Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

861

Table 106.1  Mitochondrial Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders: Clinical and Biochemical Features—cont’d
ENZYME DEFICIENCY

GENE

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

LABORATORY FINDINGS

2,4-­Dienoyl-­CoA reductase

DECR1

Only one patient described, hypotonia in the
newborn, mainly severe skeletal myopathy and
respiratory failure; hypoglycemia is rare

Normal or ↓ free carnitine, ↑ acyl:free carnitine
ratio, normal urine organic acids and
acylglycines

HMG CoA synthetase

HMGCS2

Hypoketosis and hypoglycemia, rarely myopathy

↑ Total plasma fatty acids; enzyme studies in
biopsied liver may be diagnostic; genetic
testing preferred

HMG CoA lyase

HMGCL

Hypoketosis and hypoglycemia, rarely myopathy

Normal free carnitine, ↑ C5-­OH, and
methylglutaryl-­carnitine; enzymes studies in
fibroblasts may be diagnostic

Monocarboxylate
transporter 1 (MCT1)

SLC16A1

Severe fasting-­induced ketoacidosis, rarely hypoglycemia

Profound ketoacidosis; no specific biomarkers
yet identified

*Also known as glutaric acidemia type II or multiple acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase defect (MADD).
AFLP, Acute fatty liver of pregnancy; CoA, coenzyme A; ETF, electron transport flavoprotein; HELLP, hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets; MTP, mitochondrial trifunctional
protein; NH3, ammonia.
From Shekhawat PS, Matern D, Strauss AW. Fetal fatty oxidation disorders, their effect on maternal health and neonatal outcome: impact of expanded newborn screening on their
diagnosis and management. Pediatr Res. 2005;57:78R–84R.

Long-chain free fatty acid (C16-palmitate)
Carnitine

Medium-chain fatty acid

Plasma membrane

OCTN2

Transporter
?

Long-chain free fatty Acyl CoA  carnitine

Cytosol
CPT I
CARNITINE
CYCLE

Respiratory Chain

LC acylcarnitine
TRANS

SHORT- & MEDIUM-CHAIN
-OXIDATION

e
LC acylcarnitine

Enoyl CoA ETF-DH
ETF
Hydratase

3-OH-ACD
SCHAD

TCA cycle
VLCAD
LCAD
ETF

Thiolase
Acetyl CoA

ETF-DH
C14-C10 Acyl
2,3(C16-10)
CoA
Enoyl CoA

3-Ketoacyl CoA
Inner
mitochondrial
membrane

HMG-CoA synthase
Leucine

HMG CoA
HMG CoA lyase
Acetoacetate

Outer
mitochondrial
membrane

CPT II

LC fatty acyl CoA

MCAD
SCAD
C8-4 Acyl CoA

3-Hydroxacyl CoA

Carnitine

TFP

LONG-CHAIN
-OXIDATION

-Hydroxybutyrate
KETONE
SYNTHESIS

Fig. 106.1 Mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation. Carnitine enters the cell through the action of the organic cation/carnitine transporter (OCTN2).

Palmitate, a typical 16-­carbon long chain (LC) fatty acid, is transported across the plasma membrane and can be activated to form an LC fatty
acyl coenzyme A (CoA). It then enters into the carnitine cycle, where it is transesterified by carnitine palmitoyltransferase-­I (CPT-­I), translocated
across the inner mitochondrial membrane by carnitine/acylcarnitine translocase (TRANS), and then reconverted into an LC fatty acyl-­CoA by carnitine palmitoyltransferase-­II (CPT-­II) to undergo β-­oxidation. Very LC acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD/LCAD) leads to the production of (C16-­C10)
2,3-­enoyl CoA. Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP) contains the activities of enoyl CoA hydratase (hydratase), 3-­OH-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (3-­OH-­ACD), and β-­ketothiolase (thiolase). Acetyl-­CoA, a reduced form of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH), and a reduced form of
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) are produced. Medium-­and short chain fatty acids (C8-­4) can enter the mitochondrial matrix independent of the carnitine cycle. Medium-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD), short chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (SCAD), and short chain hydroxy
acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (SCHAD) are required. Acetyl-­CoA can then enter the Krebs (TCA) cycle. Electrons are transported from FADH to the respiratory chain via the electron transfer flavoprotein (ETF) and the electron transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase (ETF-­DH). NADH enters the electron
transport chain through complex I. In the liver, acetyl-­CoA can be converted into hydroxymethylglutaryl (HMG) CoA by β-­hydroxy-­β-­methylglutaryl-­
CoA synthase (HMG CoA synthase) and then the ketone body acetoacetate by the action of β-­hydroxy-­β-­methylglutaryl-­CoA lyase (HMG-­CoA lyase).
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

862 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Palmitate

C15 CO CoA
CPT-1
C15 CO carnitine
Inner mitochondrial
membrane

TRANS

Carnitine
Cycle

C15 CO carnitine
CPT-2

Electron
Transfer

C15 CO CoA

Electron ETF-DH ETF FAD
transport
FADH2
chain
R CH CH
2

ACD
CH

CO CoA

Hydratase
R

CH2

CHOH CH

NAD
NADH
R

CH2

3

CHO

Acetyl CoA

CO CoA

-Oxidation
Cycle

OH ACD

CH2

CO CoA

Thiolase

C13

CO CoA

Treatment

Acetyl CoA
C11

Acute illnesses should be promptly treated with intravenous (IV) fluids containing 10% dextrose to correct or prevent hypoglycemia and
to suppress lipolysis as rapidly as possible (see Chapter 113). Chronic
therapy consists of avoiding fasting. This usually requires simply
adjusting the diet to ensure that overnight fasting periods are limited
to <6 hours in infants under 6 months of age, <8 hours for infants 6-­24
months of age, and <12 hours for older children. Restricting dietary
fat or treatment with carnitine is unnecessary. There is likely no need
for active therapeutic intervention for individuals with the Thr199Cys
variant.

CO CoA

Acetyl CoA
C9

CO CoA

Acetyl CoA
C7

CO CoA

Acetyl CoA
C5

CO CoA

Acetyl CoA
C3

Prognosis

CO CoA

Acetyl CoA
Acetyl CoA
HMG CoA synthase
Leucine

acids) that derive from microsomal and peroxisomal omega oxidation of accumulated medium-­chain fatty acids. Plasma and tissue concentrations of total carnitine are reduced to 25–50% of normal, and
the fraction of total esterified carnitine is increased. This pattern of
secondary carnitine deficiency is seen in most fatty acid oxidation
defects and reflects competition between increased acylcarnitine levels
and free carnitine for transport at the renal tubular plasma membrane.
Significant exceptions to this rule are the plasma membrane carnitine
transporter, CPT-­IA, and β-­hydroxy-­β-­methylglutaryl-­CoA (HMG-­
CoA) synthase deficiencies, which do not manifest secondary carnitine
deficiency.
Diagnostic metabolite patterns for MCAD deficiency include
increased plasma C6:0, C8:0, C10:0, and C10:1 acylcarnitine species and
increased urinary acylglycines, including hexanoylglycine, suberylglycine, and 3-­phenylpropionylglycine. Newborn screening, performed in
all states in the United States and in many other countries, can detect
presymptomatic MCAD deficiency based on these abnormal acylcarnitines in filter paper blood spots. The diagnosis can be confirmed by
demonstrating the common Ala985Gly pathogenic variant or sequencing the MCAD gene. A second common variant, Thr199Cys, has been
detected in infants identified by newborn screening. Interestingly, this
allele has not been seen to date in symptomatic MCAD patients, likely
because of the significant residual activity of this milder pathogenic
variant.

Hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA

Ketone
Synthesis

HMG CoA lyase
Acetoacetate

-Hydroxybutyrate

Fig. 106.2 Pathway of mitochondrial oxidation of palmitate, a typi-

cal 16-­carbon long chain fatty acid. Enzyme steps include carnitine
palmitoyltransferase (CPT) 1 and 2, carnitine/acylcarnitine translocase
(TRANS), electron transfer flavoprotein (ETF), ETF dehydrogenase (ETF-­
DH), acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (ACD), enoyl CoA hydratase (hydratase),
3-­hydroxy-­acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (3-­OH-­ACD), β-­ketothiolase
(thiolase), β-­hydroxy-­β-­methylglutaryl-­CoA (HMG-­CoA) synthase, and
lyase.

hypoglycemia). Because of the hypoketonemia, there is little or no
metabolic acidosis, which is typically present in children with hypoglycemia not caused by fatty acid oxidation disorders. Liver function tests
(LFTs) are abnormal, with elevations of liver enzymes (alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase), elevated blood ammonia, and prolonged prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times. Liver biopsy at
times of acute illness shows microvesicular or macrovesicular steatosis
from triglyceride accumulation. During fasting stress or acute illness,
urinary organic acid profiles by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry show inappropriately low concentrations of ketones and elevated
levels of medium-­chain dicarboxylic acids (adipic, suberic, and sebacic

Up to 25% of previously undiagnosed patients may die during their
first attack of illness. There is often a history of a previous sibling
death that is presumed to be from an unrecognized MCAD deficiency.
Some patients may sustain permanent brain injury during an attack
of profound hypoglycemia. For survivors without brain damage and
essentially all babies identified by newborn screening, the prognosis is
excellent because progressive cognitive impairment or cardiomyopathy
does not occur in MCAD deficiency. Fasting tolerance improves with
age, and the risk of decompensation decreases. Because as many as 35%
of affected patients have never had an episode, testing of siblings of
affected patients is important to detect asymptomatic family members
who did not receive newborn screening.

Very Long Chain Acyl-­CoA Dehydrogenase
Deficiency

Very long chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency is the
second most common diagnosed disorder of fatty acid oxidation. It was
originally termed “long chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency”
before the existence of the inner mitochondrial membrane-­bound
VLCAD was known. All patients previously diagnosed as having long
chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency have VLCAD gene defects.
Patients with VLCAD deficiency have no ability to oxidize physiologic
long chain fatty acids and are usually more severely affected than those
with MCAD deficiency, who have a milder oxidative defect. VLCAD
deficiency presents earlier in infancy and has more chronic problems
with muscle weakness or episodes of muscle pain and rhabdomyolysis.
Cardiomyopathy may be present during acute attacks provoked by fasting. The left ventricle may be hypertrophic or dilated and may show
poor contractility on echocardiography. Sudden unexpected death
has occurred in several patients, but most who survive the initial episode show improvement, including normalization of cardiac function.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids
Other physical and routine laboratory features are similar to those of
MCAD deficiency, including secondary carnitine deficiency. The urinary organic acid profile shows a nonketotic dicarboxylic aciduria
with increased levels of C6-­12 dicarboxylic acids. Diagnosis may be suggested by an abnormal acylcarnitine profile with plasma or blood spot
C14:0, 14:1, 14:2 acylcarnitine species. However, the specific diagnosis
requires pathogenic variant analysis of the VLCAD gene. Newborn
screening by tandem mass spectrometry of dried blood spots is effective in identifying early/severe disease, though it can miss milder,
later-­onset cases. A common mild variant is identified by a newborn
screen that typically predicts later-­onset disease. Treatment has traditionally been based primarily on avoidance of fasting for >8-­12 hours
depending on age, along with supplementation with medium-­chain
triglycerides. Triheptanoin (Dojolvi) has been approved as a treatment
for VLCAD deficiency and for all other disorders of long-­chain fatty
acid oxidation. The odd-­chain fat heptanoate (C7) released from this
triglycerol provides acetyl-­CoA for the tricarboxylic acid cycle and
propionyl-­CoA, which is metabolized through methylmalonyl-­CoA to
succinyl-­CoA and succinate. This anaplerotic effect essentially eliminates hypoglycemia in long-­chain fatty acid oxidation disorder patients
and significantly improves heart function in patients with cardiomyopathy. However, although heptanoin does reduce the incidence, rhabdomyolysis remains a major problem in treated patients. This finding
led to the recognition of previously unrecognized inflammation as a
component of these disorders, likely caused by the accumulation of
a high level of proinflammatory long-­chain complex lipids. Patients
can develop a secondary carnitine deficiency; however, the need for
replacement therapy remains unclear. If the free carnitine level in
blood is <10 μM, supplementation with 25-­50 mg/kg of oral carnitine
(with a maximum of 1,000 mg/day) may be helpful, especially in the
face of cardiomyopathy or significant muscular symptoms.

Short Chain Acyl-­CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency

A small number of patients with two null pathogenic variants in
the short chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (SCAD) gene have been
described with a variable phenotype. Most individuals classified as
being SCAD deficient actually have polymorphic DNA changes in the
SCAD gene; two common polymorphisms are Gly185Ser and Arg147Trp, present in biallelic fashion in 7% of the population. Although
SCAD deficiency was originally reported with a wide range of symptoms, it was likely a result of the frequency of the common polymorphisms in unrelated disease rather than a true causal relationship.
Long-­term follow-­up of infants identified by newborn screening
has failed to demonstrate a convincing, consistent phenotype, and
thus SCAD deficiency is best described as a biochemical phenotype
rather than a disease. The diagnosis is indicated by elevated levels of
butyrylcarnitine (C4-­carnitine) on newborn blood spots or plasma
and increased excretion of urinary ethylmalonic acid and butyrylglycine. These metabolic abnormalities are most pronounced in patients
with null pathogenic variants and are variably present in patients who
are homozygous for the common polymorphisms. In the context of
metabolic abnormalities consistent with SCAD deficiency in patients
with significant clinical problems, a thorough evaluation for another
unrelated diagnosis is indicated. There is no need for treatment of
individuals with SCAD deficiency.

Long Chain 3-­Hydroxyacyl-­CoA Dehydrogenase/
Mitochondrial Trifunctional Protein Deficiency

The LCHAD enzyme is part of the MTP, which also contains two other
steps in β-­oxidation: long chain 2,3-­enoyl CoA hydratase and long chain
β-­ketothiolase. MTP is a heterotetrameric protein composed of two α
and two β chains derived from distinct contiguous genes, HADHA and
HADHB, that share a common promoter. In some patients, only the
LCHAD activity of the MTP is affected (LCHAD deficiency), whereas
others have deficiencies of all three activities (MTP deficiency).
Clinical manifestations include attacks of acute hypoketotic hypoglycemia similar to VLCAD deficiency; however, patients often show
evidence of more severe disease, including cardiomyopathy, muscle
cramps and weakness, and abnormal liver function (cholestasis).

863

Pigmented retinopathy leading to blindness, progressive liver failure,
peripheral neuropathy, and rhabdomyolysis are also present, with
retinopathy being more severe in isolated LCHAD deficiency and
neuropathy worse in combined MTP defects. Life-­threatening obstetric complications (AFLP, HELLP syndrome) have been observed in
heterozygous mothers carrying homozygous fetuses affected with
LCHAD/MTP deficiency. Sudden unexpected infant death may occur,
especially in populations where tandem mass spectrometry newborn
screening is not routine. The diagnosis is indicated by elevated levels of
blood spot or plasma 3-­hydroxy acylcarnitines of chain lengths C16-­C18.
The urinary organic acid profile in patients may show increased levels
of 3-­hydroxydicarboxylic acids of chain lengths C6-­C14. Secondary carnitine deficiency is common. A common pathogenic variant in the α
subunit, E474Q, is seen in more than 60% of isolated LCHAD-­deficient
patients. This pathogenic variant in the fetus is especially associated
with the obstetric complications, but other pathogenic variants in
either subunit may also be linked to maternal illness.
Treatment is similar to that for VLCAD deficiency; that is, avoiding
fasting stress, triheptanoin, and potentially carnitine. Docosahexaenoic acid may slow the retinal changes but does not prevent them.
None of these therapeutic measures likely affect the development or
progression of peripheral neuropathy. Liver transplantation has been
attempted in patients with severe liver failure but does not ameliorate the metabolic abnormalities or prevent the myopathic or retinal
complications.

Short Chain 3-­Hydroxyacyl-­CoA Dehydrogenase
Deficiency

Very few patients with proven pathogenic variants of short chain
3-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA dehydrogenase (SCHAD) have been reported.
Most cases with recessive pathogenic variants of the SCHAD gene
have presented with episodes of hypoketotic hypoglycemia that was
caused by hyperinsulinism. In contrast to those with other forms of
fatty acid oxidation disorders, these patients required specific therapy with diazoxide for hyperinsulinism to avoid recurrent hypoglycemia. A single patient with compound heterozygous pathogenic
variants presented with fulminant hepatic failure at age 10 months.
The SCHAD protein has a nonenzymatic function in which it directly
interacts with glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) to inhibit its activity.
In the absence of SCHAD protein, this inhibition is removed, leading to upregulation of GDH enzyme activity, a recognized cause of
hyperinsulinism, usually from activating pathogenic variants of the
GDH gene. Severe deficiency of SCHAD protein often presents predominantly as protein-­sensitive hypoglycemia rather than as fasting
hypoglycemia. It appears that if SCHAD protein is present, inhibition of GDH is maintained even when there is no SCHAD enzyme
activity; these patients may present with a more traditional fatty
acid oxidation defect. Specific metabolic markers for SCHAD deficiency include elevated plasma C4-­hydroxy acylcarnitine and urine
3-­hydroxyglutaric acid. Successful newborn screening for SCHAD
deficiency has been recorded, but the sensitivity of the process has
not yet been established.
Treatment of SCHAD-­
deficient patients with hyperinsulinism
is with diazoxide. There is insufficient experience with the non-­
hyperinsulinemic form of SCHAD deficiency at present to recommend
treatment modalities, but prevention of fasting seems advisable.

Short Chain 2,3-­Enoyl-­CoA Hydratase Deficiency

This rare disorder, resulting from pathogenic variants in the ECHS1
gene, was identified through exome sequencing. The disorder affects
a shared pathway of short chain fatty acid and valine metabolism. The
clinical phenotypes are more characteristic of mitochondrial disorders
of pyruvate metabolism with predominantly a Leigh-­like disease (see
Chapters 108 and 638.2) with profound and often-­fatal lactic acidosis.
No treatment modalities or specific biomarkers have been established.
Several patients were found to excrete increased levels of methacrylylglycine, a highly reactive and potentially toxic intermediate;
2-­methyl-­2.3 dihydroxybutyrate; S-­(2-­carboxypropyl) cysteine; and S-­
(2-­carboxpropyl) cysteamine.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

864 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
DEFECTS IN THE CARNITINE CYCLE
Plasma Membrane Carnitine Transport Defect
(Primary Carnitine Deficiency)

Primary carnitine deficiency is the only genetic defect in which carnitine deficiency is the cause, rather than the consequence, of impaired
fatty acid oxidation. The most common presentation is progressive cardiomyopathy with or without skeletal muscle weakness beginning at
age 1-­4 years. A smaller number of patients may present with fasting
hypoketotic hypoglycemia in the first year of life, before the cardiomyopathy becomes evident. Cardiac arrythmias are often seen. A common pathogenic variant causes late-­onset disease in the Faroe Islands
with sudden death caused by cardiomyopathy and/or arrhythmia. The
underlying defect involves the high-­affinity plasma membrane sodium
gradient–dependent carnitine transporter encoded by the SLC22A5
gene that is expressed at high levels in heart, muscle, and kidney. This
transporter is responsible both for maintaining intracellular carnitine
concentrations 20-­to 50-­fold higher than plasma concentrations and
for renal conservation of carnitine.
Diagnosis of the carnitine transporter defect is aided by patients
having extremely reduced carnitine levels in plasma and muscle (1–2%
of normal). Heterozygote parents have plasma carnitine levels approximately 50% of normal. Fasting ketogenesis may be normal because liver
carnitine transport is normal, but it may become impaired if dietary
carnitine intake is interrupted. The fasting urinary organic acid profile
may show a hypoketotic dicarboxylic aciduria pattern if hepatic fatty
acid oxidation is impaired but is otherwise unremarkable. The defect in
carnitine transport can be demonstrated clinically by the severe reduction in renal carnitine threshold or by in vitro assay of carnitine uptake
using cultured fibroblasts or lymphoblasts. SLC22A5 sequencing is the
most common method to confirm the diagnosis. A common relatively
severe pathogenic variant has been described in the Chinese population in Taiwan. Treatment with pharmacologic doses of oral carnitine
(100-­300 mg/kg/day) is highly effective in correcting the cardiomyopathy and muscle weakness, as well as any impairment in fasting ketogenesis. Muscle total carnitine concentrations remain <5% of normal
on treatment.

Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase-­IA Deficiency

Several dozen infants and children have been described with a deficiency
of the liver and kidney CPT-­I isozyme (CPT-­IA). Clinical manifestations include fasting-­induced hypoketotic hypoglycemia, occasionally
with extremely abnormal LFTs and, rarely, with renal tubular acidosis.
The heart and skeletal muscles are not involved because the muscle
isozyme is unaffected. Fasting urinary organic acid profiles sometimes
show a hypoketotic C6-­C12 dicarboxylic aciduria but may be normal.
Plasma acylcarnitine analysis demonstrates mostly free carnitine with
very little acylated carnitine. This observation has been used to identify CPT-­IA deficiency on newborn screening by tandem mass spectrometry. CPT-­IA deficiency is the only fatty acid oxidation disorder in
which plasma total carnitine levels may be elevated, often to 150–200%
of normal. This phenomenon is explained by the absence of inhibitory
effects of long chain acylcarnitines on the renal tubular carnitine transporter in CPT-­IA deficiency. The enzyme defect can be demonstrated
in cultured fibroblasts or lymphoblasts. CPT-­IA deficiency in the fetus
has been associated in a single case report with AFLP in the mother.
A common variant in the CPTIA gene (c.1436C>t, p.Pro479Leu) has
been identified in individuals of Inuit background in the United States,
Canada, and Greenland. This variant is associated with an increased
risk for sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) in the Inuit population.
The variant can be detected by newborn screening; enzyme activity is
reduced by 80%, and regulation by malonyl-­CoA is lost. It has not been
established whether this variant is a pathologic enzyme variant or an
adaptation to ancient Inuit high-­fat diets. Another pathogenic variant
is common in the Ashkenazi Jewish population and leads to infantile
symptoms. Treatment for the severe form of CPT-­IA deficiency that
is found in non-­Inuit populations is similar to that for VLCAD deficiency, with avoidance of situations where fasting ketogenesis is necessary and use of triheptanoin to provide an anaplerotic fuel source. The
need for treatment of the Inuit variant has not yet been determined.

Carnitine:Acylcarnitine Translocase Deficiency

This defect of the inner mitochondrial membrane carrier protein for
long chain acylcarnitines blocks the entry of long chain fatty acids into
the mitochondria for oxidation. The clinical phenotype of this disorder is driven by a typically severe and generalized impairment of fatty
acid oxidation. Most newborn patients present with attacks of fasting-­
induced hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and cardiorespiratory
collapse. All symptomatic newborns have had evidence of cardiomyopathy and muscle weakness. Several patients with a partial translocase deficiency and milder disease without cardiac involvement have
also been identified. No distinctive urinary or plasma organic acids are
noted, although increased levels of plasma long chain acylcarnitines
of chain lengths C16-­C18 are reported, not distinguishable from the
pattern seen in CPT-­II deficiency (see later). Diagnosis can be confirmed using genetic analysis. Functional carnitine:acylcarnitine translocase activity can be measured in cultured fibroblasts or lymphoblasts.
Treatment is similar to that of VLCAD deficiency and is particularly
effective in reducing the hyperammonemia that is often otherwise persistent in severe patients.

Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase-­II Deficiency

Three forms of CPT-­II deficiency have been described. A severe neonatal lethal presentation associated with a profound enzyme deficiency,
and early death has been reported in newborns with hypoglycemia
and hyperammonemia in association with dysplastic kidneys, cerebral
malformations, and mild facial anomalies. A milder defect is associated with an adult presentation of episodic rhabdomyolysis. The first
episode usually does not occur until late childhood or early adulthood.
Attacks are frequently precipitated by prolonged exercise. There is aching muscle pain and myoglobinuria that may be severe enough to cause
renal failure. Hypoglycemia has not been described, but fasting may
contribute to attacks of myoglobinuria. Muscle biopsy shows increased
deposition of neutral fat. This adult myopathic presentation of CPT­II deficiency is associated with a common CPT2 pathogenic variant,
c.338C>T, p.Ser113Leu, seen as a recurrent pathogenic variant in the
Ashkenazi Jewish population. This pathogenic variant produces a heat-­
labile protein that is unstable to increased muscle temperature during
exercise that may contribute to the myopathic presentation. A third
intermediate form of CPT-­II deficiency presents in infancy or early
childhood with fasting-­induced hepatic failure, cardiomyopathy, and
skeletal myopathy with hypoketotic hypoglycemia but is not associated with the severe developmental changes seen in the neonatal lethal
presentation. This pattern of illness is similar to VLCAD deficiency,
and management is identical. It is often caused by the presence of one
severe pathogenic variant in combination with the mild c.338C>T
variant.
Diagnosis of all forms of CPT-­II deficiency can be made by a combination of molecular genetic analysis and demonstrating deficient
enzyme activity in muscle or other tissues and in cultured fibroblasts.
Severe and intermediate disease can be identified through newborn
screening, but patients homozygous for the common mild variant typically have normal newborn screens.

DEFECTS IN THE ELECTRON TRANSFER PATHWAY
Electron Transfer Flavoprotein and Electron Transfer
Flavoprotein Dehydrogenase Deficiencies (Glutaric
Acidemia Type 2, Multiple Acyl-­CoA Dehydrogenation
Defects)

Electron transfer flavoprotein (ETF) and electron transfer flavoprotein
dehydrogenase (ETF-­DH) function to transfer electrons into the mitochondrial electron transport chain from dehydrogenation reactions
catalyzed by VLCAD, MCAD, SCAD, and glutaryl-­CoA dehydrogenase, four enzymes involved in branched-­chain amino acid (BCAA)
oxidation and sarcosine and dimethylglycine dehydrogenases. Deficiencies of ETF or ETF-­DH produce illness that combines the features
of impaired fatty acid oxidation and impaired oxidation of several
amino acids. Complete deficiencies of either protein are associated
with severe illness in the newborn period, characterized by acidosis,
hypoketotic hypoglycemia, coma, hypotonia, cardiomyopathy, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

865

an unusual odor of sweaty feet caused by isovaleryl-­CoA dehydrogenase inhibition. Some affected neonates have had congenital facial
dysmorphism and polycystic kidneys similar to those in severe CPT-­II
deficiency, which suggests that toxic effects of accumulated metabolites may occur in utero. Most severely affected infants do not survive
the neonatal period. Disorders of cellular or mitochondrial riboflavin
transport or flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD, an essential cofactor for
the acyl-­CoA dehydrogenases) have been identified with similar biochemical profiles to ETF and ETF-­DH deficiency but with more variable features.
Diagnosis can be made from the newborn blood spot acylcarnitine
profile and urinary organic acids; both tests show abnormalities corresponding to disruptions in the oxidation of fatty acids (ethylmalonate and C6-­C10 dicarboxylic acids), lysine (glutarate), and BCAAs
(isovaleryl-­, isobutyryl-­, and 2-­methylbutyrylglycine). The diagnosis
can be confirmed by genetic testing of ETFA, ETFB, and ETFDH. If no
pathogenic variants in these genes are identified, additional testing for
the riboflavin transport and FAD synthesis genes should be pursued.
Partial deficiencies of ETF and ETF-­DH produce a disorder that
may mimic MCAD deficiency or other milder long-­chain fatty acid
oxidation defects with attacks of fasting hypoketotic coma. The urinary organic acid profile reveals primarily elevations of dicarboxylic
acids and ethylmalonate, derived from short chain fatty acid intermediates. Secondary carnitine deficiency is present. Some patients with
mild forms of ETF/ETF-­DH deficiency may benefit from treatment
with high doses of riboflavin, a precursor of the various flavoproteins
involved in electron transfer.

of life; hypoglycemia is not always present. The differential includes
ketotic hypoglycemia associated with milder forms of glycogen storage disease, such as phosphorylase or phosphorylase kinase deficiency
(see Chapter 107). Treatment for acute episodes includes IV dextrose
to suppress lipolysis and inhibit ongoing ketogenesis. Long-­term treatment includes avoidance of prolonged fasting stress. The diagnosis
should be suspected by unusually severe ketosis and delayed suppression of ketones after starting treatment with dextrose. There are no specific metabolic markers or newborn screening methods. The diagnosis
can be established by genetic sequencing of SLC16A1.

DEFECTS IN THE KETONE SYNTHESIS PATHWAY

β-­Ketothiolase Deficiency

The final steps in production of ketones from mitochondrial fatty acid
β-­oxidation convert acetyl-­CoA to acetoacetate through two enzymes
of the HMG-­CoA pathway (see Fig. 106.2).

β-­Hydroxy-­β-­Methylglutaryl-­CoA (HMG-­CoA)
Synthase Deficiency

See Chapter 103.6.
HMG-­CoA synthase is the rate-­limiting step in the conversion of
acetyl-­CoA derived from fatty acid β-­oxidation in the liver to ketones.
The presentation of deficiency is one of fasting hypoketotic hypoglycemia without evidence of impaired cardiac or skeletal muscle function.
The urinary organic acid profile shows only a nonspecific hypoketotic
dicarboxylic aciduria. Plasma and tissue carnitine levels are normal,
in contrast to all the other disorders of fatty acid oxidation. A separate
synthase enzyme, present in cytosol for cholesterol biosynthesis, is not
affected. The HMG-­CoA synthase defect is expressed only in the liver
and kidney and cannot be demonstrated in cultured fibroblasts. The
diagnosis can be made by genetic testing. Avoiding fasting is usually a
successful treatment.

β-­Hydroxy-­β-­Methylglutaryl-­CoA Lyase Deficiency
(3 Hydroxy-­3-­Methylgutaric Aciduria)
See Chapter 105.6.

DEFECTS IN KETONE BODY UTILIZATION

The ketone bodies β-­hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate are the end
products of hepatic fatty acid oxidation and are important metabolic
fuels for the brain during fasting. Three defects in utilization of ketones
in brain and other peripheral tissues present as episodes of hyperketotic coma, with or without hypoglycemia.

Monocarboxylate Transporter-­1 Deficiency

About 10 patients have been described with recurrent episodes of
potentially lethal ketoacidosis, with or without hypoglycemia, caused
by a deficiency of monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1), a plasma
membrane carrier encoded by SLC16A1 that is required to transport
ketones into tissues from plasma. Although the first cases identified
were homozygous for inactivating pathogenic variants of SLC16A1,
heterozygous carriers can also be affected. Affected patients develop
severe ketoacidosis provoked by fasting or infections in their first years

Succinyl-­CoA:3-­Ketoacid-­CoA Transferase Deficiency

See Chapter 103.6.
The characteristic presentation of succinyl-­
CoA:3-­
ketoacid-­
CoA
transferase (SCOT) deficiency is an infant with recurrent episodes of
severe ketoacidosis induced by fasting. Plasma acylcarnitine and urine
organic acid abnormalities do not distinguish SCOT deficiency from
other causes of ketoacidosis. Treatment of episodes requires infusion
of glucose and large amounts of bicarbonate until metabolic stability is
reestablished. Patients usually exhibit inappropriate, persistent hyperketonemia even between episodes of illness. SCOT is responsible for
activating acetoacetate in peripheral tissues, using succinyl CoA as a
donor to form acetoacetyl-­CoA. Deficient enzyme activity can be demonstrated in the brain, muscle, and fibroblasts from affected patients.
The gene has been cloned, and numerous pathogenic variants have
been characterized. The diagnosis is usually established by sequencing
analysis of the OXCT1 gene that encodes the SCOT enzyme.
See Chapter 105.6.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

106.2 Disorders of Very Long Chain
Fatty Acids and Other Peroxisomal
Functions
Michael F. Wangler

PEROXISOMAL DISORDERS

Disorders of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) fall within the
broader group of peroxisomal diseases. The peroxisomal diseases are
genetically determined disorders caused either by the failure to form
or maintain the peroxisome or by a defect in the function of a single
protein that is localized to the peroxisome. These disorders cause serious disability in childhood and occur more frequently and present a
wider range of phenotypes than recognized in the past. Many, but not
all, peroxisomal disorders are associated with elevations of VLCFAs.

Etiology

Peroxisomal disorders are subdivided into two major categories (Table
106.2). In the peroxisomal biogenesis disorders (PBDs), the basic
defect is the failure to import one or more proteins into the organelle.
In the other group, defects affect a single peroxisomal protein (single-­
enzyme defects). The peroxisome is present in all cells except mature
erythrocytes and is a subcellular organelle surrounded by a single
membrane; there are >50 peroxisomal enzymes. Some enzymes are
involved in the production and decomposition of hydrogen peroxide
and others in lipid and amino acid metabolism. Peroxisomal enzymes
have a unique system to ship them to the peroxisome that uses specific peroxisome targeting sequences (PTSs). These enzymes are first
synthesized in their mature form on free polyribosomes and float free
in the cytoplasm until their specific PTS is recognized. Most peroxisomal matrix proteins contain a PTS1, a short amino acid sequence
at the carboxyl terminus. In addition, the amino-­terminal–located
PTS2 is critical for the import of enzymes involved in plasmalogen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

866 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 106.2  Peroxisomal Disorder Classification,
Disorders, and Genes

Table 106.3  Abnormal Laboratory Findings Common to
Zellweger Spectrum Disorders

PEROXISOMAL BIOGENESIS
DISORDERS

Defective oxidation and abnormal accumulation of very long chain
fatty acids
Peroxisomes absent to reduced in number
Catalase in cytosol
Deficient synthesis and reduced tissue levels of plasmalogens
Deficient oxidation and age-­dependent accumulation of phytanic
acid
Defects in certain steps of bile acid formation and accumulation of
bile acid intermediates
Defects in oxidation and accumulation of l-­pipecolic acid
Increased urinary excretion of dicarboxylic acids

GENES

Peroxisome biogenesis disorder–Zellweger
spectrum disorders (PBD-­ZSD)
Zellweger syndrome (severe PBD-­ZSD)
Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy
(intermediate PBD-­ZSD)
Infantile Refsum disease (mild PBD-­ZSD)

PEX1, PEX2, PEX3, PEX5,
PEX6, PEX10, PEX11B,
PEX12, PEX13, PEX14,
PEX16, PEX19, PEX26

Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata,
types 1 and 5 (RCDP1 and RCDP5)

PEX7 and PEX5,
respectively

SINGLE-­ENZYME DEFECTS
X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy

ABCD1

Acyl-­CoA oxidase deficiency

ACOX1

D-­Bifunctional protein deficiency

HSD17B4

2-­Methylacyl-­CoA racemase deficiency

AMACR

Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata,
types 2 and 3 (RCDP2 and RCDP3)

AGPS, GNPAT

Adult Refsum disease

PHYH

and branched-­chain fatty acid metabolism. The peroxisome biogenesis
machinery then recognizes, binds, and targets PTS-­containing proteins
to the peroxisome. This process involves a complex series of reactions
mediated by at least 23 distinct proteins. These proteins, referred to as
peroxins, are encoded by the PEX genes. Pathogenic genetic variants in
these genes are the cause of PBDs.

Epidemiology

Except for X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), all the peroxisomal
disorders listed in Table 106.2 are inherited as autosomal recessive diseases. ALD is the most common peroxisomal disorder, with an estimated incidence of 1 in 17,000 live births. The combined incidence
of the other peroxisomal disorders is estimated to be 1 in 50,000 live
births, although with broader newborn screening, it is expected that
the actual incidences of all the disorders of VLCFAs will be more accurately established.

Pathology

Absence or reduction in the number of peroxisomes is pathognomonic for disorders of peroxisome biogenesis. In most cases, a close
examination of cells in these patients reveals membranous sacs that
lack the normal complement of matrix proteins; these are peroxisome
“ghosts,” and they indicate the inability of the cell to properly localize
peroxisomal proteins. Pathologic changes are observed in most organs
and include profound and characteristic defects in neuronal migration, micronodular cirrhosis of the liver, renal cysts, chondrodysplasia
punctata, sensorineural hearing loss, retinopathy, congenital heart disease, and dysmorphic features.

Pathogenesis

Clinical pathologic changes of the PBDs are secondary to the underlying peroxisome biogenesis defect. As a result, multiple peroxisomal
enzymes fail to function in the PBDs (Table 106.3). PBDs include the
Zellweger spectrum disorders (PBD-­ZSD) and one form of rhizomelic
chondrodysplasia punctata (PBD-­RCDP), which are distinguished by
clinical phenotype and differences in the extent of biogenesis abnormality. In PBDs, enzymes that are synthesized cannot be properly
located to the peroxisome and are thus degraded abnormally quickly
because they are unprotected outside the peroxisome. However, it has
yet to be clarified as to how specific peroxisome defects lead to each of
the pathologic manifestations.
Pathogenic variants in 14 different PEX genes have been identified in PBDs. For PBD-­RCDP, PEX7 pathogenic variants are the most

common, but rarer PEX5 pathogenic variants are seen. The pattern
and severity of pathologic features vary with the nature of the import
defects and the degree of import impairment leading to the severity
spectrum of PBD-­ZSD. These gene defects lead to disorders named
prior to recognizing their relationship to the peroxisome, namely, Zellweger syndrome, neonatal ALD, infantile Refsum disease, and RCDP.
The first three disorders are considered to be a form of clinical continuum,
with Zellweger syndrome the most severe (severe PBD-­ZSD), infantile
Refsum disease the least severe (mild PBD-­ZSD), and neonatal ALD
being intermediate (intermediate PBD-­ZSD). For PBD-­ZSD, 13 genes
can be affected to result in autosomal recessive disease (PEX1, PEX2,
PEX3, PEX5, PEX6, PEX10, PEX11B, PEX12, PEX13, PEX14, PEX16,
PEX19, PEX26). Specific gene defects cannot be distinguished by clinical features. Clinical severity varies with the degree to which protein
import is impaired. Pathogenic variants that completely abolish import
are often associated with the severe PBD-­ZSD or Zellweger phenotype,
whereas a missense variant, in which some degree of import function
is retained, leads to the somewhat milder presentations. A defect in
PEX7 or, very rarely, PEX5, which depend on peroxisomal import that
use PTS2, is associated with RCDP. PEX7 defects that leave the import
partially intact are associated with milder phenotypes, some of which
resemble classic (adult) Refsum disease.
The genetic disorders that involve single peroxisomal enzymes usually have clinical manifestations that are more restricted and relate to
the single biochemical defect. The primary adrenal insufficiency of
ALD is caused by an accumulation of VLCFAs in the adrenal cortex,
and the peripheral neuropathy in adult Refsum disease is caused by the
accumulation of phytanic acid in Schwann cells and myelin.

PBD-­ZSD

Newborn infants with severe PBD-­ZSD, previously described as Zellweger
syndrome, show striking and consistent recognizable abnormalities.
Of central diagnostic importance are the typical facial appearance (large
anterior fontanelle, wide sutures, high forehead, hypoplastic supraorbital
ridges, flat face, and broad nasal bridge; Fig. 106.3), severe weakness
and hypotonia, neonatal seizures, and eye abnormalities. Because of
the hypotonia and craniofacial appearance, Down syndrome may be
suspected in neonates. Infants with severe PBD-­ZSD rarely live more
than a few months. More than 90% show postnatal growth failure.
Table 106.4 lists the main clinical abnormalities.
Patients with intermediate PBD-­ZSD, previously described as neonatal
ALD, show fewer, less prominent craniofacial features. Neonatal
seizures occur frequently. Psychomotor developmental delay is present; function remains in the range of severe intellectual disability, and
development may regress after 3-­5 years of age, likely from progressive
leukodystrophy. Hepatomegaly, impaired liver function, pigmentary
degeneration of the retina, and severely impaired hearing are invariably
present. Adrenocortical function is usually impaired and may require
adrenal hormone replacement. Chondrodysplasia punctata and renal
cysts are absent.
Patients with mild PBD-­ZSD, previously described as infantile
Refsum disease, have survived to adulthood. They can walk, although
gait may be ataxic and broad based. Cognitive function is generally

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

867

Table 106.4  Main Clinical Abnormalities in
Zellweger Syndrome
PATIENTS IN WHOM
THE FEATURE WAS
PRESENT
ABNORMAL FEATURE

Fig. 106.3 Zellweger syndrome. Three affected neonates. Note the

hypotonia, high forehead with shallow supraorbital ridges, anteverted
nares, and mild micrognathia, as well as the talipes equinovarus and
contractures at the knees. (From Shaheen R, Al-­Dirbashi OY, Al-­Hassnan
ZN, et al. Clinical, biochemical and molecular characterization of peroxisomal diseases in Arabs. Clin Genet. 2011;79[1]:60–70.)

impaired, but accurate assessment is limited, usually by the presence
of both vision and hearing impairment. Almost all have some degree
of sensorineural hearing loss and pigmentary degeneration of the
retina. They have moderately dysmorphic features that may include
epicanthal folds, a flat nose bridge, and low-­set ears. Early hypotonia
and hepatomegaly with impaired function are common. Levels of
plasma cholesterol and high-­density and low-­density lipoprotein are
often moderately reduced. Chondrodysplasia punctata and renal cortical cysts are absent. Postmortem study in these mild PBD-­ZSD cases
reveals micronodular liver cirrhosis and small, hypoplastic adrenals.
The brain shows no malformations, except for severe hypoplasia of the
cerebellar granule layer and ectopic locations of the Purkinje cells in
the molecular layer.
Some patients with PBD-­ZSD have milder and atypical phenotypes.
They may present with peripheral neuropathy or with retinopathy,
impaired vision, or cataracts in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood
and have been considered to have Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease or
Usher syndrome. Some patients with PEX16 variants present with cerebellar ataxia. Some patients have survived to the fifth decade.

Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctata

RCDP is characterized by the presence of stippled foci of calcification
within the hyaline cartilage and is associated with short stature, cataracts (72%), and multiple malformations caused by contractures. Vertebral bodies have coronal clefting filled by cartilage that results from an
embryonic arrest. Disproportionate short stature affects the proximal

NUMBER

%

High forehead

58

97

Flat occiput

13

81

Large fontanelle(s), wide sutures

55

96

Shallow orbital ridges

33

100

Low/broad nasal bridge

23

100

Epicanthus

33

92

High-­arched palate

35

95

External ear deformity

39

97

Micrognathia

18

100

Redundant skin fold of neck

13

100

Brushfield spots

5

83

Cataract/cloudy cornea

30

86

Glaucoma

7

58

Abnormal retinal pigmentation

6

40

Optic disc pallor

17

74

Severe hypotonia

94

99

Abnormal Moro response

26

100

Hyporeflexia or areflexia

56

98

Poor sucking

74

96

Gavage feeding

26

100

Epileptic seizures

56

92

Intellectual disability

45

100

Impaired hearing

9

40

Nystagmus

30

81

From Heymans HAS. Cerebro-­hepato-­renal (Zellweger) syndrome: Clinical and
biochemical consequences of peroxisomal dysfunctions. Thesis, University of
Amsterdam, 1984.

parts of the extremities (rhizomelia; Fig. 106.4A). Radiologic abnormalities consist of shortening of the proximal limb bones, metaphyseal cupping, and disturbed punctate ossification (Fig. 106.4B). Height,
weight, and head circumference are less than the third percentile, and
these children have a severe intellectual disability. Skin changes such as
those observed in ichthyosiform erythroderma are present in approximately 25% of patients. RCDP can be caused by pathogenic variants
in one of four genes (PEX5, PEX7, AGPS, GNPAT). Defects in PEX7,
which most frequently lead to the RCDP phenotype, may also lead to a
milder phenotype with clinical manifestations similar to those of adult
Refsum disease, a later-­onset disorder described later.

Isolated Defects of Peroxisomal Fatty Acid Oxidation

In the group of single-­enzyme defects, acyl-­CoA oxidase and bifunctional enzyme deficiency involve a single enzymatic step in peroxisomal fatty acid oxidation. Defects of bifunctional enzyme are found
in approximately 15% of patients who are initially suspected of having
PBD-­ZSD. Patients with isolated acyl-­C oA oxidase deficiency have
a somewhat milder phenotype that resembles mild or intermediate
PBD-ZSD or Usher syndrome and typically comes to attention because
of the development of an early childhood leukodystrophy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

868 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Atypical Autosomal Dominant Disorders

Peroxisomal disorders are classically autosomal recessive in family
pedigrees. X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy is a key exception. Several
other exceptions of rare dominant inheritance of peroxisomal disease
manifesting as neurologic disease have emerged for a few peroxisomal
genes, including ACOX1, PEX6, and DNM1L.

Laboratory Findings

A

B

Fig. 106.4 A, Newborn infant with rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punc-

tata. Note the severe shortening of the proximal limbs, the depressed
bridge of the nose, hypertelorism, and widespread scaling skin lesions.
B, Note the marked shortening of the humerus and epiphyseal stippling
at the shoulder and elbow joints. (Courtesy John P. Dorst, MD.)

Isolated Defects of Plasmalogen Synthesis

Plasmalogens are lipids in which the first of three glycerol carbons
is linked to an alcohol rather than a fatty acid. They are synthesized
through a complex series of reactions, the first two steps of which
are catalyzed by the peroxisomal enzymes dihydroxyacetone phosphate alkyl transferase (DHAPT, encoded by the gene GNPAT) and
synthase (AGPS, encoded by the gene AGPS). Deficiency of either of
these enzymes leads to RCDP types 2 and 3, respectively, phenotypes
that are clinically indistinguishable from each other and from the peroxisomal import disorder RCDP1. This latter disorder is caused by a
defect in PEX7, the receptor for PTS2 upon which DHAPT and AGPS
are dependent for peroxisomal import. RCDP1 shares the severe deficiency of plasmalogens with these single-­enzyme disorders but also has
defects of phytanic oxidation. The fact that these single genetic disorders are associated with the full phenotype of RCDP suggests that a
deficiency of plasmalogens is sufficient to produce it.

Adult (Classic) Refsum Disease

The defective enzyme (phytanoyl-­CoA hydroxylase, encoded by the
PHYH gene) is localized to the peroxisome. The manifestation of
Refsum disease includes impaired vision from retinitis pigmentosa,
anosmia, ichthyosis, peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, and occasionally
cardiac arrhythmias. In contrast to infantile Refsum disease, cognitive function is normal, and there are no congenital malformations.
Refsum disease often does not manifest until young adulthood, but
visual disturbances such as night blindness, ichthyosis, and peripheral neuropathy may already be present in childhood and adolescence. Early diagnosis is important because institution of a phytanic
acid–restricted diet can reverse the peripheral neuropathy and prevent the progression of the visual and central nervous system (CNS)
manifestations. Adult Refsum disease may also be caused by defects
in PEX7.

2-­Methylacyl-­CoA Racemase Deficiency (AMACR)

This disorder is caused by an enzyme defect that leads to the accumulation of the branched-­chain fatty acids (phytanic and pristanic
acid) and bile acids. Individuals present with typically an adult-­onset
peripheral neuropathy and may also have pigmentary degeneration of
the retina.

Clinical suspicion would be followed by specific biochemical determination of an abnormality and then confirmation through genetic testing targeted to specific genes. However, an extended gene panel and
exome and genome testing have been used to identify pathogenic variants or variants of uncertain significance (VUS) in peroxisomal genes.
These patients still require biochemical testing for confirmation. In addition, newborn screening for X-­linked ALD using dried blood spots on
filter paper in states across the United States and many parts of Europe
also identifies other forms of peroxisomal deficiency. Early recognition
of peroxisomal disorders in newborns will be a clinical reality.
Whether based on clinical suspicion, an abnormal newborn screen,
or reported genetic variants, the biochemical characterization of peroxisomal disorders is a necessary step and uses the generally available
testing strategy listed in Table 106.5. Measurement of plasma VLCFA
levels is the most common assay. It must be emphasized that although
plasma VLCFA levels are elevated in many patients with peroxisomal
disorders and the same defect is the indirect basis for the newborn
screen assay, this is not always the case. The most important exception
is RCDP, in which VLCFA levels are normal but plasma phytanic acid
levels are increased and red blood cell (RBC) plasmalogen levels are
reduced. In other peroxisomal disorders, the biochemical abnormalities are still more restricted. Therefore a panel of tests is recommended
and includes plasma levels of VLCFAs and phytanic, pristanic, and
pipecolic acids and RBC levels of plasmalogens. Tandem mass spectrometry techniques also permit convenient quantitation of bile acids
in plasma and urine. This panel of tests can be performed on very small
amounts of venous blood and permits detection of most peroxisomal
disorders.
Definition of the molecular defect either through gene panel testing
or exome sequencing in the proband is essential for carrier detection
and speeds prenatal diagnosis. Characterization of the pathogenic
variant may be of prognostic value in patients with PEX1 defects. This
defect is present in approximately 60% of PBD patients, and about
half the PEX1 defects have the G843D allele, which is associated with
a significantly milder phenotype than found in other pathogenic
variants.

Diagnosis

Several noninvasive laboratory tests permit precise and early diagnosis of peroxisomal disorders (see Table 106.5). The challenge in PBDs
is to differentiate them from the large variety of other conditions that
can cause hypotonia, seizures, failure to thrive, or dysmorphic features.
Experienced clinicians readily recognize classic Zellweger syndrome
by its clinical manifestations. However, more mildly affected PBD-­ZSD
patients often do not show the full clinical spectrum of disease and
may be identifiable only by laboratory assays. Clinical features that
warrant diagnostic assessment include intellectual disability; weakness
and hypotonia; dysmorphic features; neonatal seizures; retinopathy,
glaucoma, or cataracts; hearing deficits; enlarged liver and impaired
liver function; and chondrodysplasia punctata. The presence of one or
more of these abnormalities increases the likelihood of this diagnosis.
Atypical milder forms presenting as peripheral neuropathy have also
been described.
Some patients with the isolated defects of peroxisomal fatty acid oxidation resemble those with ZSD and can be detected by the demonstration of abnormally high levels of VLCFAs.
Patients with RCDP must be distinguished from patients with other
causes of chondrodysplasia punctata. RCDP is suspected clinically
because of the shortness of limbs, developmental delays, and ichthyosis. The most decisive laboratory test is the demonstration of abnormally low plasmalogen levels in RBCs and an alteration in PEX7.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

869

Table 106.5  Diagnostic Biochemical Abnormalities in Peroxisomal Disorders
DISORDER

VLCFA

PHYTANIC ACID

PRISTANIC ACID

PLASMALOGENS

PBD-­ZSD

↑↑

↑*

↑*

↓

RCDP

Nl

↑

Nl

↓↓

ALD

↑

Nl

Nl

Nl

ACoX

↑

Nl

Nl

Nl

Bifunctional enzyme deficiency

↑

↑

↑

Nl

AMACR

Nl

↑

↑

Nl

Refsum disease

Nl

↑

↑

Nl

*Phytanic acid and pristanic acid accumulation is age dependent, and normal (Nl) levels may be seen in infants and young children.
VLCFA, Very long chain fatty acids; ZSD, Zellweger spectrum disorder; RCDP, rhizomelic chondroplasia punctata; ALD, adrenoleukodystrophy; ACoX, acyl-­CoA oxidase deficiency;
AMACR, 2-­methylacyl-­CoA racemase deficiency.

Complications

Patients with severe PBD-­ZSD have multiple disabilities involving
muscle tone, swallowing, cardiac abnormalities, liver disease, and seizures. These conditions are treated symptomatically, but the prognosis
is poor, and most patients succumb in the first years of life. Similarly,
individuals with RCDP have multiple systemic and neurologic issues.
In addition, they may develop spinal cord compression at any level of
the spine.

with over half these being private or unique to the family. There is no
genotype-­phenotype correlation, as wide ranges of clinical severity can
occur within a family across multiple individuals with the same pathogenic variant. A curated database of pathogenic variants is maintained
(www.x-­ald.nl). The mechanism by which the ALDP defect leads to
VLCFA accumulation appears to be a disruption of transport of saturated fatty acids into the peroxisome, with resultant continued progressive elongation of fatty acids.

Treatment

Epidemiology

The most effective therapy is the dietary treatment of adult Refsum disease with a phytanic acid–restricted diet. However, this only applies to
this specific condition.
For patients with the somewhat milder variants of the peroxisome
import disorders, success has been achieved with multidisciplinary
early intervention, including physical and occupational therapy, hearing aids or cochlear implants, augmentative and alternative communication, nutrition, and support for the families. Although most patients
continue to function in the impaired range, some make significant
gains in self-­help skills, and several are in stable condition in their teens
or even early 20s.
Attempts to mitigate some of the secondary biochemical abnormalities include the oral administration of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). The
DHA level is greatly reduced in patients with disorders of peroxisome
biogenesis, and this therapy normalizes DHA plasma levels. Although
there were anecdotal reports of clinical improvement with DHA therapy,
a randomized placebo-­controlled study failed to find benefit.

Genetic Counseling

Most of these disorders can be diagnosed prenatally. Prenatal testing
using chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis enables genetic testing when the alteration is known, but biochemical measurements may
be made using the same tests as described for postnatal diagnosis (see
Table 106.5). Because of the 25% recurrence risk with autosomal recessive inheritance, couples with an affected child should be advised about
the availability of prenatal and preconception diagnosis.

ADRENOLEUKODYSTROPHY

ALD is an X-­linked disorder associated with the accumulation of saturated VLCFAs and a progressive dysfunction of the adrenal cortex and
nervous system. It is the most common peroxisomal disorder.

Etiology

The key biochemical abnormality in ALD is the tissue accumulation of
saturated VLCFAs, with a carbon chain length of 24 or more. Excess
hexacosanoic acid (C26:0) is the most striking and characteristic feature. This accumulation of fatty acids is caused by genetically deficient
peroxisomal degradation of fatty acid. The defective gene (ABCD1)
codes for a peroxisomal membrane protein (ALDP, the ALD protein).
Many alterations in ABCD1 have been determined to be pathogenic,

The incidence of ALD in males is 1 in 21,000, and the combined incidence of ALD males and heterozygous females in the general population is estimated to be 1 in 17,000. All ethnicities are affected. The
various phenotypes often occur in members of the same kindred.

Pathology

Characteristic lamellar cytoplasmic inclusions can be demonstrated
on electron microscopy in adrenocortical cells, testicular Leydig cells,
and nervous system macrophages. These inclusions probably consist of
cholesterol esterified with VLCFA. They are most prominent in cells of
the zona fasciculata of the adrenal cortex, which at first are distended
with lipids and subsequently atrophy.
The nervous system displays two types of ALD lesions. In the severe
cerebral form, demyelination is associated with an inflammatory
response manifested by the accumulation of perivascular lymphocytes
that is most intense in the involved region. In the slowly progressive
adult form, adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN), the main finding is a
distal axonopathy that affects the long tracts in the spinal cord. In this
form the inflammatory response is mild or absent.

Pathogenesis

The adrenal dysfunction is probably a direct consequence of the accumulation of VLCFAs. The cells in the adrenal zona fasciculata are
distended with abnormal lipids. Cholesterol esterified to VLCFA is
relatively resistant to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)–stimulated cholesterol ester hydrolases, and this limits the capacity to convert cholesterol to active steroids. In addition, C26:0 excess increases the
viscosity of the plasma membrane, which may interfere with receptor
and other cellular functions.
There is no defined correlation between the neurologic phenotype
and the nature of the pathogenic variant or the severity of the biochemical defect as assessed by plasma VLCFA levels or between the degree
of adrenal involvement and nervous system involvement. The severity
of the illness and rate of progression correlate with the intensity of the
inflammatory response. The inflammatory response may be partially
cytokine mediated and may involve an autoimmune response triggered
in an unknown way by the excess of VLCFAs. Mitochondrial damage
and oxidative stress also appear to contribute. Approximately half the
patients do not experience the inflammatory response, although the
basis of this difference is not understood.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

870 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Clinical Manifestations

There are five relatively distinct ALD phenotypes, three of which present in childhood with symptoms and signs. In all the phenotypes,
development is usually normal in the first 3-­4 years of life.
In the childhood cerebral form of ALD, symptoms most often are
first noted between ages 4 and 8 years. The most common initial manifestations are hyperactivity, inattention, and worsening school performance in a child who had previously been a good student. Auditory
discrimination is often impaired, although tone perception is preserved.
This may be evidenced by difficulty in using the telephone and greatly
impaired performance on intelligence tests in items that are presented
verbally. Spatial orientation is often impaired. Other initial symptoms
are disturbances of vision, ataxia, poor handwriting, seizures, and
strabismus. Visual disturbances are often caused by involvement of
the parietooccipital cortex rather than eye or optic tract abnormalities, which leads to variable and seemingly inconsistent visual capacity.
Seizures occur in most patients and may represent the first manifestation of the disease. Some patients present with increased intracranial
pressure. Impaired cortisol response to ACTH stimulation is present in
85% of patients, and mild hyperpigmentation is noted. In most patients
with this phenotype, adrenal dysfunction is recognized only after the
condition is diagnosed because of the cerebral symptoms. Cerebral
childhood ALD tends to progress rapidly with increasing spasticity and
paralysis, visual and hearing loss, and loss of ability to speak or swallow. The mean interval between the first neurologic symptom and an
apparently unresponsive wakeful state is 1.9 years. Patients may continue in this apparently unresponsive wakeful state for ≥10 years.
Adolescent ALD designates patients who experience neurologic
symptoms between ages 10 and 21 years. The manifestations resemble
those of childhood cerebral ALD except that progression is slower.
Approximately 10% of patients present acutely with status epilepticus,
adrenal crisis, acute encephalopathy, or coma.
AMN first manifests in late adolescence or adulthood as a progressive paraparesis caused by long tract degeneration in the spinal cord.
Approximately half the affected males also have involvement of the
cerebral white matter.
The Addison-­only phenotype is an important condition. Of male
patients with Addison disease, 25% may have the biochemical defect of
ALD. Many of these patients have intact neurologic systems, whereas
others have subtle neurologic signs. Many acquire AMN in adulthood.
The term asymptomatic ALD is applied to persons who have the
biochemical defect of ALD but are free of neurologic or endocrinal disturbances. Almost all persons with the gene defect eventually become
neurologically symptomatic.
Approximately 50% of female heterozygotes acquire a syndrome that
resembles AMN but is milder and of later onset. Adrenal insufficiency
and cerebral disease are rare.
Cases of typical ALD have occurred in relatives of those with AMN.
One of the most difficult problems in the management of ALD is the
common observation that affected individuals in the same family may
have quite different clinical courses. For example, in one family, an
affected male may have severe classic ALD culminating in death by age
10 years, and another brother will have the later-­onset AMN.

Laboratory and Radiographic Findings

The most specific and important laboratory finding is the demonstration of abnormally high levels of VLCFAs in plasma, RBCs, or cultured
skin fibroblasts. Positive results are obtained in all male patients with
ALD and in approximately 85% of female carriers of ALD. Pathogenic
variant analysis is the most reliable method for the identification of
carriers. Simply finding a variation in ABCD1 is not adequate for making the diagnosis of ALD. It must be shown to segregate with elevated
VLCFA levels.

Neuroimaging

Patients with childhood cerebral or adolescent ALD have characteristic
white matter lesions on MRI. In 80% of patients, the lesions are symmetric and involve the splenium of the corpus callosum and periventricular white matter in the posterior parietal and occipital lobes. Many

A

B

Fig. 106.5 Characteristic MRI findings in cerebral adrenoleukodystro-

phy. A, Symmetric T2-­weighted MRI abnormalities involve the posterior
white matter, including the corpus callosum. B, Contrast administration
reveals a garland of enhancement.

will show a garland of contrast enhancement adjacent and anterior to
the posterior hypodense lesions (Fig. 106.5). This zone corresponds to
the zones of intense perivascular lymphocytic infiltration where the
blood-­brain barrier breaks down. In 10–15% of patients, the initial
lesions are frontal. Unilateral lesions that produce a mass effect suggestive of a brain tumor may occur rarely. MRI provides a clearer delineation of normal and abnormal white matter than does CT and is the
preferred imaging modality.

Impaired Adrenal Function

More than 85% of patients with the childhood form of ALD have elevated levels of ACTH in plasma and a subnormal rise of cortisol levels
in plasma after IV injection of ACTH.

Newborn Screening and Diagnosis

Diagnosis of asymptomatic males is available by newborn screening,
which allows for early diagnosis of ALD years before the manifestations of disease. Males then enter a program of surveillance for adrenal
insufficiency and early detection of potential cerebral disease. Females
identified through these programs should also have confirmatory testing, genetic counseling for the family, and screening of other at-­risk
males. Females do not generally require any other monitoring in childhood. This early screening paradigm allows for early surveillance of
ALD neurologic symptoms, which are difficult to distinguish from
the more common attention-­deficit disorders or learning disabilities
of school-­age children. Early diagnosis could lead to early cortisol
treatment for adrenal problems, which could be life-­threatening. Early
bone marrow transplant is likely to result as a benefit of screening. For
positive newborn screens or for individuals with clinical suspicion of
ALD, confirmatory VLCFA testing and genetic counseling should be
provided.

The Earliest Manifestations of Childhood
Cerebral ALD

Rapid progression, signs of dementia, or difficulty in auditory discrimination suggest ALD. Even in early stages, neuroimaging shows
abnormal changes. Other leukodystrophies or multiple sclerosis may
sometimes mimic these radiographic findings, although early ALD has
more of a predilection for the posterior brain than its mimics. Definitive diagnosis depends on demonstration of VLCFA excess, which
occurs only in ALD and the other peroxisomal disorders.
Cerebral forms of ALD, especially if asymmetric, may be misdiagnosed as gliomas or other mass lesions. Individuals have received
brain biopsy and, rarely, other therapies before the correct diagnosis
was made. Measurement of VLCFAs in plasma is the most reliable differentiating test.
Adolescent or adult cerebral ALD can be confused with psychiatric
disorders, dementing disorders, multiple sclerosis, or epilepsy. The first
clue to the diagnosis of ALD may be the demonstration of characteristic
white matter lesions by neuroimaging; VLCFA assays are confirmatory.
ALD cannot be distinguished clinically from other forms of Addison
disease; it is recommended that assays of VLCFA levels be performed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids
in all male patients with Addison disease. ALD patients do not usually
have antibodies to adrenal tissue in their plasma.

Complications

An avoidable complication is the occurrence of adrenal insufficiency.
The most difficult neurologic problems are those related to bed rest,
contracture, coma, and swallowing disturbances. Other complications
involve behavioral disturbances and injuries associated with defects of
spatial orientation, impaired vision and hearing, and seizures.

Treatment

Corticosteroid replacement for adrenal insufficiency or adrenocortical
hypofunction is effective. It may be lifesaving and may increase general
strength and well-­being, but it does not alter the course of the neurologic disability.

Bone Marrow Transplantation

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) or hematopoietic stem cell
therapy (HSCT) benefits patients who show early evidence of the
inflammatory demyelination characteristic of the rapidly progressive
neurologic disability in young males and adolescents with the cerebral
ALD phenotype. BMT carries risk, and patients must be evaluated and
selected with care. The mechanism of the beneficial effect is incompletely understood. Bone marrow–derived cells do express ALDP, the
protein that is deficient in ALD; approximately 50% of brain microglial
cells are bone marrow derived. The favorable effect may be caused by
modification of the brain inflammatory response. Follow-­up of young
males and adolescents who had early cerebral involvement has shown
stabilization. On the other hand, BMT does not arrest the course in
those who already had severe brain involvement and may accelerate disease progression under these circumstances. The ALD MRI
score and the use of performance measures on IQ testing have shown
some predictive ability for boys likely to benefit from this procedure.
Transplant is not recommended in patients with performance IQ significantly <80. Unfortunately, in more than half the patients who are
diagnosed because of neurologic symptoms, the illness is so advanced
at diagnosis that they are not candidates for transplant.
Consideration of BMT is most relevant in neurologically asymptomatic or mildly involved patients. Screening at-­risk relatives of symptomatic
patients identifies these patients most frequently. Screening by measurement of plasma VLCFA levels in patients with Addison disease may also
identify candidates for BMT. Because of its risk (10–20% mortality) and
because up to 50% of untreated patients with ALD do not develop inflammatory brain demyelination, transplant is not recommended in patients
who are free of demonstrable brain involvement on MRI. MRI is also of
key importance for the crucial decision of whether transplant should be
performed. MRI abnormalities precede clinically evident neurologic or
neuropsychologic abnormalities. The brain MRI should be monitored
at 6-­month intervals in neurologically asymptomatic young males and
adolescents age 3-­15 years. If the MRI is normal, BMT is not indicated.
If brain MRI abnormalities develop, the young male should be evaluated
by a center familiar with transplant for ALD. This should include MRI,
neurologic, and neuropsychologic evaluations. It is not known whether
BMT has a favorable effect on the noninflammatory spinal cord involvement in adults with the adrenomyeloneuropathy phenotype.
Autologous hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy (elivaldogene
autotemcel) is approved for patients 4-17 years of age to slow the neurologic progression of early, active cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy.

Supportive Therapy

The progressive behavioral and neurologic disturbances associated
with the childhood form of ALD are extremely difficult for the family.
ALD patients require the establishment of a comprehensive management program and partnership among the family, physician, visiting
nursing staff, school authorities, and counselors. In addition, parent
support groups (e.g., United Leukodystrophy Foundation) are often
helpful. Communication with school authorities is important because
under the provisions of Public Law 94-­142, children with ALD qualify
for special services as “other health impaired” or “multi-­handicapped.”

871

Depending on the rate of progression of the disease, special needs
might range from relatively low-­level resource services within a regular
school program to home-­and hospital-­based teaching programs for
children who are not mobile.
Management challenges vary with the stage of the illness. The early
stages are characterized by subtle changes in affect, behavior, and attention span. Counseling and communication with school authorities are
of prime importance. Changes in the sleep–wake cycle can be benefited
by the judicious use of nighttime sleep medications.
As the leukodystrophy progresses, the modulation of muscle tone
and support of bulbar muscular function are major concerns. Baclofen
in gradually increasing doses (5 mg twice a day to 25 mg four times
a day) is an effective pharmacologic agent for the treatment of acute
episodic painful muscle spasms. Other agents may also be used, with
care taken to monitor the occurrence of side effects and drug interactions. As the leukodystrophy progresses, bulbar muscular control is
lost. Although initially this can be managed by changing the diet to soft
and pureed foods, most patients eventually require a gastrostomy tube.
At least 30% of patients have focal or generalized seizures that usually
readily respond to standard anticonvulsant medications.

Genetic Counseling and Prevention

Genetic counseling and appropriate monitoring are of crucial importance. Extended-­family screening should be offered to all at-­risk relatives of symptomatic patients; one program led to the identification of
>250 asymptomatic affected males and 1,200 women heterozygous for
ALD. The plasma assay permits reliable identification of affected males
in whom plasma VLCFA levels are increased already on the day of
birth. Identification of asymptomatic males permits institution of steroid replacement therapy when appropriate and prevents adrenal crisis,
which may be fatal. Monitoring of brain MRI also permits identification
of patients who are candidates for BMT at a stage when this procedure
has the greatest chance of success. Plasma VLCFA assay is recommended
in all male patients with Addison disease. ALD has been shown to be the
cause of adrenal insufficiency in >25% of boys with Addison disease of
unknown cause. Identification of women heterozygous for ALD is more
difficult than that of affected males. Plasma VLCFA levels are normal
in 15–20% of heterozygous women, and failure to note this has led to
serious errors in genetic counseling. DNA analysis permits accurate
identification of carriers, provided that the pathogenic variant has been
defined in a family member, and this is the procedure recommended for
the identification of heterozygous women.
Prenatal diagnosis of affected male fetuses can be achieved by determination of the known pathogenic variant or by the measurement of VLCFA
levels in cultured amniocytes or chorionic villus cells. Whenever a new
patient with ALD is identified, a detailed pedigree should be constructed
and efforts made to identify all at-­risk female carriers and affected males.
These investigations should be accompanied by careful and sympathetic
attention to social, emotional, and ethical issues during counseling.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

106.3 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
and Transport
Lee A. Pyles

EPIDEMIOLOGY OF BLOOD LIPIDS AND
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE

There is a strong association between average intake of saturated fats,
plasma cholesterol, and mortality from coronary heart disease (CHD).
Of all common chronic diseases, none is so clearly influenced by
both environmental and genetic factors as CHD. This multifactorial
disorder is strongly associated with increasing age and male gender,
although it is increasingly apparent that heart disease is underrecognized in women. Tobacco use confers a twofold higher lifetime risk.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

872 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Sedentary activity and high intake of processed sugars leading to adiposity increase risk through differences in the plasma levels of atherogenic lipoproteins. Family history reflects the combined influence of
lifestyle and genetic predisposition to early heart disease. Risk of premature heart disease associated with positive family history is 1.7 times
higher than in families with no such history.
Atherosclerosis begins during childhood. The Johns Hopkins Precursors Study demonstrated that White male medical students with
blood cholesterol levels in the lowest quartile showed only a 10% incidence of CHD 3 decades later, whereas those in the highest quartile had
a 40% incidence. The Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclerosis
in Youth Study demonstrated a significant relationship between the
weight of the abdominal fat pad and the extent of atherosclerosis found
at autopsy on individuals 15-­34 years of age. The Bogalusa Heart Study
of more than 3,000 Black and White children and adolescents has provided the most comprehensive longitudinal data relating the presence
and severity of CHD risk factors with semi-­quantifiable severity of atherosclerosis. Coronary atherosclerosis was present in 8.5% of military
autopsies performed after combat or unintentional injuries.
The fetal origins hypothesis is based on the observation that infants
born with low birthweight have a higher incidence of heart disease as
adults. Epidemiologic studies support the idea that prenatal and early
postnatal conditions may affect adult health status. Children who are
large for gestational age at birth and exposed to an intrauterine environment of either diabetes or maternal obesity are at increased risk of
eventually developing metabolic syndrome (insulin resistance, type 2
diabetes, obesity, CHD). Breastfeeding preterm infants confers a long-­
term cardioprotective benefit 13-­16 years later. Those adolescents who
were breastfed as infants had lower C-­reactive protein (CRP) concentrations and a 14% lower low-­density lipoprotein (LDL)/high-­density
lipoprotein (HDL) ratio than formula-­fed infants. The impact of early
nutrition and other lifestyle variables on gene expression via epigenetics
is one mechanism by which adult metabolism and body composition
may be influenced.
Secondary causes of hyperlipidemia may be the result of drugs
(cyclosporine, corticosteroids, isotretinoin, protease inhibitors, alcohol, thiazide diuretics, β-­blocking agents, valproate) or various diseases
(nephrotic syndrome, hypothyroidism, Cushing syndrome, anorexia
nervosa, obstructive jaundice). Psychotropic medications, including
second-­generation antipsychotics such as olanzapine, are also associated with dyslipidemia, obesity, and insulin resistance.

BLOOD LIPIDS AND ATHEROGENESIS

Numerous epidemiologic studies demonstrate the association of
hypercholesterolemia, referring to elevated total, non-­HDL, and LDL

blood cholesterol, with atherosclerotic disease. Atherosclerosis affects
primarily the coronary arteries but may also involve the aorta, arteries
of the lower extremities, and carotid arteries.
The early stage of development of atherosclerosis is thought to begin
with vascular endothelial dysfunction and intima-­media thickness,
which has been shown to occur in preadolescent children with risk
factors such as obesity or familial hypercholesterolemia. The complex
process of penetrating the intimal lining of the vessel may result from a
variety of insults, including the presence of highly toxic oxidized LDL
particles. Lymphocytes and monocytes penetrate the damaged endothelial lining, where they become macrophages laden with LDL lipids
and then become foam cells. Such accumulation is counterbalanced by
HDL particles capable of removing lipid deposits from the vessel wall.
Fundamental to plaque formation is an inflammatory process (elevated
CRP) involving macrophages and the arterial wall. The deposition of
lipid within the subendothelial lining of the arterial wall appears macroscopically as fatty streaks, which may to some degree be reversible.
A later stage of plaque development involves disruption of arterial
smooth muscle cells stimulated by the release of tissue cytokines and
growth factors. The atheroma is composed of a core of fatty substance
separated from the lumen by collagen and smooth muscle (Fig. 106.6).
Growth of the atherosclerotic plaque may result in ischemia of the tissue supplied by the artery. Chronic inflammation within the atheroma
results in plaque instability and subsequent rupture. Platelet adherence
leads to clot formation at the site of rupture, resulting in myocardial
infarction (MI) or a cerebrovascular accident (CVA), depending on the
site of thrombosis or thromboembolism.

PLASMA LIPOPROTEIN METABOLISM AND
TRANSPORT

Lipoproteins are soluble complexes of lipids and proteins that effect
transport of fat absorbed from the diet, or synthesis by the liver and
adipose tissues, for utilization and storage. Dietary fat is transported
from the small intestine as chylomicrons. Lipids synthesized by the
liver as very low-­
density lipoproteins (VLDLs) are catabolized to
intermediate-­density lipoproteins (IDLs) and LDLs. HDL is fundamentally involved in VLDL and chylomicron metabolism and cholesterol transport. Nonesterified free fatty acids are metabolically active
lipids derived from lipolysis of triglycerides stored in adipose tissue
and bound to albumin for circulation in the plasma (Fig. 106.7).
Lipoproteins consist of a central core of triglycerides and cholesteryl
esters surrounded by phospholipids, cholesterol, and proteins (Fig.
106.8). The density of the several classes of lipoproteins is inversely
proportional to the ratio of lipid to protein, which is generally denser
(Fig. 106.9).

Artery
Adventitia
Monocyte/
Macrophage

Smooth
muscle cells
Lumen

Intima
Tunica
media

Endothelium

Subendothelial
layer
Endothelium

Lipid core
Smooth
muscle cells
Fig. 106.6 The early stage of development of atherosclerosis begins with penetration of the intimal lining of the vessel by inflammatory cells.
Deposition of lipid within the subendothelial lining of the arterial wall eventually leads to disruption of smooth muscle cells to form an atheromatous
lipid core that impinges on the lumen. Chronic inflammation leads to plaque instability, setting the stage for plaque rupture and complete occlusion
of the vessel lumen by clot formation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

FFA

Muscle

873

Adipose

Chylomicron
Vascular bed

LPL
IDL

VLDL

Fig. 106.7 The exogenous, endogenous, and re-

verse cholesterol pathways. The exogenous pathway transports dietary fat from the small intestine
as chylomicrons to the periphery and the liver. The
endogenous pathway denotes the secretion of very
low-­density lipoprotein (VLDL) from the liver and its
catabolism to intermediate-­density lipoprotein (IDL)
and low-­density lipoprotein (LDL). Triglycerides are
hydrolyzed from the VLDL particle by the action of
lipoprotein lipase (LPL) in the vascular bed, yielding
free fatty acids (FFAs) for utilization and storage in
muscle and adipose tissue. High-­density lipoprotein
(HDL) metabolism is responsible for the transport of
excess cholesterol from the peripheral tissues back
to the liver for excretion in the bile. Nascent HDL-­3
particles derived from the liver and small intestine are
esterified to more mature HDL-­2 particles by enzyme-­
mediated movement of chylomicron and VLDL into
the HDL core, which is removed from the circulation
by endocytosis.

Lymphatics

Chylomicron
remnant

LDL
Exogenous
pathway

Endogenous
pathway
Liver

Reverse
cholesterol
transport
HDL 3

HDL 2
VLDL

Small Intestine

Peripheral
tissues

Chylomicron

Cholesterol ester

1.20
HDL

Phospholipid
Unesterified
cholesterol

APOB-100

Density g/mL

1.10
LDL

1.06

IDL

1.02

VLDL
1.006
1.00

Low-Density Lipoprotein

Fig. 106.8 Schematic of low-­density lipoprotein. Lipoprotein consists
of a central core of cholesteryl esters surrounded by phospholipids,
cholesterol, and protein.

Constituent proteins known as apolipoproteins are responsible for
a variety of metabolic functions in addition to their structural role,
including as cofactors or inhibitors of enzymatic pathways and mediators of lipoprotein binding to cell surface receptors (Table 106.6).
ApoA is the major apolipoprotein (Apo) of HDL. ApoB is present in
LDL, VLDL, IDL, and chylomicrons. ApoB-­100 is derived from the
liver, whereas apoB-­48 comes from the small intestine. ApoC-­I, C-­II,
and C-­III are small peptides important in triglyceride metabolism.
Loss of function and disruptive pathogenic variants of the APOC3
gene are associated with low levels of triglycerides and a reduced risk
of ischemic CHD. Likewise, apoE, which is present in VLDL, HDL,
chylomicrons, and chylomicron remnants, plays an important role in
the clearance of triglycerides.

Transport of Exogenous (Dietary) Lipids

All dietary fat except medium-­chain triglycerides is efficiently carried
into the circulation by way of lymphatic drainage from the intestinal

5

10

20

40
60
Diameter, mm

80

1,000

Fig. 106.9 The density of the several classes of lipoprotein is inversely

proportional to the ratio of lipid to protein. As lipid is less dense than
protein, the more lipid contained in the particle increases its size and
decreases its density. HDL, High-­density lipoprotein; LDL, low-­density
lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate-­
density lipoprotein; VLDL, very low-­
density lipoprotein.

mucosa. Triglyceride and cholesteryl esters combine with apoA and
apoB-­48 in the intestinal mucosa to form chylomicrons, which are
carried into the peripheral circulation via the lymphatic system. HDL
particles contribute apoC-­II to the chylomicrons, required for the activation of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) within the capillary endothelium of
adipose, heart, and skeletal muscle tissue. Free fatty acids are oxidized,
esterified for storage as triglycerides, or released into the circulation
bound to albumin for transport to the liver. After hydrolysis of the triglyceride core from the chylomicron, apoC particles are recirculated
back to HDL. The subsequent contribution of apoE from HDL to the
remnant chylomicron facilitates binding of the particle to the hepatic
LDL receptor (LDL-­R). Within the hepatocyte, the chylomicron remnant may be incorporated into membranes, resecreted as lipoprotein

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

874 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 106.6  Characteristics of the Major Lipoproteins
COMPOSITION
LIPOPROTEIN

SOURCE

SIZE (nm)

DENSITY (g/mL)

PROTEIN (%)

LIPID (%)

APOLIPOPROTEINS

Chylomicrons

Intestine

80-­1,200

<0.95

1-­2

98-­99

C-­I, C-­II, C-­III, E, A-­I, A-­II,
A-­IV, B-­48

Chylomicron remnants

Chylomicrons

40-­150

<1.0006

6-­8

92-­94

B-­48, E

VLDL

Liver, intestine

30-­80

0.95-­1.006

7-­10

90-­93

B-­100, C-­I, C-­II, C-­III

IDL

VLDL

25-­35

1.006-­1.019

11

89

B-­100, E

LDL

VLDL

18-­25

1.019-­1.063

21

79

B-­100

HDL

Liver, intestine VLDL,
chylomicrons

5-­20

1.125-­1.210

32-­57

43-­68

A-­I, A-­II, A-­IV C-­I, C-­II,
C-­III D, E

HDL, High-­density lipoproteins; IDL, intermediate-­density lipoproteins; LDL, low-­density lipoproteins; VLDL, very low-­density lipoproteins.

back into the circulation, or secreted as bile acids. Normally, all dietary
fat is disposed of within 8 hours after the last meal, an exception being
individuals with a disorder of chylomicron metabolism. Postprandial
hyperlipidemia is a risk factor for atherosclerosis. Abnormal transport
of chylomicrons and their remnants may result in their absorption into
the blood vessel wall as foam cells, caused by the ingestion of cholesteryl esters by macrophages, the earliest stage in the development of
fatty streaks.

Transport of Endogenous Lipids from the Liver

The formation and secretion of VLDL from the liver and its catabolism
to IDL and LDL particles describe the endogenous lipoprotein pathway. Fatty acids used in the hepatic formation of VLDL are derived
primarily by uptake from the circulation. VLDL appears to be transported from the liver as rapidly as it is synthesized, and it consists of
triglycerides, cholesteryl esters, phospholipids, and apoB-­100. Nascent
particles of VLDL secreted into the circulation combine with apoC and
apoE. The size of the VLDL particle is determined by the amount of
triglyceride present, progressively shrinking in size as triglyceride is
hydrolyzed by the action of LPL, yielding free fatty acids for utilization
or storage in muscle and adipose tissue. Hydrolysis of approximately
80% of the triglyceride present in VLDL particles produces IDL particles containing an equal amount of cholesterol and triglyceride. The
remaining remnant IDL is converted to LDL for delivery to peripheral
tissues or to the liver. ApoE is attached to the remnant IDL particle to
allow binding to the cell and subsequent incorporation into the lysosome. Individuals with a deficiency of either apoE2 or hepatic triglyceride lipase accumulate IDL in the plasma.
LDL particles account for approximately 70% of the plasma cholesterol in normal individuals. LDL receptors are present on the surfaces
of nearly all cells. Most LDL is taken up by the liver, and the rest is
transported to peripheral tissues such as the adrenal glands and gonads
for steroid synthesis. Dyslipidemia is greatly influenced by LDL-­R
activity. The efficiency with which VLDL is converted into LDL is also
important in lipid homeostasis. The normal newborn LDL level of 50
mg/dL is probably adequate for steroid synthesis throughout the life
cycle.

High-­Density Lipoprotein and Reverse Cholesterol
Transport

Because hepatic secretion of lipid particles into the bile is the only
mechanism by which cholesterol can be removed from the body, transport of excess cholesterol from the peripheral cells is a vitally important function of HDL. HDL is heavily laden with apoA-­I–containing
lipoproteins, which is nonatherogenic, in contrast to B lipoproteins.
Cholesterol-­poor nascent HDL particles secreted by the liver and small
intestine are esterified to more mature HDL-­2 particles by the action of
the enzyme lecithin-­cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which facilitates movement of chylomicrons and VLDL into the HDL core. HDL-­2
may transfer cholesteryl esters back to apoB lipoproteins mediated by

cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), or the cholesterol-­rich particle may be removed from the plasma by endocytosis, completing
reverse cholesterol transport. Low HDL may be genetic (deficiency of
apoA-­I) or secondary to increased plasma triglyceride.
LCAT deficiency results in diminished maturation of HDL particles, affecting their ability to do reverse cholesterol transport. This
reduces its protective effect on atherosclerosis. There are rare reports,
however, of less-­than-­expected severity of atherosclerosis despite low
HDL secondary to LCAT deficiency, suggesting that the relationship
may, for unknown reasons, be variable.

HYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIAS
Hypercholesterolemia
See Table 106.7.

Familial Hypercholesterolemia

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a monogenic autosomal dominant disorder characterized by strikingly elevated LDL cholesterol
(LDL-­C), premature cardiovascular disease (CVD), and tendon xanthomas. It is predominantly associated with defects of LDL-­R activity but also includes defects in the genes for apoB (APOB) and the
proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK-­
9), a protein
important in LDL endocytosis. Of the almost 1,200 LDLR pathogenic
variants described, some result in failure of synthesis of the LDL-­R
(receptor negative) and others cause defective binding or release at the
lipoprotein-­receptor interface. Receptor-­negative pathogenic variants
result in more severe phenotypes than receptor-­defective pathogenic
variants. Data from the Netherlands has confirmed the importance
of LDL reduction in FH; the major adverse coronary event risk for
affected siblings with statin treatment begun at age 10 years mirrored
that of unaffected siblings rather than the risk profile of the affected
parent.

Homozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia

FH homozygotes inherit two abnormal LDL receptor genes, resulting
in markedly elevated plasma cholesterol levels ranging between 500
and 1,200 mg/dL. Triglyceride levels are normal to mildly elevated, and
HDL levels may be slightly decreased. The condition occurs in 1 in
500,000 persons. Receptor-­negative patients have <2% normal LDL-­R
activity, whereas those who are receptor defective may have as much as
25% normal activity and consequently a better prognosis.
However, the prognosis is poor regardless of the specific LDL-­R
aberration. Severe atherosclerosis involving the aortic root and coronary arteries is present by early to middle childhood. These children
usually present with xanthomas, which may cause thickening of the
Achilles tendon or extensor tendons of the hands, or cutaneous lesions
on the hands, elbows, knees, or buttocks (Figs. 106.10-­106.12). Corneal
arcus may be present. Family history is informative because premature heart disease is strongly prevalent among relatives of both parents.
The diagnosis may be confirmed genetically or by measuring LDL-­R

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

875

Table 106.7  Hyperlipoproteinemias
DISORDER

LIPOPROTEINS
ELEVATED

GENETICS

ESTIMATED INCIDENCE

Familial hypercholesterolemia

LDL

Tendon xanthomas, CHD

AD

1 in 500

Familial defective ApoB-­100

LDL

Tendon xanthomas, CHD

AD

1 in 1,000

Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia

LDL

Tendon xanthomas, CHD

AR

<1 in 1,000,000

Sitosterolemia

LDL

Tendon xanthomas, CHD

AR

<1 in 1,000,000

Polygenic hypercholesterolemia

LDL

CHD

Familial combined hyperlipidemia

LDL, TG

CHD

AD

1 in 200

Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia

LDL, TG

Tuberoeruptive xanthomas,
peripheral vascular
disease

AD

1 in 10,000

Familial chylomicronemia (Frederickson type I)

TG ↑↑

Eruptive xanthomas,
hepatosplenomegaly,
pancreatitis

AR

1 in 1,000,000

Familial hypertriglyceridemia (Frederickson type IV)

TG ↑

±CHD

AD

1 in 500

Familial hypertriglyceridemia (Frederickson type V)

TG ↑↑

Xanthomas ± CHD

AD

—

Familial hepatic lipase deficiency

VLDL

CHD

AR

<1 in 1,000,000

CLINICAL FINDINGS

1 in 30?

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CHD, coronary heart disease; LDL, low-­density lipoproteins, TG, triglycerides; VLDL, very low-­density lipoproteins.

B

A

C

Fig. 106.10 Homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. Tendon xanthomas in a 5-­year-­old boy with homozygous FH noted at the knee (A),
wrist (B), and Achilles (C). (Modified from Macchiaiolo M, Gagliardi MG,
Toscano A, et al. Homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia. Lancet.
2012;379:1330.)

Fig. 106.12 Eruptive xanthomata on extensor surface of forearm.
(From Durrington P. Dyslipidaemia, Lancet. 2003;362:717–731.)

Fig. 106.11 Striate palmar xanthomata. (From Durrington P. Dyslipidaemia, Lancet. 2003;362:717–731.)

activity in cultured skin fibroblasts. Phenotypic expression of the disease may also be assessed by measuring receptor activity on the surface
of lymphocytes by using cell-­sorting techniques.
Untreated homozygous patients rarely survive to adulthood. Symptoms of coronary insufficiency may occur early, and sudden death is
common. LDL apheresis to remove LDL particles selectively from the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

876 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
circulation is recommended for many children because it slows the
progression of atherosclerosis. Liver transplantation is also successful
in decreasing LDL-­C levels, but complications related to immunosuppression are common. HMG-­CoA reductase inhibitors may be modestly effective depending on the specific class of LDL-­R defect present.
Combination therapy with ezetimibe, selectively blocking cholesterol
adsorption in the gut, usually results in further decline in LDL levels and has replaced the use of bile acid sequestrants. Clinical trials
using microsomal triglyceride transfer protein inhibition with lomitapide (an oral agent) resulted in significant reduction of all apoB
lipoproteins, including LDL, but hepatic fat deposition as a side effect
limits this pharmacologic approach. Mipomersen (subcutaneous injection), an antisense oligonucleotide that binds to the apolipoprotein B
mRNA, reduces the synthesis of apoB and thus also VLDL and LDL.
LDL cholesterol levels may decline approximately 25% with this treatment. Adverse effects include flulike symptoms, hepatic steatosis, and
cirrhosis.

Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia

Heterozygous FH is the most common single-­gene disorder associated
with acute coronary syndromes and atherosclerotic CHD in adults. Its
prevalence is approximately 1 in 250 individuals worldwide, but the
frequency may be greater in select populations, such as French Canadians, Afrikaners, Ashkenazi Jews, and Christian Lebanese, as a result
of the founder effect of unique pathogenic variants. Heart disease
accounts for more than half of all deaths in Western society, with the
pathogenesis having both environmental and genetic influences.
Because heterozygous FH is a dominant condition with nearly full
penetrance, 50% of first-­degree relatives of affected individuals will
have the disease, as will 25% of second-­degree relatives. An estimated
20 million people have FH worldwide. Symptoms of CHD usually
occur at the mean age of 45-­48 years in males and a decade later in
females. Genetic testing of both adult and pediatric patients who fulfill
clinical diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of heterozygous FH is variably positive dependent on the population under investigation.
One cannot overemphasize the importance of family history for suspecting the possibility of FH, especially given the low rate of cholesterol
screening for children in primary care offices. Because the risk of CHD
in individuals with FH can be up to 20 times greater than in the general population, guidelines have advocated for universal screening for
cholesterol in childhood. There is also an interest in genetic testing for
persons with suspected FH because of variability in phenotype based
on genotype.
Plasma levels of LDL-­C also do not allow unequivocal diagnosis of
FH heterozygotes; values are generally twice normal for age because
of one absent or dysfunctional allele. The U.S. MED-­PED (Make Early
Diagnosis–Prevent Early Death) Program has formulated diagnostic
criteria.
Similar criteria with minor variations exist in the United Kingdom
(Simon Broome criteria) and Holland (Dutch Lipid Clinic Network
criteria). Within well-­defined FH families, the diagnosis is reliably
established according to LDL cutoff points. More stringent criteria are
required to establish the diagnosis in previously undiagnosed families,
requiring strong evidence of an autosomal inheritance pattern and
higher LDL cutoff points. At a total cholesterol level of 310 mg/dL, only
4% of adults in the general population would have FH, whereas 95% of
adults who were first-­degree relatives of known cases would have the
disease.
Very high cholesterol levels in children should prompt extensive
screening of adult first-­and second-­degree relatives (“reverse cascade”
cholesterol screening). In the general population, a child younger than
age 18 years with total plasma cholesterol of 270 mg/dL and/or LDL-­C
of 200 mg/dL has an 88% chance of having FH (Table 106.8). Formal
clinical diagnosis of FH is based on the presence of two or more family
members having elevated LDL-­C levels (the 95th percentile LDL-­C level
cutoff points for children vary with age and are lower than for adults;
Table 106.9). The criteria for probable FH in a child whose first-­degree
relative has known FH require only modest elevation of total cholesterol to 220 mg/dL (LDL-­C 160 mg/dL; see Table 106.8). The challenge

of childhood FH diagnosis is heightened by the lack of clinical stigmata
such as xanthomata that are employed in the Simon Broome and Dutch
Lipid Clinic Network schema and highlights the needed shift toward
genetic diagnosis.
Treatment of children with FH should begin with a rigorous low-­
fat diet. Diet alone is rarely sufficient for decreasing blood cholesterol
levels to acceptable levels (LDL-­C <130 mg/dL). Ezetimibe blocks cholesterol adsorption in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and has a low risk
of side effects. Data suggest that ezetimibe will lower total cholesterol
by 20-­30 mg/dL. HMG-­CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) are the drug of
choice for treatment of FH because of their remarkable effectiveness and
acceptable risk profile. This class of drugs in children over age 10 years
is as effective in children as in adults, and the risks of elevated hepatic
enzymes and myositis are no greater than in adults. Another class of
drugs, the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK-­9)
inhibitors, are monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that block the action of
PCSK-­9 to downregulate the LDL-­R. These agents boost LDL-­R levels and result in a marked decrease in plasma LDL-­C levels. PCSK-­9
inhibitors have a role in adults intolerant of statins and those with subtherapeutic statin effect. Use of evolocumab in children over age 10 is
FDA approved. In addition, tobacco avoidance and cessation of use of
tobacco in the family should be stressed from the time of diagnosis.

Familial Defective ApoB-­100

Familial defective apoB-­
100 is an autosomal dominant condition
indistinguishable from heterozygous LDLR FH. LDL cholesterol levels are increased, triglycerides are normal, adults often develop tendon
xanthomas, and premature CHD occurs. Familial defective apoB-­100
is caused by a pathogenic variant in the receptor-­binding region of
apoB-­100, the ligand of the LDL receptor, with an estimated frequency
of 1 in 700 people in Western cultures. It is usually caused by missense substitution of apoB-­100 (p.Arg3527Gln, previously numbered
p.Arg3500Gln), which results in reduced ability of the LDL-­R to bind
LDL-­C, thus impairing its removal from the circulation. Specialized
laboratory testing can distinguish familial defective apoB-­100 from
FH, but this is not necessary, except in research settings, because treatment is the same.

Autosomal Recessive Hypercholesterolemia

This rare condition, caused by a defect in LDL-­R–mediated endocytosis in the liver, clinically presents with severe hypercholesterolemia at
levels intermediate between those found in homozygous and heterozygous FH. It is disproportionately present among Sardinians, reported
in other Mediterranean populations, and is modestly responsive to
treatment with HMG-­CoA reductase inhibitors.

Sitosterolemia

A rare autosomal recessive condition characterized by excessive intestinal adsorption of plant sterols, sitosterolemia is caused by pathogenic
variants in the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)–binding cassette transporter system (ABCG5 or ABCG8), which is responsible for limiting
adsorption of plant sterols in the small intestine and promotes biliary
excretion of the small amounts adsorbed. Plasma cholesterol levels
may be severely elevated, resulting in tendon xanthomas and premature atherosclerosis. Other features include hemolytic anemia, macrothrombocytopenia (large platelets, reduced number), and hemorrhage.
Diagnosis can be confirmed by measuring elevated plasma sitosterol
levels. Treatment with HMG-­CoA reductase inhibitors is not effective,
but cholesterol adsorption inhibitors, such as ezetimibe, and bile acid
sequestrants are effective.

Polygenic Hypercholesterolemia

Primary elevation in LDL-­C among children and adults is most often
polygenic; the small effects of many genes are affected by environmental influences (diet). Plasma cholesterol levels are modestly elevated;
triglyceride levels are normal. Polygenic hypercholesterolemia aggregates in families sharing a common lifestyle but does not follow predictable hereditary patterns found in single-­gene lipoprotein defects.
Treatment of children with polygenic hypercholesterolemia is directed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

877

Table 106.8  Percentage of Youths Younger than Age 18 years Expected to Have Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH)
According to Cholesterol Levels and Closest Relative with FH
PERCENTAGE WITH FH AT THAT LEVEL
TOTAL CHOL
(mg/dL)

LDL CHOL
(mg/dL)

DEGREE OF RELATIVE
FIRST

SECOND

THIRD

GENERAL POPULATION

180

122

7.2

2.4

0.9

0.01

190

130

13.5

5.0

2.2

0.03

200

138

26.4

10.7

4.9

0.07

210

147

48.1

23.6

11.7

0.19

220

155

73.1

47.5

27.9

0.54

230

164

90.0

75.0

56.2

1.8

240

172

97.1

93.7

82.8

6.3

250

181

99.3

97.6

95.3

22.2

260

190

99.9

99.5

99.0

57.6

270

200

100.0

99.9

99.8

88.0

280

210

100.0

100.0

100.0

97.8

290

220

100.0

100.0

100.0

99.6

300

230

100.0

100.0

100.0

99.9

310

240

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Chol, Cholesterol; LDL, low-­density lipoprotein.
From Williams RR, Hunt SC, Schumacher MC, et al. Diagnosing heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia using new practical criteria validated by molecular genetics. Am J Cardiol.
1993;72:171–176.

toward adoption of a healthy lifestyle: reduced total and saturated fat
consumption and at least 1 hour of physical activity daily. Cholesterol-­
lowering medication is rarely necessary.

Hypercholesterolemia with Hypertriglyceridemia
Familial Combined Hyperlipidemia

This autosomal dominant condition is characterized by moderate elevation in plasma LDL-­C and triglycerides and reduced plasma HDL-­
C. Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) is the most common
primary lipid disorder, affecting approximately 1 in 200 people. Family history of premature heart disease is typically positive; the formal
diagnosis requires that at least two first-­degree relatives have evidence
of one of three variants of dyslipidemia: (1) >90th percentile plasma
LDL-­C, (2) >90th percentile LDL-­C and triglycerides, and (3) >90th
percentile triglycerides. Individuals can switch from one phenotype to
another. Xanthomas are not a feature of FCHL. Elevated plasma apoB
levels with increased small, dense LDL particles support the diagnosis.
Children and adults with FCHL have coexisting adiposity, hypertension, and hyperinsulinemia, suggesting the presence of metabolic
syndrome. Formal diagnosis in adults, as defined by the National
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Adult Treatment Panel III,
identifies six major components: abdominal obesity, atherogenic dyslipidemia, hypertension, insulin resistance with or without impaired
glucose tolerance, evidence of vascular inflammation, and prothrombotic state. An estimated 30% of overweight adults fulfill criteria for the
diagnosis of metabolic syndrome, including 65% of those with FCHL.
There is no official definition of metabolic syndrome for children. Absolute cutoffs for diagnosis in children do not account for continuous
variables in aging, sexual maturation, and race/ethnicity.
FCHL and type 2 diabetes share many features of metabolic syndrome, suggesting that they are less distinct entities than originally
conceptualized. Genetic association studies reveal evidence for a common genetic background. The resultant metabolic overlap is associated
with ectopic fat accumulation and insulin resistance. The mechanisms
associating visceral adiposity with metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes are not fully understood. It is assumed that hypercholesterolemia

and, with less certainty, hypertriglyceridemia confer risk for CVD
in patients with FCHL. When features of metabolic syndrome are
included in logistic models, shared etiologic features such as increased
visceral adiposity become apparent. Visceral adiposity increases with
age, and its importance in children as a risk factor for heart disease
and diabetes is limited by the relative paucity of data. Body mass index
(BMI) remains the surrogate for adiposity in the pediatric clinical
setting.
The cornerstone of management is lifestyle modification. This includes
a diet low in saturated fats, trans fats, and cholesterol, as well as reduced
consumption of processed sugars. Increased dietary intake of fruits
and vegetables is important, as is 1 hour of moderate physical activity
daily. Compliance among children and their parents is often a problem,
but small incremental steps are more likely to succeed than aggressive
weight loss strategies. It is very important that the child’s caregivers
participate in the process. Plasma triglyceride levels are usually quite
responsive to dietary restriction, especially reduction in the amount
of sweetened drinks consumed. Blood cholesterol levels may decrease
by 10–15%, but if LDL-­C remains >160 mg/dL, drug therapy should
be considered.

Familial Dysbetalipoproteinemia (Type III Hyperlipoproteinemia)

Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia (FDBL) is caused by pathogenic variants in APOE, which, when exposed to environmental influences (e.g.,
high-­fat high-­caloric diet, excessive alcohol intake), results in a mixed
type of hyperlipidemia. Patients tend to have elevated plasma cholesterol and triglycerides to a relatively similar degree. HDL-­C is typically
normal, in contrast to other causes of hypertriglyceridemia associated
with low HDL. This rare disorder affects approximately 1 in 10,000
persons. ApoE mediates removal of chylomicron and VLDL remnants
from the circulation by binding to hepatic surface receptors. The polymorphic APOE gene expresses in three isoforms: apoE3, apoE2, and
apoE4. E4 is the “normal” allele present in the majority of the population. The apoE2 isoform has lower affinity for the LDL receptor, and its
frequency is approximately 7%. Approximately 1% of the population is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

878 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 106.9  Plasma Cholesterol and Triglyceride Levels in Childhood and Adolescence: Means and Percentiles
TOTAL TRIGLYCERIDE (mg/dL)

TOTAL CHOLESTEROL (mg/dL)

LDL CHOLESTEROL (mg/dL)

HDL CHOLESTEROL (mg/dL)*

5TH

MEAN

75TH

90TH

95TH

5TH

MEAN

75TH

90TH

95TH

5TH

MEAN

75TH

90TH

95TH

5TH

10TH

25TH

MEAN

95TH

Cord

14

34

—

—

84

42

68

—

—

103

17

29

—

—

50

13

—

—

35

60

1-­4 YR
Male

29

56

68

85

99

114

155

170

190

203

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

Female

34

64

74

95

112

112

156

173

188

200

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

5-­9 YR
Male

28

52

58

70

85

125

155

168

183

189

63

93

103

117

129

38

42

49

56

74

Female

32

64

74

103

126

131

164

176

190

197

68

100

115

125

140

36

38

47

53

73

10-­14 YR
Male

33

63

74

94

111

124

160

173

188

202

64

97

109

122

132

37

40

46

55

74

Female

39

72

85

104

120

125

160

171

191

205

68

97

110

126

136

37

40

45

52

70

15-­19 YR
Male

38

78

88

125

143

118

153

168

183

191

62

94

109

123

130

30

34

39

46

63

Female

36

73

85

112

126

118

159

176

198

207

59

96

111

29

137

35

38

43

52

74

*Note that different percentiles are listed for high-­density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol.
LDL, Low-­density lipoprotein.
Data for cord blood from Strong W. Atherosclerosis: its pediatric roots. In Kaplan N, Stamler J, eds. Prevention of Coronary Heart Disease. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1983. Data for children 1-­4 yr from Tables 6, 7, 20, and 21, and all other data
from Tables 24, 25, 32, 33, 36, and 37 in Lipid Research Clinics Population Studies Data Book, Vol 1, “The Prevalence Study,” NIH Publication No. 80-­1527. Washington, DC: National Institutes of Health; 1980

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

879

homozygous for apoE2/E2, the most common pathogenic variant associated with FDBL, but only a minority expresses the disease. Expression requires precipitating illnesses such as diabetes, obesity, renal
disease, or hypothyroidism. Individuals homozygous for apoE4/E4 are
at risk for late-­onset Alzheimer disease and dementia from repeated
sports-­related head injuries.
Most patients with FDBL present in adulthood with distinctive xanthomas. Tuberoeruptive xanthomas resemble small, grapelike clusters
on the knees, buttocks, and elbows. Prominent orange-­yellow discoloration of the creases of the hands (palmar xanthomas) is also typically
present. Atherosclerosis, often presenting with peripheral vascular disease, usually occurs in the fourth or fifth decade. Children may present
with a less distinctive rash and generally have precipitating illnesses.
The diagnosis of FDBL is established by lipoprotein electrophoresis, which demonstrates a broad beta band containing remnant lipoproteins. Direct measurement of VLDL by ultracentrifugation can be
performed in specialized lipid laboratories. A VLDL/total triglyceride
ratio >0.30 supports the diagnosis. APOE genotyping for apoE2 homozygosity can be performed, confirming the diagnosis in the presence of
the distinctive physical findings. A negative result does not necessarily
rule out the disease, as other pathogenic variants in APOE may cause
even more serious manifestations.
Pharmacologic treatment of FDBL is necessary to decrease the likelihood of symptomatic atherosclerosis in adults. HMG-­CoA reductase
inhibitors, nicotinic acid, and fibrates are all effective. FDBL is quite
responsive to recommended dietary restriction.

Hypertriglyceridemias

The familial disorders of triglyceride-­rich lipoproteins include both
common and rare variants of the Frederickson classification system.
These include familial chylomicronemia (type I), familial hypertriglyceridemia (type IV), and the more severe combined hypertriglyceridemia and chylomicronemia (type V). Hepatic lipase deficiency also
results in a similar combined hyperlipidemia.

Familial Chylomicronemia (Type I Hyperlipidemia)

This rare single-­gene defect, like FH, is caused by pathogenic variants affecting clearance of apoB-­
containing lipoproteins. A deficiency or absence of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) or its cofactor apoC-­II
(APOC2), which facilitates lipolysis by LPL, causes severe elevation of
triglyceride-­rich plasma chylomicrons. HDL-­C levels are decreased.
Clearance of these particles is greatly delayed, so the plasma is noted
to have a turbid appearance even after prolonged fasting (Fig. 106.13).
Chylomicronemia caused by LPL deficiency is associated with modest
elevation in triglycerides, whereas this is not the case when the cause
is deficient or absent apoC-­II. Both are autosomal recessive conditions
with a frequency of approximately 1 in 1 million. The disease usually
presents during childhood with acute pancreatitis. Eruptive xanthomas
on the arms, knees, and buttocks may be present, and there may be
hepatosplenomegaly. The diagnosis is established by assaying triglyceride lipolytic activity. Treatment of chylomicronemia is by vigorous
dietary fat restriction supplemented by fat-­soluble vitamins. Medium-­
chain triglycerides that are adsorbed into the portal venous system may
augment total fat intake, and administration of fish oils may also be
beneficial.

Familial Hypertriglyceridemia (Type IV
Hyperlipidemia)

Familial hypertriglyceridemia (FHTG) is an autosomal dominant disorder of unknown etiology that occurs in approximately 1 in 500 individuals. It is characterized by elevation of plasma triglycerides >90th
percentile (250-­
1,000 mg/dL range), often accompanied by slight
elevation in plasma cholesterol and low HDL. FHTG does not usually
manifest until adulthood, although it can be detected in approximately
20% of affected children. In contrast to FCHL, FHTG is not thought to
be highly atherogenic. It is most likely caused by defective breakdown
of VLDL or, less often, by overproduction of this class of lipoproteins.
The diagnosis should include the presence of at least one first-­degree
relative with hypertriglyceridemia. FHTG should be distinguished

Fig. 106.13 Milky plasma from a patient with acute abdominal pain.
(From Durrington P. Dyslipidaemia, Lancet. 2003;362:717–731.)

from FCHL and FDBL, which require more vigorous treatment to
prevent coronary or peripheral vascular disease. The differentiation is
usually possible on clinical grounds, in that lower LDL-­C levels accompany FHTG, but measurement of normal apoB levels in FHTG may be
helpful in ambiguous situations.
A more severe hypertriglyceridemia characterized by increased levels of chylomicrons and VLDL particles (Frederickson type V) may
occasionally be encountered. Triglyceride levels are often >1,000 mg/
dL. The disease is rarely seen in children. In contrast to chylomicronemia (Frederickson type I), LPL or apoC-­II deficiency is not present. These patients often develop eruptive xanthomas in adulthood,
whereas type IV hypertriglyceridemia individuals do not. Acute
pancreatitis may be the presenting illness. As with other hypertriglyceridemias, excessive alcohol consumption and estrogen therapy can
exacerbate the disease.
Secondary causes of transient hypertriglyceridemia should be ruled
out before making a diagnosis of FHTG. A diet high in simple sugars and carbohydrates or excessive alcohol consumption, as well as
estrogen therapy, may exacerbate hypertriglyceridemia. Adolescents
and adults should be questioned about excessive consumption of soda
and other sweetened drinks, as it is common to encounter people who
drink supersized drinks or multiple 12 oz cans of sweetened drinks
daily. Cessation of this practice often results in a dramatic fall in triglyceride levels and weight among those who are obese. HDL-­C levels
will tend to rise as BMI stabilizes.
Pediatric diseases associated with hyperlipidemia include hypothyroidism, nephrotic syndrome, biliary atresia, glycogen storage disease,
Niemann-­Pick disease (NPD), Tay-­Sachs disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, hepatitis, and anorexia nervosa (Table 106.10). Certain
medications exacerbate hyperlipidemia, including isotretinoin (Accutane), thiazide diuretics, second-­generation antipsychotic agents, oral
contraceptives, corticosteroids, β blockers, immunosuppressants, and
protease inhibitors used in HIV treatment.
Treatment of hypertriglyceridemia in children rarely requires medication unless levels >1,000 mg/dL persist after dietary restriction of fats,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

880 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 106.10  Secondary Causes of Hyperlipidemia
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
Hypothyroidism
Nephrotic syndrome
Cholestasis
Anorexia nervosa
Drugs: progesterone, thiazides, carbamazepine (Tegretol),
cyclosporine
HYPERTRIGLYCERIDEMIA
Glycogen storage disease type 1
Obesity
Type 2 diabetes
Alcohol
Renal failure
Sepsis
Stress
Cushing syndrome
Pregnancy
Hepatitis
AIDS, protease inhibitors
Drugs: anabolic steroids, β blockers, estrogen, thiazides, Accutane
REDUCED HIGH-­DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN
Smoking
Obesity
Type 2 diabetes
Malnutrition
Drugs: β blockers, anabolic steroids

sugars, and carbohydrates, accompanied by increased physical activity.
In such patients the aim is to prevent episodes of pancreatitis. The common use of fibrates (fenofibric acid) and niacin in adults with hypertriglyceridemia is not recommended in children. HMG-­CoA reductase
inhibitors are variably effective in lowering triglyceride levels, and
there is considerably more experience documenting the safety and efficacy of this class of lipid-­lowering medications in children. In adults,
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved prescription (Lovaza, Vascepa) and nonprescription fish oils as adjuncts to diet
in the treatment of severe hypertriglyceridemias.

Hepatic Lipase Deficiency

Hepatic lipase deficiency is a very rare autosomal recessive condition
caused by pathogenic variants in LMF1 resulting in elevation in both
plasma cholesterol and triglycerides. Hepatic lipase hydrolyzes triglycerides and phospholipids in VLDL remnants and IDL, preventing
their conversion to LDL. HDL-­C levels tend to be increased rather
than decreased, suggesting the diagnosis. Laboratory confirmation
is established by measuring hepatic lipase activity in heparinized
plasma.

Disorders of High-­Density Lipoprotein Metabolism
Primary Hypoalphalipoproteinemia

Isolated low HDL-­C is a familial condition that often follows a pattern
suggestive of autosomal dominant inheritance but may occur independent of family history. It is the most common disorder of HDL metabolism. It is defined as HDL-­C <10th percentile for gender and age with
normal plasma triglycerides and LDL-­C. Whether it is associated with
more rapid atherosclerosis is uncertain. Primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia appears to be related to a reduction in apoA-­I synthesis and
increased catabolism of HDL. Secondary causes of low HDL-­C, such
as metabolic syndrome, and rare diseases such as LCAT deficiency and
Tangier disease must be ruled out.

Familial Hyperalphalipoproteinemia

This is an unusual condition conferring decreased risk for CHD among
family members. Plasma levels of HDL-­C exceed 80 mg/dL.

Familial Apolipoprotein A-­I Deficiency

Pathogenic variants in the APOA1 gene may result in complete absence
of plasma HDL. Nascent HDL is produced in the liver and small
intestine. Free cholesterol from peripheral cells is esterified by LCAT,
enabling formation of mature HDL particles. ApoA-­I is required for
normal enzymatic functioning of LCAT. The resultant accumulation of
free cholesterol in the circulation eventually leads to corneal opacities,
planar xanthomas, and premature atherosclerosis. Some patients, however, may have pathogenic variants of APOA1 that result in very rapid
catabolism of the protein not associated with atherogenesis, despite
HDL-­C levels in the 15-­30 mg/dL range.

Tangier Disease

This autosomal dominant disease is associated with HDL-­C levels <5
mg/dL. It is caused by pathogenic variants in ABCA1, which encodes
a protein that facilitates the binding of cellular cholesterol to apoA-­I.
This results in free cholesterol accumulation in the reticuloendothelial system, manifested by tonsillar hypertrophy of a distinctive orange
color and hepatosplenomegaly. Intermittent peripheral neuropathy
may occur from cholesterol accumulation in Schwann cells. Diagnosis should be suspected in children with enlarged orange tonsils and
extremely low HDL-­C levels.

Familial Lecithin–Cholesterol Acyltransferase
Deficiency

Pathogenic variants of LCAT interfere with the esterification of cholesterol, thereby preventing formation of mature HDL particles. This
is associated with rapid catabolism of apoA-­I. Free circulating cholesterol in the plasma is greatly increased, which leads to corneal opacities
and HDL-­C levels <10 mg/dL. Partial LCAT deficiency is known as
“fish-­eye” disease because of the corneal opacities. Complete deficiency
causes hemolytic anemia and progressive renal insufficiency early in
adulthood. This rare disease is not thought to cause premature atherosclerosis. Laboratory confirmation is based on a demonstration of
decreased cholesterol esterification in the plasma.

Cholesteryl Ester Transfer Protein Deficiency

Pathogenic variants of the CETP gene result in cholesteryl ester transfer
protein (CETP) deficiency. CETP facilitates the transfer of lipoproteins
from mature HDL to and from VLDL and chylomicron particles, thus
ultimately regulating the rate of cholesterol transport to the liver for
excretion in the bile. About half of mature HDL-­2 particles are directly
removed from the circulation by HDL receptors on the surface of the
liver. The other half of cholesteryl esters in the core of HDL exchange
with triglycerides in the core of apoB lipoproteins (VLDL, IDL, LDL)
for transport to the liver. Homozygous deficiency of CETP has been
observed in subsets of the Japanese population with extremely high
HDL-­C levels (>150 mg/dL).

Conditions Associated with Low Cholesterol

Disorders of apoB-­containing lipoproteins and intracellular cholesterol
metabolism are associated with low plasma cholesterol.

Abetalipoproteinemia

This rare autosomal recessive disease is caused by pathogenic variants
in the MTTP gene that encodes the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein necessary for the transfer of lipids to nascent chylomicrons in the small intestine and VLDL in the liver. This results in an
absence of chylomicrons, VLDL, LDL, and apoB and very low levels
of plasma cholesterol and triglycerides. Fat and fat-­soluble vitamin
malabsorption, diarrhea, and failure to thrive present in early childhood. Spinocerebellar degeneration, secondary to vitamin E deficiency, manifests in loss of deep tendon reflexes progressing to ataxia
and lower-­extremity spasticity by adulthood. Patients with abetalipoproteinemia also acquire a progressive pigmented retinopathy associated with decreased night and color vision and eventual blindness. The
neurologic symptoms and retinopathy may be mistaken for Friedreich
ataxia. Differentiation from Friedreich ataxia is suggested by the presence of malabsorption and acanthocytosis on peripheral blood smear

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids
in abetalipoproteinemia. Many of the clinical manifestations of the disease are a result of malabsorption of fat-­soluble vitamins, such as vitamins E, A, and K. Early treatment with supplemental vitamins, especially
E, may significantly slow the development of neurologic sequelae. Vitamin E is normally transported from the small intestine to the liver by
chylomicrons, where it is dependent on the endogenous VLDL pathway for delivery into the circulation and peripheral tissues. Parents of
children with abetalipoproteinemia have normal blood lipid and apoB
levels.

Familial Hypobetalipoproteinemia

Familial homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia is associated with
symptoms very similar to those of abetalipoproteinemia, but the inheritance pattern is autosomal dominant caused by pathogenic variants in
APOB. It is distinguishable from abetalipoproteinemia in that heterozygous parents of probands have plasma LDL-­C and apoB levels less
than half of normal. However, few symptoms or sequelae are associated
with the heterozygous condition.
The selective inability to secrete apoB-­48 from the small intestine
results in a condition resembling abetalipoproteinemia or homozygous
hypobetalipoproteinemia. Sometimes referred to as Anderson disease
or chylomicron retention disease, caused by recessive alterations of
the SAR1B gene, the failure of chylomicron absorption causes steatorrhea and fat-­soluble vitamin deficiency. The blood level of apoB-­100,
derived from normal hepatocyte secretion, is normal in this condition.

Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz Syndrome

Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive disorder that includes microcephaly, polydactyly, holoprosencephaly,
seizures and developmental delay. Phenotypic variance ranges from
microcephaly, cardiac and brain malformation, and multiorgan system failure to only subtle dysmorphic features and mild developmental delay. It is associated with low plasma cholesterol and accumulated
precursors (Tables 106.11 and 106.12) (see Chapter 628.2). Pathogenic
variants in the DHCR7 (7-­dehydrocholesterol-­Δ7 reductase) gene
result in deficiency of the microsomal enzyme DHCR7, which is necessary to complete the final step in cholesterol synthesis. Hypotheses
to connect the role of cholesterol synthesis in SLOS congenital malformations have implicated the ligand sonic hedgehog (SHH), for which
developmental signaling activity is dependent on cholesterol modification. The incidence of SLOS is estimated to be 1 in 20,000-­60,000
births.
Spontaneous abortion of SLOS fetuses may occur. Type II SLOS often
leads to death by the end of the neonatal period. Survival is unlikely
when the plasma cholesterol level is <20 mg/dL. Laboratory measurement should be performed by gas chromatography, because standard
techniques for lipoprotein assay include measurement of cholesterol
precursors, which may yield a false-­positive result. Milder cases may not
present until late childhood. Treatment includes supplemental dietary
cholesterol (egg yolk) and HMG-­CoA reductase inhibition to prevent
the synthesis of toxic precursors proximal to the enzymatic block.

Disorders of Intracellular Cholesterol Metabolism
Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis

This autosomal recessive disorder presents in late adolescence with
tendon xanthomas, cataracts, and progressive neurodegeneration. It
is caused by tissue accumulation of bile acid intermediates that are
shunted into production of cholestanol that in turn result from pathogenic variants in the gene for sterol 27-­hydroxylase (CYP27A1). This
enzyme is necessary for normal mitochondrial synthesis of bile acids
in the liver. Early treatment with chenodeoxycholic acid reduces cholesterol levels and prevents the development of symptoms.

Wolman Disease and Cholesterol Ester Storage
Disease

These autosomal recessive disorders are caused by pathogenic variants
in LIPA that result in lack of lysosomal acid lipase. After LDL cholesterol is incorporated into the cell by endocytosis, it is delivered to lysosomes, where it is hydrolyzed by lysosomal lipase. Failure of hydrolysis

881

Table 106.11  Major Clinical Characteristics of Smith-­
Lemli-­Opitz Syndrome: Frequent Anomalies
(>50% of Patients)
CRANIOFACIAL
Microcephaly
Blepharoptosis
Anteverted nares
Retromicrognathia
Low-­set, posteriorly rotated ears
Midline cleft palate
Broad maxillary alveolar ridges
Cataracts (<50%)
SKELETAL ANOMALIES
Syndactyly of toes II/III
Postaxial polydactyly (<50%)
Equinovarus deformity (<50%)
GENITAL ANOMALIES
Hypospadias
Cryptorchidism
Sexual ambiguity (<50%) or XY sex reversal
DEVELOPMENT
Prenatal and postnatal growth retardation
Feeding problems
Intellectual disability
Behavioral abnormalities
From Haas D, Kelley RI, Hoffmann GF. Inherited disorders of cholesterol biosynthesis.
Neuropediatrics. 2001;32:113–122.

because of complete absence of the enzyme causes accumulation of
cholesteryl esters within the cells. Hepatosplenomegaly, steatorrhea,
and failure to thrive occur during early infancy, leading to death by the
end of the first year. In cholesterol ester storage disease, a less severe
form than Wolman disease, there is low but detectable acid lipase activity (see Chapter 106.4).

Niemann-­Pick Disease Type C

This disorder of intracellular cholesterol transport is characterized by
accumulation of cholesterol and sphingomyelin in the CNS and reticuloendothelial system. Death from this autosomal recessive neurologic
disease usually occurs by adolescence (see Chapter 106.4).

Lipoprotein Patterns in Children and Adolescents

Derived primarily from the Lipid Research Clinics Population Studies, Table 106.9 shows the distribution of lipoprotein levels in American youth at various ages. Total plasma cholesterol rises rapidly from
a mean of 68 mg/dL at birth to a level approximately twice that by the
end of the neonatal period. A very gradual rise in total cholesterol level
occurs until puberty, when the mean level reaches 160 mg/dL. Total
cholesterol falls transiently during puberty in males because of a small
decrease in HDL-­C and in females secondary to a slight fall in LDL-­C.
Blood cholesterol levels track reasonably well as individuals age.
High blood cholesterol tends to aggregate in families, a reflection of
genetic and environmental influences.
Acceptable total cholesterol among children and adolescents is <170
mg/dL; borderline is 170-­199 mg/dL; and high is >200 mg/dL. Acceptable LDL-­C is <110 mg/dL; borderline is 110-­129 mg/dL; and high is
>130 mg/dL. HDL-­C should be >40 mg/dL.

Blood Cholesterol Screening

A lipid profile should be checked for all children between ages 9 and 11
years and then another between ages 17 and 21 years because cholesterol levels may vary after puberty. However, if a child would have met
the selective criteria from the previous risk-­based guidelines (premature coronary artery disease [CAD] in a parent or grandparent, a parent with cholesterol >240 mg/dL), screening can occur as early as age 2

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

882 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 106.12  Characteristic Malformations of Internal
Organs in Severely Affected Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz
Patients
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Frontal lobe hypoplasia
Enlarged ventricles
Agenesis of corpus callosum
Cerebellar hypoplasia
Holoprosencephaly
CARDIOVASCULAR
Atrioventricular canal
Secundum atrial septal defect
Patent ductus arteriosus
Membranous ventricular septal defect
URINARY TRACT
Renal hypoplasia or aplasia
Renal cortical cysts
Hydronephrosis
Ureteral duplication
GASTROINTESTINAL
Hirschsprung disease
Pyloric stenosis
Refractory dysmotility
Cholestatic and noncholestatic progressive liver disease
PULMONARY
Pulmonary hypoplasia
Abnormal lobation
ENDOCRINE
Adrenal insufficiency
From Haas D, Kelley RI, Hoffmann GF. Inherited disorders of cholesterol biosynthesis.
Neuropediatrics. 2001;32:113–122.

years. Data also suggest that obtaining a nonfasting lipid profile can be
just as useful in detecting severe genetic dyslipidemias as a fasting lipid
profile and thus can be used as first-­line screening in children. Fasting
lipid profiles may also be used depending on parental, child, and clinician preference, especially if there is concern for hypertriglyceridemia,
because triglycerides are affected more by fasting status. Abnormal
lipid panels should be repeated, and especially when the concern is the
triglycerides, the second panel should be obtained ≥2 weeks later in the
fasted state. Treatment other than lifestyle modification is not initiated
based on a single lipid panel determination.

Risk Assessment and Treatment of Hyperlipidemia

The NCEP recommends a population-­based approach toward a healthy
lifestyle applicable to all children and an individualized approach
directed at those children at high risk (Fig. 106.14). The important
focus on maintenance of a healthy lifestyle rather than aggressive
weight reduction is recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).
All children with dyslipidemias are stratified according to the presence of high-­level or moderate-­level risk factors to determine their ultimate treatment. High-­level risk factors are defined as hypertension
requiring drug therapy (blood pressure ≥99th percentile + 5 mm Hg),
current cigarette smoker, BMI at the ≥97th percentile, the presence of
type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, postorthoptic heart transplant, and/or Kawasaki disease with current aneurysms.
Moderate-­level risk factors are defined as hypertension that does not
require drug therapy, BMI at the ≥95th percentile but <97th percentile, HDL-­C <40 mg/dL, Kawasaki disease (and possibly multisystem
inflammatory syndrome in children [MIS-­C]) with regressed coronary
aneurysms, chronic inflammatory disease, HIV infection, and/or the
presence of nephrotic syndrome.

The initial treatment for dyslipidemia in a child always begins with a
6-­month trial of lifestyle modification, namely, improvements in dietary
and physical activity patterns. Being overweight confers a special risk
of CVD because of the strong association with insulin resistance syndrome (metabolic syndrome). Although there is no standardized
definition of metabolic syndrome for youth, it is likely that half of all
severely obese children are insulin resistant. Data from the CARDIAC
project noted that 49% of fifth-­grade children with the hyperpigmented
rash, acanthosis nigricans, had three or more factors for insulin resistance syndrome when using the definition classically used for adults,
including evidence of insulin resistance, hypertension, HDL-­C <40
mg/dL, and triglycerides >150 mg/dL, in addition to obesity.
The Cardiovascular Health Integrated Lifestyle Diet-­1 (CHILD-­1)
diet is the first level of dietary change to be recommended for all children with dyslipidemias. The CHILD-­1 diet is specially designed for
children with risk factors for CAD and focuses on limiting dietary
cholesterol to 300 mg/day, limiting sugary drink consumption, using
reduced-­fat/skim milk, avoiding foods high in trans-­type fats, limiting foods high in sodium, and encouraging consumption of foods high
in fiber. Specific recommendations depend on the child’s age. American Heart Association (AHA) diet guidelines for all persons of all ages
recommend these measures plus avoidance of highly processed foods.
Specific amounts or percentages of saturated vs monosaturated or
polyunsaturated fats are not addressed.
The use of the Cardiovascular Health Integrated Lifestyle Diet-­2
(CHILD-­2) diet is recommended if the CHILD-­1 diet alone is unsuccessful. Although similar in many aspects to the CHILD-­1 diet, the
CHILD-­
2 diet is geared toward a specific dyslipidemia type; the
CHILD-­2 LDL diet is recommended for children with elevated LDL
levels and the CHILD-­2 TG diet for those presenting with elevated triglycerides. The basic recommendations of calorie consumption for the
CHILD-­2 diet are as follows: only 25–30% of calories from fat, ≤7% of
calories from saturated fat, 10% of calories from monounsaturated fat,
and <200 mg/day of cholesterol. If the CHILD-­2 LDL diet is recommended, the use of plant sterols and water-­soluble fiber is emphasized.
If the CHILD-­2 TG diet is recommended, increasing consumption of
omega-­3 fatty acids and complex rather than simple carbohydrates is
emphasized.
If followed, these dietary recommendations will provide adequate
calories for optimal growth and development without promoting obesity. Compliance on the part of children and their caregivers is challenging. Children learn eating habits from their parents. Successful
adoption of a healthier lifestyle is much more likely to occur if meals
and snacks in the home are applicable to the entire family rather than
an individual child. A regular time for meals together as a family is
desirable. Grandparents and other nonparental caregivers sometimes
need to be reminded not to indulge the child who is on a restricted diet.
Additionally, the rise in obesity is prompting some school districts to
restrict sweetened drink availability and offer more nutritious cafeteria
selections.
Changes in physical activity habits are also an important part of the
initial lifestyle modification. The National Association for Sport and
Physical Education recommends that children should accumulate at
least 60 minutes of age-­appropriate physical activity on most days of
the week. Extended periods (≥2 hr) of daytime inactivity are discouraged, as is >2 hours of television and other forms of screen time.
Pharmacologic Therapy. See Tables 106.13 and 106.14.
Pharmacologic therapy with cholesterol-­lowering medication is the
cornerstone of treatment for children who fail to respond to 6 months
of rigorous lifestyle modification. It should be considered when one of
the following conditions are met (also shown in Fig. 106.14):
• LDL cholesterol remains >190 mg/dL
• LDL cholesterol remains >160 mg/dL with the presence of one high-­
level risk factor and/or at least two moderate-­level risk factors
• LDL cholesterol remains >130 mg/dL with the presence of at least
two high-­level risk factors, one high-­level risk factor, and at least two
moderate-­level risk factors, or evidence of CAD
HMG-­
CoA reductase inhibitors, also known as “statins,” are
remarkably effective in lowering LDL-­C levels and reducing plaque

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

883

Table 106.13  Drugs Used for the Treatment of Hyperlipidemia
DRUG

MECHANISM OF ACTION

INDICATION

STARTING DOSE

HMG-­CoA reductase inhibitors
(statins)

↓ Cholesterol and VLDL synthesis
↑ Hepatic LDL receptors

Elevated LDL

Bile acid sequestrants:
Cholestyramine
Colestipol

↑ Bile and excretion

Elevated LDL

Nicotinic acid

↓ Hepatic VLDL synthesis

Elevated LDL
Elevated TG

100-­2,000 mg three times daily

Fibric acid derivatives:
Gemfibrozil

↑ LPL
↓ VLDL

Elevated TG

600 mg twice daily

Fish oils

↓ VLDL production

Elevated TG

3-­10 g daily

Ezetimibe

↓ Intestinal absorption cholesterol

Elevated LDL

10 mg daily

PCSK-­9 inhibitor
Evolocumab

Upregulation of hepatic LDL
receptors to enhance removal of
LDL from circulation

Refractory or intolerant to statin

140 mg every 2 weeks or 420 mg
subcutaneous injection monthly

5-­80 mg every night at bedtime

4-­32 g daily
5-­40 g daily

Cholesterol absorption inhibitors:

LDL, Low-­density lipoprotein(s); LPL, lipoprotein lipase; TG, triglycerides; VLDL, very-­low-­density lipoprotein.

Table 106.14  Adverse Effects of Cholesterol-­Lowering
Drugs
STATINS
Myalgia, myositis, transaminase elevations, hepatic dysfunction,
increased risk of diabetes mellitus
Rare: Rhabdomyolysis, hemorrhagic stroke
EZETIMIBE
Diarrhea, arthralgia, rhabdomyolysis, hepatitis, pancreatitis,
thrombocytopenia
PCSK9 INHIBITORS
Nasopharyngitis, upper respiratory tract infection, influenza, back
pain, injection site reactions, rash, allergic skin reactions, cognitive
effects, antidrug antibodies
BILE ACID SEQUESTRANTS
Constipation, heartburn, nausea, eructation, bloating
Adverse effects are more common with colestipol and cholestyramine
and may diminish over time.
FIBRIC ACID DERIVATIVES
Gastrointestinal (GI) disturbances, cholelithiasis, hepatitis, myositis
NIACIN
Skin flushing, pruritus, GI disturbances, blurred vision, fatigue,
glucose intolerance, hyperuricemia, hepatic toxicity, exacerbation
of peptic ulcers
Adverse effects, especially flushing, occur more frequently with
immediate-­release products.
Rare: Dry eyes, hyperpigmentation
FISH OIL
Eructation, dyspepsia, unpleasant aftertaste
From The Medical Letter. Lipid-­lowering drugs. Med Lett. 2016;58:133–140, Table 2, p. 136.

inflammation, thereby reducing the likelihood of a sudden coronary
event in an at-­risk adult within weeks of starting the medication. As
a class, they work by blocking the intrahepatic biosynthesis of cholesterol, thereby stimulating the production of more LDL receptors on the
cell surface and facilitating the uptake of LDL-­C from the bloodstream.
The NCEP Adult Treatment Panel advocates aggressive lowering of
LDL to <70 mg/dL in individuals with known CAD. This information is relevant because a child who fulfills criteria for consideration of

cholesterol-­lowering medication will almost always have inherited the
condition from one of the child’s parents. Not infrequently, when providing care for the child, questions arise about screening and treatment
of parents or grandparents. Statins are equally effective in children,
capable of lowering LDL-­C levels by 50% when necessary. They are
considered first-­line therapy for children who meet criteria for pharmacologic therapy. They also will effect a modest reduction in triglycerides and an inconsistent increase in HDL-­C. Their side effect profile,
mainly liver dysfunction and rarely rhabdomyolysis with secondary
renal failure, should be taken into consideration before prescribing
the drug. However, there has been no evidence that complications are
any more frequent in children than in adults, and skeletal muscle discomfort seems to be somewhat less of a problem. Drug interactions
may occur as well, so careful attention should be paid to a child’s active
prescriptions to avoid potentiation of the side effects. Children should
have liver enzymes monitored regularly and creatine phosphokinase
measured if muscle aches or weakness occurs. Liver (muscle) enzymes
may be allowed to rise threefold before discontinuing the drug. There
is a suggested link between the use of statins and increased risk of
developing type 2 diabetes mellitus in adults, but these results have not
been replicated in children. Sex hormones have been measured in children receiving statins and are unchanged. It should be reemphasized
that children with modest elevations in cholesterol, such as that seen
in polygenic hypercholesterolemia, are not, as a rule, candidates for
statins because of their side effect profile and the childhood response to
lifestyle modifications. Statins should be started at the lowest effective
dose and allowed at least 8 weeks to achieve their peak effect. If LDL
levels are not at goal, which in children who are treated is generally
established to be <130 mg, the medication may be titrated upward with
careful monitoring of side effects.
Other cholesterol-­lowering medications, such as nicotinic acid and
fibrates, have been used far less often in children than bile acid sequestrants and statins. Nicotinic acid and fibrates have been used selectively
in children with marked hypertriglyceridemia (>500 mg/dL) at risk for
acute pancreatitis, though dietary restriction of complex sugars (stressing elimination of sugar-­sweetened beverages) and carbohydrates will
usually result in significant lowering of triglyceride levels. Guidelines
recommend treatment of LDL-­C as the initial priority, and after LDL
levels are at goal, then if triglycerides remain between 200 and 499 mg/
dL and non-­HDL cholesterol ≥145 mg/dL, pharmacologic treatment
to reduce triglyceride levels is indicated. Omega-­3 fatty acid supplementation, available in both over-­the-­counter and prescription form,
is a safe and useful treatment thought to reduce triglyceride levels by
decreasing the hepatic synthesis of triglycerides. LDL-­C levels in adults

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

884 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Fasting lipid profile (FLP) × 2*, average results
TG 500 mg/dL,
→ Consult lipid
specialist

LDL-C 250 mg/dL,
→ Consult lipid
specialist
LDL-C 130, 250 mg/dL** → Target LDL-C
TG 100, 500 mg/dL, 10 y
130, 500 mg/dL, 10–19 y

Target TG

Exclude secondary causes
Evaluate for other risk factors (RFs)
Start Cardiovascular Health Integrated Lifestyle Diet (CHILD 1) →
CHILD 2-LDL + lifestyle change × 6 months***

FLP
LDL-C 130 mg/dL
→ Continue CHILD 2-LDL
→ Repeat FLP q. 12 months

LDL-C 130 to 189 mg/dL
Family history (FHx) (–)
No other RFs

LDL-C 190 mg/dL

LDL-C 160 to 189 mg/dL
FHx (+) or
1 high-level RF or
2 moderate-level RFs

LDL-C 130 to 159 mg/dL
+ 2 high-level RFs or
1 high-level + 2 moderatelevel RFs OR clinical CVD

→ Continue CHILD 2-LDL,
Follow q. 6 m with FLP,
FHx/RF update

→ Initiate statin therapy

→ Initiate statin therapy

→ Initiate statin therapy

Follow with FLPs, related chemistries

→ LDL-C still 130 mg/dL, TG 200 mg/dL, refer to lipid specialist for addition of
second lipid-lowering agent
→ In high LDL-C patients, if non-HDL-C 145 mg/dL after effective LDL-C treatment,
→ Target TG
* Obtain FLPs at least 2 weeks but no more than 3 months apart.
** Use of drug therapy is limited to children 10 y with defined risk profiles.
*** In a child with LDL-C 190 mg/dL and other RFs, trial of CHILD 2-LDL may be abbreviated.

Fig. 106.14 Dyslipidemia treatment algorithm: Target LDL-­C (low-­density lipoprotein cholesterol). Note: Values given are in mg/dL. To convert to
SI units, divide results for total cholesterol (TC), low-­density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-­C), high-­density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-­C), and non–
HDL-­C by 38.6; for triglycerides (TG), divide by 88.6. (From U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents.
NIH Publication No. 12-­7486A, Oct. 2012, Fig 9-­1.)

of about 70 mg/dL were recently associated with coronary artery atheromatous plaque reduction and reversal of CAD. Knowledge in this
area will continue to evolve.
Ezetimibe has proved to be useful in the pediatric population because
of its efficacy and low side effect profile. Ezetimibe reduces plasma
LDL-­C by blocking sterol absorption in enterocytes. The drug is marketed as an adjunct to statins when adults are not achieving sufficient
blood lipid lowering with statins alone. Sufficient reports documenting
its effectiveness without side effects support recommending ezetimibe
instead of a statin when moderate hypercholesterolemia is encountered
or apprehension from parents makes using a statin difficult.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

106.4 Lipidoses (Lysosomal Storage
Disorders)
Margaret M. McGovern and Robert J. Desnick
The lysosomal lipid storage diseases are diverse disorders each caused
by an inherited deficiency of a lysosomal hydrolase leading to the
intralysosomal accumulation of the enzyme’s particular substrate
(Tables 106.15 and 106.16). With the exceptions of Wolman disease
and cholesterol ester storage disease (see Chapter 106.3), the lipid
substrates share a common structure that includes a ceramide backbone (2-­N-­acylsphingosine) from which the various sphingolipids are
derived by substitution of hexoses, phosphorylcholine, or one or more

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids
sialic acid residues on the terminal hydroxyl group of the ceramide
molecule. The pathway of sphingolipid metabolism in nervous tissue
(Fig. 106.15) and in visceral organs (Fig. 106.16) is known. Each catabolic step, with the exception of the catabolism of lactosylceramide,
has a genetically determined metabolic defect and a resultant disease.
Because sphingolipids are essential components of all cell membranes,
the inability to degrade these substances and their subsequent accumulation results in the physiologic and morphologic alterations and
characteristic clinical manifestations of the lipid storage disorders (see
Tables 106.15 and 106.16). Progressive lysosomal accumulation of glycosphingolipids in the CNS leads to neurodegeneration, whereas storage in visceral cells can lead to organomegaly, pulmonary infiltration,
skeletal abnormalities, and other manifestations.
Diagnostic assays for the identification of affected individuals has
relied on the measurement of the specific enzymatic activity in isolated
leukocytes or cultured fibroblasts or lymphoblasts. An approach to
differentiating these disorders is noted in Figure 106.17. In addition,
next generation sequencing of lysosomal genes as well as metabolomic/
protomic approaches have helped determine a specific diagnosis. For
most disorders, carrier identification and prenatal diagnosis are available; a specific diagnosis is essential to permit genetic counseling. The
characterization of the genes that encode the specific enzymes required
for sphingolipid metabolism permit the development of therapeutic
options, such as recombinant enzyme replacement therapy, as well as
the potential of cell or gene therapy. Identification of specific disease-­
causing pathogenic variants improve diagnosis, prenatal detection,
and carrier identification. For several disorders (Gaucher, Fabry, and
NPD), it has been possible to make genotype-­phenotype correlations
that predict disease severity and allow more precise genetic counseling.
Inheritance is autosomal recessive except for X-­linked Fabry disease.

GM1 GANGLIOSIDOSIS

GM1 gangliosidosis most frequently presents in early infancy but has
been described in patients with juvenile-­and adult-­onset subtypes (Fig.
106.18, Table 106.17). Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, each
subtype results from a different gene pathogenic variant that leads to
the deficient activity of β-­galactosidase, a lysosomal enzyme encoded
by the gene GLB1. Although the disorder is characterized by the pathologic accumulation of GM1 gangliosides in the lysosomes of both neural
and visceral cells, GM1 ganglioside accumulation is most marked in the
brain. In addition, keratan sulfate, a mucopolysaccharide, accumulates
in liver and is excreted in the urine of patients with GM1 gangliosidosis.
The clinical manifestations of the infantile form of GM1 gangliosidosis may be evident in the newborn as hepatosplenomegaly, edema,
and skin eruptions (angiokeratoma). It most frequently presents in the
first 6 months of life with developmental delay followed by progressive
psychomotor retardation and the onset of tonic-­clonic seizures. Typical
facies is characterized by low-­set ears, frontal bossing, a depressed nasal
bridge, and an abnormally long philtrum. Up to 50% of patients have
a macular cherry red spot. Hepatosplenomegaly and skeletal abnormalities similar to those of the mucopolysaccharidoses (see Chapter
109), including anterior beaking of the vertebrae, enlargement of the
sella turcica, and thickening of the calvarium, are present. By the end
of the first year of life, most patients are blind and deaf, with severe neurologic impairment characterized by decerebrate rigidity. Death usually
occurs by 3-­4 years of age. The juvenile-­onset form of GM1 gangliosidosis
is clinically distinct, with a variable age at onset. Affected patients present primarily with neurologic symptoms including ataxia, dysarthria,
intellectual disabilities, and spasticity. Deterioration is slow; patients may
survive through the fourth decade of life. These patients lack the visceral
involvement, facial abnormalities, and skeletal features seen in type 1 disease. Adult-­onset patients have been described who present with gait and
speech abnormalities, dystonia, and mild skeletal abnormalities. There is
no specific treatment for any form of GM1 gangliosidosis.
The diagnosis of GM1 gangliosidosis should be suspected in infants
with typical clinical features and is confirmed by the demonstration of
biallelic pathogenic variants in GLB1 and, as needed, demonstration of
deficiency of β-­galactosidase activity in peripheral leukocytes. Other
disorders that share some of the features of the GM1 gangliosidoses

885

include Hurler disease (mucopolysaccharidosis type I), I-­cell disease,
and NPD type A, each of which can be distinguished by the demonstration of their specific genetic variants and enzymatic deficiencies. Carriers of the disorder are detected by the measurement of the enzymatic
activity in peripheral leukocytes or by identifying the specific gene
pathogenic variants. Prenatal diagnosis is accomplished by testing of
known pathogenic variants or by determination of the enzymatic activity in cultured amniocytes or chorionic villi. Currently only supportive
therapy is available for patients with GM1 gangliosidosis.

THE GM2 GANGLIOSIDOSES

The GM2 gangliosidoses include the autosomal recessive Tay-­Sachs
disease and Sandhoff disease. Each results from the deficiency of β-­
hexosaminidase activity and the lysosomal accumulation of GM2 gangliosides, particularly in the CNS. Both disorders have been classified
into infantile-­, juvenile-­, and adult-­onset forms based on the age at
onset and clinical features. β-­Hexosaminidase occurs as two isozymes:
β-­hexosaminidase A, which is composed of one α and one β subunit,
and β-­hexosaminidase B, which has two β subunits. β-­Hexosaminidase
A deficiency results from pathogenic variants in the α subunit and
causes Tay-­Sachs disease, whereas pathogenic variants in the β-­subunit
gene result in the deficiency of both β-­hexosaminidases A and B and
cause Sandhoff disease. Both are autosomal recessive traits, with Tay-­
Sachs disease having a predilection for the Ashkenazi Jewish population, where the carrier frequency is about 1/25.
More than 100 pathogenic variants in HEXA have been identified
for Tay-­Sachs disease. Most are associated with the infantile forms of
disease. Three pathogenic variants account for >98% of mutant alleles
among Ashkenazi Jewish carriers, including one allele associated with
the adult-­onset form. Pathogenic variants that cause the subacute or
chronic forms result in enzyme proteins with residual enzymatic activities, the levels of which correlate with the severity of the disease.
Patients with the infantile form of Tay-­Sachs disease have clinical
manifestations in infancy including loss of motor skills, increased
startle reaction, and macular pallor and retinal cherry red spots (see
Table 106.15). Affected infants usually develop normally until 4-­5
months of age, when decreased eye contact and an exaggerated startle
response to noise (hyperacusis) are noted. Macrocephaly, not associated with hydrocephalus, may develop. In the second year of life,
seizures develop, which may be refractory to anticonvulsant therapy.
Neurodegeneration is relentless, with death occurring by the age
of 4 or 5 years. The juvenile-­and later-­onset forms initially present
with ataxia and dysarthria and may not be associated with a macular
cherry red spot.
The clinical manifestations of Sandhoff disease are similar to those
for Tay-­Sachs disease. Infants with Sandhoff disease have hepatosplenomegaly, cardiac involvement, and mild bony abnormalities. The juvenile
form of this disorder presents as ataxia, dysarthria, and intellectual
deterioration, but without visceral enlargement or a macular cherry red
spot. More than 50 pathogenic variants in HEXB have been identified
for Sandhoff disease.
The diagnosis of infantile Tay-­Sachs disease and Sandhoff disease is
usually suspected in an infant with neurologic features and a cherry red
spot. Definitive diagnosis is made by genetic testing or by determination of enzyme activities in peripheral leukocytes. The two disorders
can be distinguished enzymatically, because in Tay-­Sachs disease only
the β-­hexosaminidase A isozyme is deficient, whereas in Sandhoff disease both the β-­hexosaminidase A and B isozymes are deficient. At-­risk
pregnancies for both disorders can be prenatally diagnosed by testing
known pathogenic variants or determining enzyme levels in fetal cells
obtained by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. Identification
of carriers in families is also possible by genetic or enzymatic determination. For Tay-­Sachs disease, carrier screening of all couples in
which at least one member is of Ashkenazi Jewish descent is recommended before the initiation of pregnancy to identify couples at risk.
The incidence of Tay-­Sachs disease has been markedly reduced since
the introduction of carrier screening programs in the Ashkenazi Jewish
population. Newborn screening may be possible by measuring specific
glycosphingolipid markers or the relevant enzymatic activities in dried

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

886 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 106.15  Clinical Findings in Lysosomal Storage Diseases

HYDROPS
FETALIS

COARSE FACIAL
FEATURES
DYSOSTOSIS
MULTIPLEX

HEPATOSPLENOMEGALY

N-­Acetylglucosaminylphosphotransfe
rase

(+)

++

+

Mucolipidosis III, Pseudo-­Hurler

N-­Acetylglucosaminylphosphotransfe
rase

−

+

(+)

Mucolipidosis IV

Unknown

−

−

+

SPHINGOLIPIDOSES
Fabry disease

α-­Galactosidase

−

−

−

Farber disease

Ceramidase

−

−

(+)

Galactosialidosis

β-­Galactosidase and sialidase

(+)

++

++

GM1 gangliosidosis

β-­Galactosidase

(+)

++

+

GM2 gangliosidosis (Tay-­Sachs
disease, Sandhoff disease)

β-­Hexosaminidases A and B

−

−

(+)

Gaucher type I

Glucocerebrosidase

−

−

++

Gaucher type II

Glucocerebrosidase

(+)

−

++

Gaucher type III

Glucocerebrosidase

(+)

−

+

Niemann-­Pick type A

Sphingomyelinase

(+)

−

++

Niemann-­Pick type B

Sphingomyelinase

−

−

++

Metachromatic leukodystrophy

Arylsulfatase A

−

−

−

Krabbe disease

β-­Galactocerebrosidase

−

−

−

LIPID STORAGE DISORDERS
Niemann-­Pick type C

Intracellular cholesterol transport

−

−

(+)

Wolman disease

Acid lipase

(+)

−

+

Ceroid lipofuscinosis, infantile
(Santavuori-­Hantia)

Palmitoyl-­protein thioesterase (CLN1)

−

−

−

Ceroid lipofuscinosis, late infantile
(Jansky-­Bielschowsky)

Pepstatin-­insensitive peptidase (CLN2);
variants in Finland (CLN5), Turkey
(CLN7), and Italy (CLN6)

−

−

−

Ceroid lipofuscinosis, juvenile
(Spielmeyer-­Vogt)

CLN3, membrane protein

−

−

−

Ceroid lipofuscinosis, adult (Kufs,
Parry)

CLN4, probably heterogeneous

(+)

−

−

OLIGOSACCHARIDOSES
Aspartylglucosaminuria

Aspartylglucosaminase

−

+

(+)

Fucosidosis

α-­Fucosidase

−

++

(+)

α-­Mannosidosis

α-­Mannosidase

−

++

+

β-­Mannosidosis

β-­Mannosidase

−

+

(+)

Schindler disease

α-­N-­Acetylgalactosaminidase

−

−

−

Sialidosis I

Sialidase

(+)

−

−

Sialidosis II

Sialidase

(+)

++

+

NATURE

ENZYME DEFECT

MUCOLIPIDOSES
Mucolipidoses II, I-­cell disease

++, prominent; +, often present, (+), inconstant or occurring later in the disease course; –, not present.
GAG, glycosaminoglycans.
Modified from Hoffmann GF, Nyhan WL, Zschoke J, et al. Storage Disorders in Inherited Metabolic Diseases. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2002:346–351.

     

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

887

Table 106.15  Clinical Findings in Lysosomal Storage Diseases—cont’d
CARDIAC
INVOLVEMENT
CARDIAC FAILURE

MENTAL
DETERIORATION

MYOCLONUS

SPASTICITY

PERIPHERAL
NEUROPATHY

CHERRY
RED SPOT

CORNEAL
CLOUDING

ANGIOKERATOMATA

++

++

−

−

−

−

(+)

−

−

(+)

−

−

−

−

+

−

−

(+)

−

−

−

−

−

−

+

−

−

−

−

−

+

++

++

+

−

−

+

(+)

−

−

+

++

(+)

+

−

+

+

+

(+)

++

−

(+)

−

(+)

+

+

−

++

+

+

−

++

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

++

+

+

−

−

−

−

−

+

(+)

(+)

−

−

−

−

−

+

(+)

−

(+)

(++)

−

−

−

−

−

−

(+)

(+)

−

−

−

++

−

+

++

(+)

−

−

−

++

−

+

++

(+)

−

−

−

+

−

−

−

(+)

−

−

(+)

−

−

−

−

(+)

−

−

−

+

+

+

−

−

−

−

−

+

+

+

−

−

−

−

−

+

−

(+)

−

−

−

−

−

+

−

−

−

−

−

−

(+)

+

−

−

−

−

(+)

(+)

+

++

+

+

−

−

−

(+)

−

++

−

(+)

−

−

++

(+)

−

+

−

+

+

−

−

(+)

−

+

+

+

−

−

−

−

−

−

++

+

+

++

(+)

−

+

++

(+)

−

−

++

−

+

     

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

888 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 106.16  Lysosomal Storage Disorders in the Newborn Period: Genetic and Clinical Characteristics of Neonatal Presentation
DISORDER

ONSET

FACIES

NEUROLOGIC
FINDINGS

DISTINCTIVE
FEATURES

Niemann-­Pick A disease

Early infancy

Frontal bossing

Difficulty feeding, apathy,
deafness, blindness,
hypotonia

Brownish-­yellow skin,
xanthomas

Niemann–Pick C disease

Birth to 3 mo

Normal

Developmental delay,
vertical gaze paralysis,
hypotonia, later spasticity

–

Gaucher disease type 2

In utero to 6 mo

Normal

Poor suck and swallow,
weak cry, squint, trismus,
strabismus, opsoclonus,
hypertonic, later flaccidity

Congenital ichthyosis,
collodion skin

Krabbe disease

3-­6 mo

Normal

Irritability, tonic spasms with
light or noise stimulation,
seizures, hypertonia, later
flaccidity

Increased CSF
protein level

GM1 gangliosidosis

Birth

Coarse

Poor suck, weak cry, lethargy,
exaggerated startle,
blindness, hypotonia, later
spasticity

Gingival hypertrophy,
edema, rashes

Farber disease type I

2 wk to 4 mo

Normal

Progressive psychomotor
impairment, seizures,
decreased reflexes,
hypotonia

Joint swelling with nodules,
hoarseness, lung disease,
contractures, fever,
granulomas, dysphagia,
vomiting, increased
CSF protein level

Farber disease types II and III

Birth to 9 mo (≤20 mo)

Normal

—

Joint swelling with nodules,
hoarseness

Farber disease type IV (neonatal)

Birth

Normal

Nodules not consistent findings

Corneal opacities (1/3)

Congenital sialidosis

In utero to birth

Cognitive, edema

Intellectual impairment,
hypotonia

Neonatal ascites, inguinal
hernias, renal disease

Galactosialidosis

In utero to birth

Coarse

Intellectual impairment,
occasional deafness,
hypotonia

Ascites, edema, inguinal
hernias, renal disease,
telangiectasias

Wolman disease

First weeks of life

Normal

Cognitive deterioration

Vomiting, diarrhea, steatorrhea,
abdominal distention,
failure to thrive, anemia,
adrenal calcifications

Infantile sialic acid storage disease

In utero to birth

Coarse,
dysmorphic

Intellectual impairment,
hypotonia

Ascites, anemia, diarrhea,
failure to thrive

I-­cell disease

In utero to birth

Coarse

Intellectual impairment,
deafness

Gingival hyperplasia,
restricted joint mobility,
hernias

Mucolipidosis type IV

Birth to 3 mo

Normal

Intellectual impairment,
hypotonia

—

Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII

In utero to childhood

Variable
coarseness

Mild to severe intellectual
impairment

Hernias

     

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

889

Table 106.16  Lysosomal Storage Disorders in the Newborn Period: Genetic and Clinical Characteristics of Neonatal Presentation—cont’d
EYE
FINDINGS

DEFECT

GENE LOCATION/MOLECULAR
FINDINGS

ETHNIC
PREDILECTION

Cherry-­red spot (50%)

Sphingomyelinase deficiency

SMPD1 gene at 11p15.4; 3 of 18 variants
account for approximately 92% of mutant
alleles in the Ashkenazi population

1:40,000 in Ashkenazi Jews
with a carrier frequency of
1:60

–

Abnormal cholesterol esterification

NPC1 gene at 18q11 accounts for >95% of
cases; HE1 gene variants may account for
remaining cases

Increased in French
Canadians of Nova Scotia
and Spanish Americans in
the Southwest United States

–

Glucocerebrosidase deficiency

1q21; large number of variants known;
five variants account for approximately
97% of mutant alleles in the Ashkenazi
population but approximately 75% in the
non-­Jewish population

Panethnic

Optic atrophy

Galactocerebrosidase deficiency

14q 24.3-­q32.1; >60 variants with some
common variants in specific populations

Increased in Scandinavian
countries and in a large
Druze kindred in Israel

Cherry red spot (50%)

β-­Galactosidase
deficiency

3pter-­3p21; heterogeneous variants;
common variants in specific populations

Panethnic

Grayish opacification
surrounding the retina
in some patients, subtle
cherry red spot

Lysosomal acid
ceramidase

8p21.3-­22; nine disease-­causing variants
identified

Panethnic

Normal macula, corneal
opacities

—

8p21.3-­p22

Panethnic

—

—

Unknown

Panethnic

Corneal clouding

Neuraminidase deficiency

NEU 1 gene (sialidase) at 6p21

Panethnic

Cherry red spot, corneal
clouding

Absence of a protective protein that
safeguards neuraminidase and
β-­galactosidase from premature
degradation

20q13.1

Panethnic

—

Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency

10q23.2-­q23.3; variety of variants identified

Increased in Iranian Jews and
in non-­Jewish and Arab
populations of Galilee

—

Defective transport of sialic acid out of the
lysosome

SLC17A5 gene at 6q

Panethnic

Corneal clouding

Lysosomal enzymes lack mannose
6-­phosphate recognition marker and
fail to enter the lysosome
(phosphotransferase deficiency,
3-­subunit complex [α2 β2 γ2])

Enzyme encoded by two genes; α and
β subunits encoded by gene at 12p; γ
subunit encoded by gene at 16p

Panethnic

Severe corneal clouding,
retinal degeneration,
blindness

Unknown; some patients with partial
deficiency of ganglioside sialidase

MCOLN1 gene at 19p13.2-­13.3 encoding
mucolipin 1; two founder variants
accounting for 95% of mutant alleles in
the Ashkenazi population

Increased in Ashkenazi Jews

Variable corneal clouding

β-­Glucuronidase deficiency

GUSB gene at 7q21.2-­q22; heterogeneous
variants

Panethnic

     

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

890 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Neuraminidase




NAcgal
gal
glc
ceramide
gal
gal


NANA
NANA

NANA

NAcgal

gal
NANA

glc-ceramide
GM1 ganglioside -galactosidase
GM1 gangliosidosis

Polysialogangliosides

NAcgal

gal

glc-ceramide

NANA
-Hexosaminidase A
GM2 gangliosidosis
(Tay-Sachs, Sandhoff, and others)
gal

glc-ceramide

NANA
GM3 ganglioside neuraminidase

PC-ceramide
Sphingomyelinase
Niemann-Pick disease

gal

glc-ceramide
Lactosylceramide -galactosidase
GM1 gangliosidosis, Krabbe disease

glc-ceramide
Glucosylceramide -glucosidase
Gaucher disease
SO4

Sulfatide
Sulfatase


gal

ceramide

Galactosylceramide
-galactosidase
gal-ceramide

Metachromatic
leukodystrophy

Ceramidase
ceramide

Krabbe disease

sphingosine  fatty acid

Farber disease

Fig. 106.15 Pathways in the metabolism of sphingolipids found in nervous tissues. The name of the enzyme catalyzing each reaction is given
with the name of the substrate acted on. Inborn errors are depicted as bars crossing the reactions arrows, and the name of the associated defect
or defects is given in the nearest box. The gangliosides are named according to the nomenclature of Svennerholm. Anomeric configurations are
given only at the largest starting compound. Gal, galactose; glc, glucose; NAcgal, N-­acetylgalactosamine; NANA, N-­acetylneuraminic acid; PC,
phosphorylcholine.

blood spots. There is no treatment available for Tay-­Sachs disease or
Sandhoff disease. The FDA has approved an investigational new drug
application to initiate adeno-associated virus vector gene (beta hexosaminidase A and B) therapy for Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff disease.

GAUCHER DISEASE

This disease is a multisystemic lipidosis characterized by hematologic
abnormalities, organomegaly, and skeletal involvement, the latter usually manifesting as bone pain and pathologic fractures (see Table 106.15
and 106.16). It is the most common lysosomal storage disease and the
most prevalent genetic defect among Ashkenazi Jews. There are three
clinical subtypes delineated by the absence or presence and progression
of neurologic manifestations: type 1 or the adult, non-­neuronopathic
form; type 2, the infantile or acute neuronopathic form; and type 3, the
juvenile or subacute neuronopathic form. All are autosomal recessive
traits. Type 1, which accounts for 99% of cases, has a striking predilection for Ashkenazi Jews, with an incidence of about 1/1,000 and a carrier frequency of about 1/18.
Gaucher disease results from the deficient activity of the lysosomal
hydrolase, acid β-­glucosidase, which is encoded by the gene GBA. The
enzymatic defect results in the accumulation of undegraded glycolipid
substrates, particularly glucosylceramide, in cells of the reticuloendothelial system. This progressive deposition results in infiltration of the bone
marrow, progressive hepatosplenomegaly, and skeletal complications.
Four pathogenic variants—p.Asn370Ser, p.Leu444Pro, c.84insG, and
IVS2+1G>A—account for about 95% of mutant alleles among Ashkenazi
Jewish patients, permitting screening for this disorder in this population. Genotype-­phenotype correlations have been noted, providing the

molecular basis for the clinical heterogeneity seen in Gaucher disease
type 1. Patients who are homozygous for the p.Asn370Ser pathogenic
variant tend to have a later onset, with a more indolent course than
patients with one copy of p.Asn370Ser and another common allele.
Clinical manifestations of type 1 Gaucher disease have a variable age at onset, from early childhood to late adulthood, with most
symptomatic patients presenting by adolescence. At presentation,
patients may have bruising from thrombocytopenia, chronic fatigue
secondary to anemia, hepatomegaly with or without elevated LFT
results, splenomegaly, and bone pain. Occasional patients have pulmonary involvement at the time of presentation. Patients presenting
in the first decade frequently are not Jewish and have growth retardation and a more malignant course. Other patients may be discovered fortuitously during evaluation for other conditions or as part
of routine examinations; these patients may have a milder or even a
benign course. In symptomatic patients, splenomegaly is progressive
and can become massive. Most patients develop radiologic evidence
of skeletal involvement, including an Erlenmeyer flask deformity of
the distal femur. Clinically apparent bony involvement, which occurs
in most patients, can present as bone pain, a pseudo-­osteomyelitis
pattern, or pathologic fractures. Lytic lesions can develop in the long
bones, including the femur, ribs, and pelvis; osteosclerosis may be
evident at an early age. Bone crises with severe pain and swelling
can occur. Bleeding secondary to thrombocytopenia may manifest as
epistaxis or bruising and is frequently overlooked until other symptoms become apparent. With the exception of the severely growth-­
stunted child, who may experience developmental delay secondary to
the effects of chronic disease, development and intelligence are normal.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

fuc


fuc


gal

gal


NAcglc


glc

gal





NAcglc
gal
gal
glc
ceramide

NAcgal
Blood group A glycosphingolipid
-galactosaminidase

-galactosidase



ceramide

891

fuc

gal

NAcglc

Fabry disease

gal

glc

ceramide

Blood group O glycosphingolipid
-fucosidase

Blood group B glycosphingolipid

Fucosidosis
gal

NAcgal


gal


gal

NAcglc


glc

gal

glc-ceramide

-galactosidase

ceramide

GM1 gangliosidosis

Globoside
-hexosaminidase A and B
NAcglc

GM2 gangliosidosis (Sandhoff)

gal

glc-ceramide

-hexosaminidase (probably A and B)
GM2 gangliosidosis, certain types
Trihexosylceramide
-galactosidase
gal

gal

glc-ceramide

gal
Fabry disease

glc-ceramide
Lactosylceramide -galactosidase
GM1 gangliosidosis, Krabbe disease

GM3 ganglioside
neuraminidase

NANA


gal

Glucosylceramide -glucosidase


glc

glc-ceramide

ceramide

Gaucher disease

Sphingomyelinase
PC-ceramide

Ceramidase
ceramide

Niemann-Pick disease

sphingosine  fatty acid

Farber disease

Fig. 106.16 Pathways in the degradation of sphingolipids found in visceral organs and red or white blood cells. See also the legend for Figure
106.15. Fuc, fucose; NAcglc, N-­acetylglucosamine.

The pathologic hallmark of Gaucher disease is the Gaucher cell in
the reticuloendothelial system, particularly in the bone marrow (Fig.
106.19). These cells, which are 20-­100 μm in diameter, have a characteristic wrinkled paper appearance resulting from the presence of
intracytoplasmic substrate inclusions. The cytoplasm of the Gaucher
cell reacts strongly positive with the periodic acid–Schiff stain. The
presence of this cell in bone marrow and tissue specimens is highly
suggestive of Gaucher disease, although it also may be found in patients
with granulocytic leukemia and myeloma.
Gaucher disease type 2 is much less common and does not have an
ethnic predilection. It is characterized by a rapid neurodegenerative
course with extensive visceral involvement and death within the first
years of life. It presents in infancy with increased tone, strabismus, and
organomegaly. Failure to thrive and stridor caused by laryngospasm are
typical. After a several-­year period of psychomotor regression, death
occurs secondary to respiratory compromise. Gaucher disease type 3
presents as clinical manifestations that are intermediate to those seen
in types 1 and 2, with a presentation in childhood and death by age 10-­
15 years. It has a predilection for the Swedish Norrbottnian population,
among which the incidence is about 1/50,000. Neurologic involvement
is present. Type 3 disease is further classified as types 3a and 3b based
on the extent of neurologic involvement and whether there is progressive myotonia and dementia (type 3a) or isolated supranuclear gaze
palsy (type 3b).
Gaucher disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
patients with unexplained organomegaly, who bruise easily, have bone
pain, or have a combination of these conditions. Bone marrow examination usually reveals the presence of Gaucher cells. All suspected

diagnoses should be confirmed by genetic testing or by determination of the acid β-­glucosidase activity in isolated leukocytes or cultured fibroblasts. In Ashkenazi Jewish individuals, the identification
of carriers can be achieved best by molecular testing for the common
pathogenic variants. Testing should be offered to all family members,
keeping in mind that heterogeneity, even among members of the same
kindred, can be so great that asymptomatic affected individuals may
be diagnosed. Prenatal diagnosis is available by determination of the
specific family pathogenic variants and/or enzyme activity of chorionic
villi or cultured amniotic fluid cells.
Treatment of patients with Gaucher disease type 1 includes enzyme
replacement therapy, with recombinant acid β-­glucosidase (imiglucerase). Most extraskeletal symptoms (organomegaly, hematologic
indices) are reversed by enzymes (60 IU/kg) administered by intravenous infusion every other week. Monthly maintenance enzyme
replacement improves bone structure, decreases bone pain, and
induces compensatory growth in affected children. A small number
of patients have undergone bone marrow transplantation, which can
be curative but results in significant morbidity and mortality from
the procedure, making the selection of appropriate candidates limited. Although enzyme replacement does not alter the neurologic
progression of patients with Gaucher disease types 2 and 3, it has
been used in selected patients as a palliative measure, particularly in
type 3 patients with severe visceral involvement. Alternative treatments, including the use of agents designed to decrease the synthesis of glucosylceramide by chemical inhibition of glucosylceramide
synthase, are available for patients who cannot be treated by enzyme
replacement.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

892 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Presentation:
Coarse facial features,
organomegaly, skeletal dysplasia,
severe skin changes, or NIHF

Take detailed family
history for familial
diseases, consanguinity,
recurrent fetal loss

Screen urine for
GAGs
and/or
oligosaccharides

Elevated
oligosaccharides

No elevation

Low index of
suspicion

High index of
suspicion
Elevated GAG
Consider:
Mucolipidosis 1, I-cell disease
(ML2), GM1 or GM2
gangliosidoses,
stalidosis, galactostalidosis,
ISSD, or Pompe

Consider:
MPSs

Electrophoresis for
GAG analysis

Follow up
Consider:
Fabry, Farber, Gaucher,
Krabbe, Niemann-Pick,
Schindler, Wolman, or
prosaposin deficiency

Enzyme analysis
of leukocytes or
cultured fibroblasts/
lymphoblasts

No enzyme
defect
detected

Enzyme defect
detected

Test different tissue,
esp. in Pompe,
stalidosis

Genetic analysis of
relevent genes;
consultation for
future pregnancies

Fig. 106.17 Algorithm of the clinical evaluation recommended for an infant with a suspected lysosomal storage disease. GAGs, Glycosaminoglycans; NIHF, nonimmune hydrops fetalis. (From Staretz-­Chacham O, Lang TC, LaMarca ME, et al. Lysosomal storage disorders in the newborn.
Pediatrics. 2009;123:1191–1207.)

Clinical classification

0

6 mo

1y

2y

3y

10 y

Type I
Infantile, rapid progression
Type II
Slow progression, clinical variability
Late-infantile

Juvenile
Type III
Adult

Fig. 106.18 Classification of GM1 gangliosidosis according to occur-

rence of the first symptom. (From Arash-­Kaps L, Komlosi K, Seegräber
M, et al. The clinical and molecular spectrum of GM1 gangliosidosis. J
Pediatr. 2019;215:152–157.)

NIEMANN-­PICK DISEASE

Type A NPD is a fatal disorder of infancy characterized by failure to
thrive, hepatosplenomegaly, and a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative course that leads to death by 2-­3 years of age. Type B disease is
a non-­neuronopathic form observed in children and adults. Type C
disease is a neuronopathic form that results from defective cholesterol
transport. All subtypes are inherited as autosomal recessive traits and
display variable clinical features (see Tables 106.15 and 106.16).
NPD types A and B result from the deficient activity of acid sphingomyelinase, a lysosomal enzyme encoded by the gene SMPD1. The enzymatic defect results in the pathologic accumulation of sphingomyelin, a

ceramide phospholipid, and other lipids in the monocyte-­macrophage
system as the primary pathologic site. The progressive deposition of
sphingomyelin in the CNS results in the neurodegenerative course seen
in type A and in non-­neural tissue in the systemic disease manifestations of type B, including progressive lung disease in some patients. A
variety of pathogenic variants in SMPD1 that cause types A and B NPD
have been identified.
The clinical manifestations and course of type A NPD is uniform and
characterized by a normal appearance at birth. Hepatosplenomegaly,
moderate lymphadenopathy, and psychomotor retardation are evident
by 6 months of age, followed by neurodevelopmental regression and
death by 3 years. With advancing age, the loss of motor function and
the deterioration of intellectual capabilities are progressively debilitating with spasticity and rigidity and in later stages. Affected infants lose
contact with their environment. In contrast to the stereotyped type A
phenotype, the clinical presentation and course of patients with type B
disease are more variable. Most are diagnosed in infancy or childhood
when enlargement of the liver or spleen, or both, is detected during a
routine physical examination. At diagnosis, type B NPD patients usually have evidence of mild pulmonary involvement, usually detected as
a diffuse reticular or finely nodular infiltration on the chest radiograph.
Pulmonary symptoms usually present in adulthood. In most patients,
hepatosple-­nomegaly is particularly prominent in childhood, but with
increasing linear growth, the abdominal protuberance decreases and
becomes less conspicuous. In mildly affected patients, the splenomegaly may not be noted until adulthood, and there may be minimal disease manifestations.
In some type B patients, decreased pulmonary diffusion caused
by alveolar infiltration becomes evident in late childhood or early

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

893

Table 106.17  Symptoms and Biochemical Signs in Three Clinical Forms of GM1 Gangliosidosis
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS

INFANTILE FORM

LATE-­INFANTILE FORM

JUVENILE FORM

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS
Coarse facial features
Cherry red macula spot
Cardiomyopathy
Hepatosplenomegaly
Cognitive decline
Dystonia
Ataxia
Pyramidal signs

+
–/+
–/+
–/+
+
–/+
–/+
+

–
–
–/+
–
+
–/+
–/+
+

–
–
–
–
+
–/+
–/+
–

+
–/+
>1,000

–/+
–/+
>100–1,000

–/+
–
na

LABORATORY SIGNS
Increased oligosaccharides
Increased ASAT
Increased chitotriosidase activity

na, Not applicable.
From Arash-­Kaps L, Komlosi K, Seegräber M, et al. The clinical and molecular spectrum of GM1 gangliosidosis. J Pediatr. 2019;215:152–157, Table II.

Fig. 106.19 Cells from the spleen of a patient with Gaucher disease.
A characteristic spleen cell is shown engorged with glucocerebroside.

adulthood and progresses with age. Severely affected individuals may
experience significant pulmonary compromise by 15-­20 years of age.
Such patients have low Po2 values and dyspnea on exertion. Life-­
threatening bronchopneumonias may occur, and cor pulmonale has
been described. Severely affected patients may have liver involvement
leading to life-­threatening cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and ascites.
Clinically significant pancytopenia caused by secondary hypersplenism may require partial or complete splenectomy; this should be
avoided if possible because splenectomy frequently causes progression of pulmonary disease, which can be life-­threatening. In general,
type B patients do not have neurologic involvement and have a normal IQ. Some patients with type B disease have cherry red maculae
or haloes and subtle neurologic symptoms that can include peripheral
neuropathy.
Type C NPD patients often present with prolonged neonatal jaundice,
appear normal for 1-­2 years, and then experience a slowly progressive
and variable neurodegenerative course. Their hepato¬splenomegaly
is less severe than that of patients with types A or B NPD, and they
may survive into adulthood. The underlying biochemical defect in type
C patients is an abnormality in cholesterol transport, leading to the
accumulation of sphingomyelin and cholesterol in their lysosomes and
a secondary partial reduction in acid sphingomyelinase activity (see
Chapter 106.3).
In type B NPD patients, splenomegaly is usually the first manifestation detected. The splenic enlargement is noted in early childhood. In
very mild disease, the enlargement may be subtle and detection may
be delayed until adolescence or adulthood. The presence of the characteristic NPD cells in bone marrow aspirates supports the diagnosis of

type B NPD. Patients with type C NPD, however, also have extensive
infiltration of NPD cells in the bone marrow, and thus all suspected
cases should be evaluated genetically or enzymatically to confirm the
clinical diagnosis by measuring the acid sphingomyelinase activity
level in peripheral leuko¬cytes, cultured fibroblasts, or lymphoblasts,
or a combination of these cells. Patients with types A and B NPD have
markedly decreased enzyme levels (1–10%), whereas patients with
type C NPD have normal or mildly decreased acid sphingomyelinase
activities. Without known genetic causes, the enzymatic identification
of NPD carriers is problematic. In families in which the specific genetic
lesion has been identified, however, family members can be accurately
tested for heterozygote status by DNA analysis. Prenatal diagnosis of
types A and B NPD can be made by genetic testing and reliably by the
measurement of acid sphingomyelinase activity in cultured amniocytes
or chorionic villi. Historically, the diagnosis of Niemann-­Pick type C
has relied on the demonstration of the cholesterol transport defect in
cultured fibroblasts by filipin staining but is now readily accomplished
by genetic testing of the NPC1 and NPC2 genes and the measurement
of oxidative cholesterol metabolites. There is no conclusive treatment
for types A and B NPD. Orthotopic liver transplantation in an infant
with type A disease and amniotic cell transplantation in several type B
NPD patients have been attempted with little or no success. Bone marrow transplantation in a small number of type B NPD patients has been
shown to be successful in reducing the spleen and liver volumes, the
sphingomyelin content of the liver, the number of Niemann-­Pick cells
in the marrow, and radiologically detected infiltration of the lungs. In
one patient, liver biopsies taken up to 33 months after transplantation
showed only a moderate reduction in stored sphingomyelin. Lung
transplantation has not been performed in any severely compromised
patient with type B disease, although two patients who underwent
whole lung lavages with variable results have been reported. Enzyme
replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human acid sphingomyelinase (olipudase alpha) is in clinical trials for the treatment of
NPD type B. A 26-­week phase 1b study in adult patients with NPD
B established initial proof of concept in this patient group. In a phase
1/2 pediatric trial (ASCEND-­Peds/NCT02292654) in children with
chronic acid sphingomyelinase deficiency (ASMD), olipudase alfa was
generally well-­tolerated with improvements in disease pathology, and
a phase 1/2 clinical trial in pediatric patients and a randomized phase
2/3 trial in adults (ASCEND) with ASMD documented improvement
in lung function and spleen size.
Clinical trials of miglustat (Actelion, Basel, Switzerland) have been
performed, and the drug has been approved in Europe for the treatment of type C disease. Treatment of type A disease with bone marrow
transplantation has not been successful, presumably because of severe
neurologic involvement.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

894 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
FABRY DISEASE

Fabry disease is an X-­linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid
metabolism characterized by angiokeratomas (telangiectatic skin
lesions); hypohidrosis; corneal and lenticular opacities; acroparesthesias; and vascular disease of the kidney, heart, and/or brain (see
Table 106.15). The classic phenotype is caused by deficient activity
of the enzyme α-­galactosidase A and has an estimated prevalence
of approximately 1/50,000 males. Later-­onset affected males with
residual α-­galactosidase A activity may present with cardiac and/or
renal disease, including hypertrophic cardio¬myopathy and renal
failure, and is more prevalent than the classic phenotype. Heterozygous females for the classic phenotype can be either asymptomatic
or as severely affected as the males—the variability is a result of
random X-­inactivation. The disease results from pathogenic variants in α-­galactosidase A encoded by the X-­linked GLA gene. The
enzymatic defect leads to the systemic accumulation of neutral
glycosphingolipids, primarily globotriaosylceramide, particularly
in the plasma and lysosomes of vascular endothelial and smooth
muscle cells. The progressive vascular glycosphingolipid deposition
in classically affected males results in ischemia and infarction, leading to the major disease manifestations. The cDNA and genomic
sequences encoding α-­galactosidase A have identified more than
500 different pathogenic variants in the α-­galactosidase A gene
that are responsible for this lysosomal storage disease, including
amino acid substitutions, gene rearrangements, and mRNA splicing defects.
Affected males with the classic phenotype have the skin lesions,
acroparesthesias, hypohidrosis, and ocular changes, whereas males
with the later-­onset phenotypes lack these findings and present
with cardiac and/or renal disease in adulthood (Table 106.18). The
classic angiokeratomas usually occur in childhood and may lead to
early diagnosis (Fig. 106.20). They increase in size and number with
age and range from barely visible to several millimeters in diameter. The lesions are punctate, dark red to blue-­black, and flat or
slightly raised. They do not blanch with pressure, and the larger
ones may show slight hyperkeratosis. Characteristically, the lesions
are most dense between the umbilicus and knees, in the “bathing
trunk area,” but may occur anywhere, including the oral mucosa.
The hips, thighs, buttocks, umbilicus, lower abdomen, scrotum, and
glans penis are common sites, and there is a tendency toward symmetry. Variants without skin lesions have been described. Sweating
is usually decreased or absent. Corneal opacities and characteristic
lenticular lesions, observed under slit-­lamp examination, are present in affected males and in about 90% of heterozygotes. Conjunctival and retinal vascular tortuosity is common and results from the
systemic vascular involvement.
Pain is the most debilitating symptom in childhood and adolescence. Fabry crises, lasting from minutes to several days, consist of
agonizing, burning pain in the hands, feet, and proximal extremities and are usually associated with exercise, fatigue, fever, or a
combination of these factors. These painful acroparesthesias usually become less frequent in the third and fourth decades of life,
although in some men, they may become more frequent and severe.
Attacks of abdominal or flank pain may simulate appendicitis or
renal colic.
The major morbid symptoms result from the progressive involvement of the vascular system. Early in the course of the disease,
casts, red cells, and lipid inclusions with characteristic birefringent
“Maltese crosses” appear in the urinary sediment. Proteinuria, isosthenuria, and gradual deterioration of renal function and development of azotemia occur in the second through fourth decades.
Cardiovascular findings may include hypertension, left ventricular
hypertrophy, anginal chest pain, myocardial ischemia or infarction,
and heart failure. Mitral insufficiency is the most common valvular lesion. Abnormal electrocardiographic and echocardiographic
findings are common. Cerebrovascular manifestations result from
multifocal small vessel involvement. Other features may include

Table 106.18  Summary of Reported Clinical Manifestations
in Fabry Patients (Newborn to 4 Yr)
FABRY-­RELATED SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

EARLIEST REPORT OF
SYMPTOM

Storage of globotriaosylceramide found
in organs on biopsy

Prenatal

Corneal whorls/verticillata

Prenatal/newborn

Gastrointestinal problems, including
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
constipation, and abdominal pain

1.0 yr

Slow growth in boys (mean height/
weight <50th percentile)

2.0 yr

Intermittent acroparesthesia/
neuropathic pain triggered by stress,
heat, fatigue, or exercise

2.0 yr

Hypohidrosis or anhidrosis

2.5 yr

Fabry crises of agonizing neuropathic
pain typically begin in the hands and
feet and may radiate proximally

2.5 yr

Heat, cold, and/or exercise intolerance

3.5 yr

Retinal vascular tortuosity

4.0 yr

Tinnitus/vertigo

4.0 yr

Low glomerular filtration rate

4.0 yr

T-­wave inversion on electrocardiogram

4.0 yr

Trivial cardiac valve disease

4.0 yr

Angiokeratoma

4.4 yr

From Laney DA, Peck DS, Atherton AM, et al. Fabry disease in infancy and early childhood: A systematic literature review. Genetics Med. 2015;17(5):323–330, Table 2.

Fig. 106.20 Typical angiokeratomas. Angiokeratomas are quite

large and easily recognizable, but if only a few lesions exist or they
are restricted only to the genitals or umbilical regions, they can be
easily missed. (From Zarate VA, Hopkin RJ. Fabray’s disease. Lancet.
2008;372:1427.)

chronic bronchitis and dyspnea, lymphedema of the legs without hypoproteinemia, episodic diarrhea, osteoporosis, retarded
growth, and delayed puberty. Death most often results from uremia or vascular disease of the heart or brain. Before hemodialysis
or renal transplantation, the mean age at death for affected men
was 40 years. Patients with the later-­onset phenotype with residual
α-­galactosidase A activity have cardiac and/or renal disease. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids
Table 106.19  Common Misdiagnoses for Fabry Disease
INFLAMMATORY
Systemic lupus erythematous
Rheumatic fever
Fibromyalgia
Dermatomyositis
Raynaud phenomenon
Raynaud syndrome
C1 esterase deficiency
TNF receptor–associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS)
Joint and recurrent fever syndromes (juvenile idiopathic arthritis,
familial Mediterranean fever)
Erythromelalgia
NEUROLOGIC
Porphyria
Guillain-­Barre syndrome
Hereditary neuropathies
Nutritional neuropathies
Uremic neuropathy
Diabetic neuropathy
Polyneuropathy
Meniere disease
Complex regional pain syndromes
Multiple sclerosis
Mitochondrial disorders
Migraine
MELAS
CADASIL
GASTROINTESTINAL/NUTRITION
Irritable bowel syndrome
Appendicitis
Metabolic bone disease (rickets, uremia, scurvy)
Crohn disease
Celiac disease
Peptic ulcer disease
OTHER
Growing pains
Chronic overlapping pain syndrome
Malingering
Coronary heart disease
Osler-­Weber-­Rendu disease
Cardiomyopathy
Gaucher disease
MELAS, Mitochondrial encephalopathy lactic acidosis, strokelike symptoms; CADASIL,
cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy.

cardiac manifestations include hypertrophy of the left ventricular
wall and interventricular septum and electrocardiographic abnormalities consistent with cardiomyopathy. Others have had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or myocardial infarction, or both.
The diagnosis in classically affected males is most readily made
from the history of painful acroparesthesias, hypohidrosis, the
presence of characteristic skin lesions, and the observation of the
characteristic corneal opacities and lenticular lesions. The disorder is often misdiagnosed as rheumatic fever, erythromelalgia, or
neurosis (Table 106.19). The skin lesions must be differentiated
from the benign angiokeratomas of the scrotum (Fordyce disease)
or from angiokeratoma circumscriptum. Angiokeratomas identical
to those of Fabry disease have been reported in fucosidosis, aspartylglycosaminuria, late-­onset GM1 gangliosidosis, galactosialidosis,
α-­N-­acetylgalactosaminidase deficiency, and sialidosis. Later-­onset

895

patients have been identified among patients on hemodialysis and
among patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or who have suffered cryptogenic strokes. Later-­onset patients lack the early classic
manifestations such as the angiokeratomas, acroparesthesias, hypohidrosis, and corneal opacities. The diagnosis of classic and later-­
onset patients is confirmed biochemically by the demonstration of
markedly decreased α-­galactosidase A activity in plasma, isolated
leukocytes, or cultured fibroblasts or lymphoblasts.
Heterozygous females may have corneal opacities, isolated skin
lesions, and intermediate activities of α-­galactosidase A in plasma
or cells. Rare female heterozygotes may have manifestations as
severe as those in affected males. Asymptomatic at-­risk females in
families affected by Fabry disease, however, should be optimally
diagnosed by the direct analysis of their family’s specific pathogenic
variant. Prenatal detection of affected males can be accomplished
by the demonstration of deficient α-­galactosidase A activity or the
family’s specific gene pathogenic variant in chorionic villi obtained
in the first trimester or in cultured amniocytes obtained by amniocentesis in the second trimester of pregnancy. Fabry disease can be
detected by newborn screening, and pilot studies have been conducted in Italy and Taiwan.
Treatment for Fabry disease may include the use of phenytoin and/
or carbamazepine to decrease the frequency and severity of the chronic
acroparesthesias and the periodic crises of excruciating pain. Renal
transplantation and long-­term hemodialysis are lifesaving procedures
for patients with renal failure.
Recombinant α-­galactosidase is a safe and effective ERT of choice for
Fabry disease at a dose of 1 mg/kg every other week. It has been shown
to clear microvascular endothelial deposits of globotriaosylceramide
from the kidneys, heart, and skin in patients with Fabry disease with
stabilization of renal disease, regression of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, reduction of pain, and improvement in quality of life. Migalastat, a
protein-­folding chaperone therapy, is an oral treatment for Fabry that
can both be used as a first-­line therapy in ERT-­naïve patients and as an
alternative to ERT in patients with a migalastat-­amenable pathogenic
variant.

FUCOSIDOSIS

This is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by the deficient
activity of α-­fucosidase and the accumulation of fucose-­containing
glycosphingolipids, glycoproteins, and oligosaccharides in the
lysosomes of the liver, brain, and other organs (see Table 106.15).
α-­Fucosidase is encoded by the FUCA1 gene, and specific pathogenic variants are known. Although the disorder is panethnic, most
affected patients are from Italy and the United States. There is wide
variability in the clinical phenotype, with the most severely affected
patients presenting in the first year of life with developmental delay
and somatic features similar to those of the mucopolysaccharidoses.
These features include frontal bossing, hepatosplenomegaly, facial
features, and macroglossia. The CNS storage results in a relentless neurodegenerative course, with death in childhood. Patients
with milder disease have angiokeratomas and longer survival. No
specific therapy exists for the disorder, which can be diagnosed by
the demonstration of pathogenic variants in FUCA1 or deficient α-­
fucosidase activity in peripheral leukocytes or cultured fibroblasts.
Carrier identification studies and prenatal diagnosis are possible
by determination of the enzymatic activity or the specific family
pathogenic variants.

SCHINDLER DISEASE

Schindler disease is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder that results from the deficient activity of α-­N-­
acetylgalactosaminidase and the accumulation of sialylated and
asialoglycopeptides and oligosaccharides (see Table 106.15). The
enzyme is encoded by the gene NAGA. The disease is clinically
heterogeneous, and two major phenotypes have been identified.
Type I disease is an infantile-­onset neuroaxonal dystrophy. Affected

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

896 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
infants have normal development for the first 9-­15 months of life
followed by a rapid neurodegenerative course that results in severe
intellectual disability, cortical blindness, and frequent myoclonic
seizures. Type II disease is characterized by a variable age at onset,
mild retardation, and angiokeratomas. There is no specific therapy
for either form of the disorder. The diagnosis is by demonstration of
the enzymatic deficiency in leukocytes or cultured skin fibroblasts
or specific gene pathogenic variants.

METACHROMATIC LEUKODYSTROPHY (MLD)

This is an autosomal recessive white matter disease caused by a deficiency of arylsulfatase A (ASA) encoded by the gene ARSA, which is
required for the hydrolysis of sulfated glycosphingolipids. Another
form of MLD is caused by a deficiency of a sphingolipid activator
protein (SAP1) encoded by the gene PSAP, which is required for
the formation of the substrate-­enzyme complex. The deficiency of
this enzymatic activity results in the white matter storage of sulfated
glycosphingolipids, which leads to demyelination and a neurodegenerative course. Pathogenic variants fall into two groups that correlate with disease severity.
The clinical manifestations of the late infantile form of MLD,
which is most common, usually present between 12 and 18 months
of age as irritability, inability to walk, and hyperextension of the
knee, causing genu recurvatum. The clinical progression of the
disease relates to the pathologic involvement of both central and
peripheral nervous systems, giving a mixture of upper and lower
motor neuron and cognitive and psychiatric signs. Deep tendon
reflexes are diminished or absent. Gradual muscle wasting, weakness, and hypotonia become evident and lead to a debilitated state.
As the disease progresses, nystagmus, myoclonic seizures, optic
atrophy, and quadriparesis appear, with death in the first decade of
life (see Table 106.15). The juvenile form of the disorder has a more
indolent course with an onset that may occur as late as 20 years of
age. This form of the disease presents with gait disturbances, mental
deterioration, urinary incontinence, and emotional difficulties. The
adult form, which presents after the second decade, is similar to
the juvenile form in its clinical manifestations, although emotional
difficulties and psychosis are more prominent features. Dementia,
seizures, diminished reflexes, and optic atrophy also occur in both
the juvenile and adult forms. The pathologic hallmark of MLD is
the deposition of metachromatic bodies, which stain strongly positive with periodic acid–Schiff and Alcian blue, in the white matter of the brain. Neuronal inclusions may be seen in the midbrain,
pons, medulla, retina, and spinal cord; demyelination occurs in
the peripheral nervous system. Bone marrow transplantation has
resulted in normal enzymatic levels in peripheral blood but there
is no clear evidence for clinical efficacy in terms of the neurologic
course; supportive care remains the primary intervention. Lentiviral transduced ex vivo autologous stem and progenitor cells with
human arylsulfatase cDNA treatment has resulted in sustained and
clinically important benefits in children with early onset disease.
Cognitive function has been preserved, as has motor development
in preliminary trials.
The diagnosis of MLD should be suspected in patients with the
clinical features of leukodystrophy. Decreased nerve con¬duction
velocities, increased cerebrospinal fluid protein, metachromatic
deposits in sampled segments of the sural nerve, and metachromatic
granules in urinary sediment are all suggestive of MLD. Confirmation of the diagnosis is based on the demonstration of pathogenic
variants in ARSA or reduced activity of ASA in leukocytes or cultured skin fibroblasts. Sphingolipid activator protein deficiency is
diagnosed by genetic testing of PSAP or by measuring the concentration of SAP1 in cultured fibroblasts using a specific antibody to
the protein. Carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis are available
for all forms of the disorder.

MULTIPLE SULFATASE DEFICIENCY

This is an autosomal recessive disorder that results from the enzymatic deficiency of at least nine sulfatases including arylsulfatases
A, B, and C and iduronate-­2-­sulfatase. The specific defect has been
shown to be an enzyme in the C-­α-­formylglycine generating system encoded by the gene SUMF1, which introduces a common
posttranslational modification in all of the affected sulfatases and
explains the occurrence of these multiple enzyme defects. Because
of the deficiency of these enzymes, sulfatides, mucopolysaccharides, steroid sulfates, and gangliosides accumulate in the cerebral
cortex and visceral tissues, resulting in a clinical phenotype with
features of leukodystrophy as well as those of the mucopolysaccharidoses. Severe ichthyosis may also occur. Carrier testing and
prenatal diagnosis by measurement of the enzymatic activities can
be performed. There is no specific treatment for multiple sulfatase
deficiency other than supportive care.

KRABBE DISEASE

This condition, also called globoid cell leukodystrophy, is an autosomal recessive fatal disorder of infancy. It results from the deficiency of
the enzymatic activity of galactocerebrosidase encoded by the GALC
gene, leading to white matter accumulation of galactosylceramide,
which is normally found almost exclusively in the myelin sheath. Both
peripheral and central myelin are affected, resulting in spasticity and
cognitive impairment coupled with deceptively normal or even absent
deep tendon reflexes. Specific disease-­causing pathogenic variants are
known. The infantile form of Krabbe disease is rapidly progressive, and
patients present in early infancy with irritability, seizures, and hypertonia (see Table 106.16). Optic atrophy is evident in the first years of life,
and cognitive development is severely impaired. As the disease progresses, optic atrophy and severe developmental delay become apparent; affected children exhibit opisthotonos and typically die before 3
years of age. A second, late infantile form of Krabbe disease also exists,
and patients present after the age of 2 years. Affected individuals, however, have a disease course similar to that of the early infantile form.
The diagnosis of Krabbe disease relies on the demonstration of the
specific pathogenic variants or by enzymatic deficiency in white blood
cells or cultured skin fibroblasts. Carrier identification and prenatal
diagnosis are available. The development of methods to measure GALC
activity on dried blood spots has led to the inclusion of Krabbe disease in the newborn screening programs of some states. Treatment of
infants with Krabbe disease with umbilical cord blood cell transplantation has been reported in prenatally identified asymptomatic newborns and symptomatic infants. The long-­term outcome of umbilical
cord blood cell transplantation is being evaluated; transplanted infants
develop neurologic manifestations at a slower rate but succumb to a
neurologic demise.

FARBER DISEASE

This is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that results from the deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme acid ceramidase and the accumulation of ceramide in various tissues, especially the joints. Symptoms can
begin as early as the first year of life with painful joint swelling and
nodule formation (Fig. 106.21), which is sometimes diagnosed as rheumatoid arthritis. As the disease progresses, nodule or granulomatous
formation on the vocal cords can lead to hoarseness and breathing difficulties; failure to thrive is common. In some patients, moderate CNS
dysfunction is present (see Table 106.16). Patients may die of recurrent
pneumonias in their teens; there is currently no specific therapy. The
diagnosis of this disorder should be suspected in patients who have
nodule formation over the joints but no other findings of rheumatoid
arthritis. In such patients, ceramidase activity should be determined
in cultured skin fibroblasts or peripheral leukocytes. Various disease-­
causing pathogenic variants have been identified in the gene encoding
acid ceramidase (ASAH1). Carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis are

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 106 u Defects in Metabolism of Lipids

Fig. 106.21 Forearm of an 18-­month old girl with Farber disease.

Note the painful joint swelling and the nodule formation. The infant was
suspected of having rheumatoid arthritis.

available. There is no specific treatment, but a recombinant human acid
ceramidase is under development.

WOLMAN DISEASE AND CHOLESTEROL ESTER
STORAGE DISEASE (CESD)

These are autosomal recessive lysosomal storage diseases that result
from the deficiency of lysosomal acid lipase and the accumulation of
cholesterol esters and triglycerides in histiocytic foam cells of most
visceral organs. Wolman disease is the more severe clinical phenotype
and is a fatal disorder of infancy. Clinical features become apparent
in the first weeks of life and include failure to thrive, relentless vomiting, abdominal distention, steatorrhea, and hepatosplenomegaly (see
Table 106.15). There usually is hyperlipidemia. Hepatic dysfunction
and fibrosis may occur. Calcification of the adrenal glands is pathognomonic for the disorder. Death usually occurs within 6 months.
CESD is a less severe disorder that may not be diagnosed until
adulthood. Hepatomegaly can be the only detectable abnormality, but
affected individuals are at significant risk for premature atherosclerosis.
Adrenal calcification is not a feature.
Lysosomal acid lipase is encoded by the LIPA gene. Diagnosis and
carrier identification can be performed by genetic testing or by measuring acid lipase activity in peripheral leukocytes or cultured skin
fibroblasts. Prenatal diagnosis can use pathogenic variants or enzyme
levels in cultured chorionic villi or amniocytes. Pharmacologic agents
to suppress cholesterol synthesis, in combination with cholestyramine
and diet modification, have been used in patients with CESD (see
Chapter 106.3). Sebelipase alfa (Kanuma) is a commercially available
recombinant human lysosomal acid lipase that is approved in the European Union (EU), the United States, and Japan as a long-­term ERT for
patients diagnosed with LAL deficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

106.5 Mucolipidoses

897

disorders that share some clinical features with Hurler syndrome
(see Chapter 109). These diseases result from the abnormal transport of newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes that are normally
targeted to the lysosome by the presence of mannose-­6-­phosphate
residues and recognized by specific lysosomal membrane receptors.
These mannose-­6-­phosphate recognition markers are synthesized
in a two-­step reaction that occurs in the Golgi apparatus and is
mediated by two enzymatic activities. The enzyme that catalyzes
the first step, the UDP-­
N-­
acetylglucosamine:lysosomal enzyme
N-­
acetylglucosamine-­
1-­
phosphotransferase, is defective in both
ML-­
II and ML-­
III, which are allelic disorders resulting from
pathogenic variants in the GlcNAc-­
phosphotransferase alpha/
beta-­subunits precursor gene (GNPTAB). This enzyme deficiency
results in the lack of mannose-­6-­phosphate tagging of lysosomal
enzymes to result in disrupted targeting to the lysosome, and they
are consequently secreted into the extracellular matrix. Because
the lysosomal enzymes require the acidic medium of the lysosome
to function, patients with this defect accumulate a variety of different substrates because of the intracellular deficiency of all lysosomal enzymes. The diagnosis of ML-­II and ML-­III can be made by
genetic testing of the GNPTAB gene, determination of the serum
lysosomal enzymatic activities, which are elevated, or by the demonstration of reduced enzymatic activity levels in cultured skin
fibroblasts. Direct measurement of the phosphotransferase activity
is possible as well. Prenatal diagnosis is available for both disorders
using familial pathogenic variants or by measurement of lysosomal
enzymatic activities in amniocytes or chorionic villus cells; carrier
identification studies are available for both disorders using cultured
skin fibroblasts. Neonatal screening by tandem mass spectroscopy
may detect I-­cell disease.

I-­CELL DISEASE

This disorder shares many of the clinical manifestations of Hurler
syndrome (see Chapter 109), although there is no mucopolysacchariduria and the presentation is earlier (see Table 106.16). Some
patients have clinical features evident at birth, including coarse
facial features, craniofacial abnormalities, restricted joint movement, and hypotonia. Nonimmune hydrops may be present prenatally. The remainder of patients present in the first year with severe
psychomotor retardation, coarse facial features, and skeletal manifestations that include kyphoscoliosis and a lumbar gibbus. Patients
may also have congenital dislocation of the hips, inguinal hernias,
and gingival hypertrophy. Progressive, severe intellectual disability
leads to death in early childhood. No treatment is available.

PSEUDO-­HURLER POLYDYSTROPHY

Pseudo-­Hurler polydystrophy is a less severe disorder than I-­cell
disease, with later onset and survival to adulthood reported.
Affected children may present around the age of 4 or 5 years of
age with joint stiffness and short stature. Progressive destruction
of the hip joints and moderate dysostosis multiplex are evident.
Radiographic evidence of low iliac wings, flattening of the proximal
femoral epiphyses with valgus deformity of the femoral head, and
hypoplasia of the anterior third of the lumbar vertebrae are characteristic findings. Ophthalmic findings include corneal clouding,
retinopathy, and astigmatism; visual complaints are uncommon
(see Tables 106.15 and 106.16). Some patients have learning disabilities or mental retardation. Treatment, which should include
orthopedic care, is symptomatic.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Margaret M. McGovern and Robert J. Desnick
I-­cell disease (mucolipidosis II [ML-­II]) and pseudo-­Hurler polydystrophy (mucolipidosis III [ML-­III]) are rare autosomal recessive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

898 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders

Chapter 107

Defects in Metabolism of
Carbohydrates
Ghada Hijazi and Priya S. Kishnani
Carbohydrate synthesis and degradation provide the energy required
for most metabolic processes. The important carbohydrates include
three monosaccharides—glucose, galactose, and fructose—and a
polysaccharide, glycogen. Figure 107.1 shows the relevant biochemical pathways of these carbohydrates. Glucose is the principal substrate of energy metabolism, continuously available through dietary
intake, glycogenolysis (breakdown of glycogen), and gluconeogenesis
(glucose made de novo from amino acids, primarily alanine). Metabolism of glucose generates adenosine triphosphate (ATP) via glycolysis (conversion of glucose or glycogen to pyruvate), mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation (conversion of pyruvate to carbon dioxide
and water), or both. Dietary sources of glucose come from polysaccharides, primarily starch, and the disaccharides lactose, maltose, and
sucrose. However, oral intake of glucose is intermittent and unreliable. Hepatic glycogenolysis provides the rapid release of glucose
and is the most significant factor in maintaining euglycemia (normal
levels of glucose in the blood). Glycogen is also the primary stored
energy source in muscle, providing glucose for muscle activity during
exercise. Gluconeogenesis contributes to maintaining euglycemia but
is less immediate. Galactose and fructose are monosaccharides that
provide fuel for cellular metabolism, though their role is less significant than that of glucose. Galactose is derived from lactose (galactose
+ glucose), which is found in milk and milk products. Galactose is an
important energy source in infants. Galactose (exogenous or endogenously synthesized from glucose) is also an important component
of certain glycolipids, glycoproteins, and glycosaminoglycans. The
dietary sources of fructose are fruits, vegetables, and honey. It is also
found in the disaccharide sucrose (fructose + glucose) and the sugar
alcohol sorbitol.
Defects in glycogen metabolism typically cause an accumulation of
glycogen in the tissues, thus the name glycogen storage disease (Table
107.1). Defects in gluconeogenesis or the glycolytic pathway, including
galactose and fructose metabolism, do not result in an accumulation
of glycogen (see Table 107.1). The defects in pyruvate metabolism in
the pathway of the conversion of pyruvate to carbon dioxide and water
via mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation are more often associated
with lactic acidosis.

107.1 Glycogen Storage Diseases
Ghada Hijazi and Priya S. Kishnani
The disorders of glycogen metabolism, the glycogen storage diseases
(GSDs), result from deficiencies of enzymes or transport proteins in
the pathways of glycogen metabolism (see Fig. 107.1). Glycogen found
in these disorders is abnormal in quantity, quality, or both. GSDs are
categorized by numerical type in accordance with the chronological
order in which these enzymatic defects were identified. This numerical
classification is still widely used, at least up to number VII. The GSDs
can also be classified by organ involvement into liver and muscle glycogenoses (see Table 107.1).
There are more than 15 forms of GSDs. Glucose-­6-­phosphatase
deficiency (type I), lysosomal acid α-­glucosidase deficiency (type II),
debrancher deficiency (type III), branching enzyme deficiency (type
IV), liver phosphorylase deficiency (type VI), and liver phosphorylase
kinase deficiency (type IX) are the most common of those that typically

present in early childhood. Myophosphorylase deficiency (type V,
McArdle disease) is the most common in adolescents and adults. The
cumulative frequency of all forms of GSD is approximately 1 in 10,000-­
25,000 live births.

LIVER GLYCOGENOSES

The GSDs that principally affect the liver include glucose-­6-­phosphatase
deficiency (type I), debranching enzyme deficiency (type III), branching enzyme deficiency (type IV), liver phosphorylase deficiency
(type VI), phosphorylase kinase deficiency (type IX), glycogen synthase deficiency (type 0), and glucose transporter-­2 (GLUT2) defect
(Fanconi-­Bickel syndrome). Because hepatic carbohydrate metabolism
is responsible for plasma glucose homeostasis, this group of disorders
typically causes fasting hypoglycemia and hepatomegaly. Some GSDs
(types III, IV, VI, IX) can be associated with liver fibrosis and cirrhosis.
Other organs can also be involved and may manifest as renal dysfunction in type I; myopathy (skeletal and/or cardiomyopathy) in types
III, IV, and some rare forms of phosphorylase kinase deficiency; and
neurologic involvement in types III (peripheral nerves) and IV (diffuse
central and peripheral nervous system dysfunction).

Type I Glycogen Storage Disease (Glucose-­6-­
Phosphatase or Translocase Deficiency, von Gierke
Disease)

Type I GSD is caused by the absence or deficiency of glucose-­6-­
phosphatase activity in the liver, kidney, and intestinal mucosa. It has two
subtypes: type Ia, in which the defective enzyme is glucose-­6-­phosphatase,
and type Ib, in which the defective enzyme is a translocase that transports
glucose-­6-­phosphate across the microsomal membrane. Deficiency of the
enzymes in both types Ia and Ib lead to inadequate hepatic conversion of
glucose-­6-­phosphate to glucose through normal glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, resulting in fasting hypoglycemia.
Type I GSD is an autosomal recessive disorder. The gene for subtype
Ia is G6PC, and the gene for subtype Ib is SLC37A4. Common pathogenic variants have been identified in different ancestral populations.
Carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis are possible with DNA-­based
methodologies.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with type I GSD may present in the neonatal period with hypoglycemia and lactic acidosis, but more often present at 3-­4 months of
age because of increased intervals between feeds and at time of weaning.
Infants can present with hepatomegaly, hypoglycemic seizures, or both.
Affected children are often described as having “doll-­like” faces with full
cheeks, relatively thin extremities, short stature, and a protuberant abdomen that is a consequence of massive hepatomegaly. The kidneys are also
enlarged, whereas the spleen and heart are not involved.
Intermittent diarrhea may occur in GSD I. In patients with GSD
Ib, diarrhea appears to be caused by the loss of mucosal barrier function via inflammation, which is likely related to glycogen-­mediated
impairment of neutrophil function. Easy bruising and epistaxis
are common and are associated with a prolonged bleeding time
as a result of impaired platelet aggregation and adhesion. A von
Willebrand factor–like deficiency and/or dysfunction has also been
found in GSD Ia patients.
The biochemical characteristics of type I GSD are hypoglycemia,
lactic acidosis, hyperuricemia, and hyperlipidemia. Hypoglycemia and
lactic acidosis can develop even after short fasts. Hyperuricemia is present in young children and rarely progresses to symptomatic gout before
puberty. Despite marked hepatomegaly, the liver transaminase levels
are usually normal or only slightly elevated. The plasma may be “milky”
in appearance due to strikingly elevated triglyceride levels. Cholesterol
and phospholipids are also elevated, albeit less prominently. The lipid
abnormality resembles type IV hyperlipidemia and is characterized by
increased levels of very low-­density lipoprotein, low-­density lipoprotein, and a unique apolipoprotein profile consisting of increased levels
of apolipoproteins B, C, and E, with relatively normal or reduced levels
of apolipoproteins A and D. The histologic appearance of the liver is
characterized by a universal distention of hepatocytes by glycogen and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates

899

CYTOSOL

G
PaP

Pa

Pb

GSa

PbKa
G
GSb

PbKb

G

Brancher

Debrancher
GLUT-2

Glucose
Pb

Pa
G

UDP-Gal-4epimerase

UDP-Gal

Translocase

Galactokinase

Glucose
GLUT-2

Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase

Glc-6-Pase

F-6-P
Fructose-1,6
Phosphofructokinase
bisphosphatase
F-1, 6-P2 F-1-P Fructokinase

Glucose

Pi

Galactose

UDP-GLc
Gal-1-P

Glc-1-P
Gal-1-P Uridyl transferase
Phosphoglucomutase
Glucokinase, hexokinase
Glc-6-P
Glucose

ENDOPLASMIC
RETICULUM

GLUT-2

UDP-Glc Pyrophosphorylase
UTP

PbKb

GLUT-2

GSb

GSa

PbKa

Glc-6-P

Galactose

G

P aP

Aldolase A

Glyceraldehyde

Fructose

Fructose

Aldolase B

Dihydroxyacetone-P
Glyceraldehyde-3-P
Triphosphate isomerase
Glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase
G

1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
Phosphoglycerate kinase

-Glucosidase

3-Phosphoglycerate
Phosphoglycerate mutase

Glucose

2-Phosphoglycerate
Enolase

LYSOSOME

CYTOSOL

Phosphoenolpyruvate
Pyruvate kinase
Lactate dehydrogenase
Pyruvate
NADH
MITOCHONDRIA

Lactate

NAD

TCA
Cycle

Fig. 107.1 Pathway related to glycogen storage diseases and galactose and fructose disorders. G, Glycogenin, the primer for glycogen synthesis;

GLUT-­2, glucose transporter 2; GSa, active glycogen synthase; GSb, inactive glycogen synthase; NAD/NADH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide;
Pa, active phosphorylase; PaP, phosphorylase a phosphatase; Pb, inactive phosphorylase; PbKa, active phosphorylase b kinase; PbKb, inactive phosphorylase b kinase; UDP, uridine diphosphate. (Adapted from Beaudet AR. Glycogen storage disease. In: Harrison TR, Isselbacher KJ, eds. Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 13th ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 1994.)

fat. The lipid vacuoles are particularly large and prominent, and there
is no associated liver fibrosis.
Although type I GSD affects mainly the liver, multiple organ systems
are involved. Delayed puberty is often seen. Females can have ultrasound findings consistent with polycystic ovaries, even though other
features of polycystic ovary syndrome (acne, hirsutism) are not seen.
Nonetheless, fertility appears to be normal, as evidenced in several
reports of successful pregnancy in women with GSD I. Increased bleeding during menstrual cycles, including life-­threatening menorrhagia,
has been reported and could be related to the impaired platelet aggregation. Symptoms of gout usually start around puberty from long-­term
hyperuricemia. There is an increased risk of pancreatitis, secondary to
the lipid abnormalities. The dyslipidemia, together with elevated erythrocyte aggregation, could predispose these patients to atherosclerosis,

but premature atherosclerosis has not yet been clearly documented
except in rare cases. Impaired platelet aggregation and increased antioxidative defense to prevent lipid peroxidation may function as protective mechanisms to help reduce the risk of atherosclerosis. Frequent
fractures and radiographic evidence of osteopenia are common, and
bone mineral content is reduced, even in prepubertal patients.
By the second or third decade of life, some patients with type I
GSD develop hepatic adenomas that can hemorrhage and become
malignant in some cases. Pulmonary hypertension has been seen
in some long-­term survivors of the disease. Iron-­refractory anemia
and an increased prevalence of thyroid autoimmunity are also being
recognized.
Renal disease is another late complication, and most patients
with type I GSD over 20 years of age have proteinuria. Glomerular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 107.1  Features of the Disorders of Carbohydrate Metabolism
DISORDERS

BASIC DEFECTS

LIVER GLYCOGENOSES
Type/Common Name
Ia/von Gierke
Glucose-­6-­
phosphatase
complex
Ib

Glucose-­6-­phosphate
translocase

IIIa/Cori or Forbes

Liver and muscle
debrancher
deficiency

IIIb

Liver debrancher
deficiency; normal
muscle enzyme
activity
Branching enzyme

IV/Andersen/adult
polyglucosan body
disease

VI/Hers

Liver phosphorylase

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

Growth retardation, hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia;
elevated blood lactate, cholesterol, triglyceride, and
uric acid levels
Same as type Ia, with additional findings of neutropenia,
periodontal disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and
increased risk of autoimmune hypothyroidism
Childhood: hepatomegaly, growth retardation, muscle
weakness, hypoglycemia, hyperlipidemia, elevated
transaminase levels, hepatic fibrosis, left ventricular
hypertrophy.
Later childhood to adulthood: muscle atrophy
and weakness, liver cirrhosis and failure, risk for
hepatocellular carcinoma, cardiac hypertrophy and
fibrosis, life-­threatening arrhythmia at any age.
Liver symptoms same as in type IIIa; no muscle or heart
symptoms
Infancy/childhood failure to thrive, hypotonia,
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, cirrhosis progressing to
liver failure (death usually before fifth year), elevated
transaminase levels; a subset does not have overt
progression to liver failure.
Risk for extrahepatic manifestations, such as myopathy
and cardiomyopathy.
Perinatal: decreased fetal movements, polyhydramnios,
fetal hydrops; arthrogryposis, hypotonia, muscle
atrophy at birth, death in the perinatal period.
Congenital: neonatal hypotonia, respiratory failure,
dilated cardiomyopathy, early infantile death.
Childhood: neuromuscular manifestations,
cardiomyopathy.
Adult form, adult polyglucosan body disease (APBD):
progressive muscle weakness, neuropathic bladder,
gait spasticity, central and peripheral nervous system
involvement.
Hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, hyperlipidemia, elevated
liver enzyme levels, and ketosis

IX/phosphorylase kinase
(PhK) deficiency

IX α2 (PHKA2 variant)

Liver PhK

IX β (PHKB variant)

Liver and muscle PhK

IX γ2 (PHKG2 variant)

Liver PhK

0a/Liver glycogen
synthase deficiency
XI/Fanconi-­Bickel
syndrome

Liver glycogen
synthase
Glucose transporter 2
(GLUT-­2)

MUSCLE GLYCOGENOSES
Type/Common Name
II/infantile Pompe
Acid α-­glucosidase

Hypoglycemia, hyperketosis, hepatomegaly, chronic liver
disease, liver fibrosis, hyperlipidemia, elevated liver
enzymes, growth retardation
Hepatomegaly, growth retardation, mild or absent
muscle disease.
More severe than IX α2; marked hepatomegaly, recurrent
hypoglycemia, hyperlipidemia, markedly elevated liver
enzymes, liver fibrosis/cirrhosis
Early morning drowsiness and fatigue, fasting
hypoglycemia and ketosis, no hepatomegaly
Failure to thrive, rickets, hepatomegaly, renomegaly,
proximal renal tubular dysfunction, impaired glucose
and galactose use

Cardiomegaly, hypotonia, hepatomegaly; onset at birth to
age 6 mo

II/late-­onset Pompe
(juvenile and adult)

Acid α-­glucosidase

Myopathy (proximal limb girdle), variable
cardiomyopathy, respiratory insufficiency; onset from
infancy and early childhood to adulthood

Danon disease

Lysosome-­associated
membrane protein 2
(LAMP2)

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, heart failure, retinopathy,
mild cognitive dysfunction

COMMENTS

Common, severe hypoglycemia.
Adulthood: hepatic adenomas and
risk for carcinoma,
osteoporosis, pulmonary
hypertension, and renal failure
10% of type I
Common, intermediate severity of
hypoglycemia.
Muscle weakness may progress to
the point that ambulation
assistance such as wheelchair use
is required.
15% of type III

A continuum of disease severity,
related to residual enzyme
activity; multisystem involvement

Often underdiagnosed; severe
presentation also known
Common, X-­linked GSD IX α2,
typically less severe than
autosomal form GSD IX γ2;
clinical variability within and
between subtypes; severe cases
being recognized across different
subtypes
X-­linked
Autosomal recessive
Autosomal recessive
Decreased liver glycogen stores
GLUT-­2 expressed in liver, kidney,
pancreas, and intestine

Common, cardiorespiratory failure
leading to death by age 1-­2 yr;
minimal to no residual enzyme
activity
Residual enzyme activity

Rare, X-­linked

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 107.1  Features of the Disorders of Carbohydrate Metabolism—cont’d
DISORDERS

BASIC DEFECTS

PRKAG2 syndrome

0b/muscle glycogen
synthase deficiency
XV/Polyglucosan body
myopathy 2
V/McArdle

Adenosine
monophosphate
(AMP)–activated
protein kinase γ
Muscle glycogen
synthase
Glycogenin-­1
Myophosphorylase

VII/Tarui

Phosphofructokinase

IX α1 (PHKA1 variant)

Muscle PhK

Phosphoglycerate
kinase deficiency
X/Phosphoglycerate
mutase deficiency

Phosphoglycerate
kinase
M subunit of
phosphoglycerate
mutase
M subunit of lactate
dehydrogenase

XI/Lactate
dehydrogenase
deficiency

GALACTOSE DISORDERS
Galactosemia with
Galactose-­1-­
transferase deficiency
phosphate
uridyltransferase
Galactokinase
Galactokinase
deficiency
Generalized uridine
Uridine diphosphate
diphosphate
galactose-­4-­
galactose-­4-­epimerase
epimerase
deficiency
Galactose mutarotase
Galactose mutarotase
deficiency
FRUCTOSE DISORDERS
Essential fructosuria
Fructokinase
Hereditary fructose
intolerance

Fructose-­1-­phosphate
aldolase (aldolase-­B)

DISORDERS OF GLUCONEOGENESIS
Fructose-­1,6-­
Fructose-­1,6-­
bisphosphatase
diphosphatase
deficiency
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase
carboxykinase
deficiency
DISORDERS OF PYRUVATE METABOLISM
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
dehydrogenase
dehydrogenase
complex defect
Pyruvate carboxylase
deficiency

Pyruvate carboxylase

Respiratory chain
defects (oxidative
phosphorylation
disease)

Complexes I-­V, many
mitochondrial and
nuclear DNA variants

DISORDERS IN PENTOSE METABOLISM
Pentosuria
l-­Xylulose reductase
Transaldolase deficiency Transaldolase

Ribose-­5-­phosphate
isomerase deficiency

Ribose-­5-­phosphate
isomerase

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

COMMENTS

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, myopathy,
myalgia, seizures; congenital fetal form is rapidly fatal

Autosomal dominant

Muscle weakness, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
abnormal heart rate, sudden cardiac arrest
Juvenile-­or adult-­onset proximal muscle weakness,
nervous system involvement uncommon
Exercise intolerance, muscle cramps, myoglobinuria,
“second-­wind” phenomenon, muscle weakness
Exercise intolerance, muscle cramps, compensatory
hemolytic anemia, myoglobinuria, “out-­of-­wind”
phenomenon
Exercise intolerance, cramps, myalgia, increased CK,
myoglobinuria in some; no hepatomegaly
As with type V

Rare, few cases reported

As with type V

Rare, majority of patients are Black

As with type V

Rare

Vomiting, feeding difficulties, liver failure/dysfunction/
hepatomegaly, cataracts, failure to thrive, E. coli sepsis,
generalized aminoaciduria
Cataracts

Black patients tend to have milder
symptoms

Similar to transferase deficiency with additional findings
of hypotonia and nerve deafness

Benign and intermediate variants
also exist

Cataract

Benign

Urine-­reducing substance

Benign

Acute; vomiting, hypoglycemia, sweating, lethargy, acute
liver failure/liver dysfunction
Chronic; failure to thrive, hepatic failure

Prognosis good with fructose
restriction

Episodic hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, liver failure/
dysfunction

Good prognosis, avoid fasting

Hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, hypotonia, failure to thrive

Rare

Severe fatal neonatal to mild late onset, lactic acidosis,
psychomotor retardation, failure to thrive, features
overlapping fetal alcohol syndrome, MRI findings
suggestive of Leigh syndrome, ataxia
Type B: neonatal severe lactic acidosis, hyperammonemia,
hypercitrullinemia, hyperlysinemia, and hypoglycemia.
Type A: late-­onset mild to moderate lactic acidosis and
developmental delay. Type C: recurrent episodes of
lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis, and mild neurologic deficits.
Heterogeneous with multisystem involvement (see
Table 107.3 and Table 107.5)

Most commonly caused by E1α
subunit defect, X-­linked

Urine-­reducing substance
Intrauterine growth restriction, oligohydramnios,
dysmorphism, cardiovascular anomalies, anemia,
thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly,
endocrine abnormalities, cutis laxa
Progressive leukoencephalopathy and peripheral
neuropathy

Benign
Autosomal recessive, milder form
exists

Rare, autosomal recessive
Common, male predominance
Prevalent in Japanese and
Ashkenazi Jewish populations
X-­linked
Rare, X-­linked

Benign

Rare, autosomal recessive

Mitochondrial, autosomal
recessive, dominant, and
X-­linked inheritance

Four cases reported

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

902 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
hyperfiltration, increased renal plasma flow, and microalbuminuria
are often found in the early stages of renal dysfunction and can occur
before the onset of proteinuria. In younger patients, hyperfiltration
and hyperperfusion may be the only signs of renal abnormalities.
Many also have hypertension, renal stones, nephrocalcinosis, proteinuria, renal tubular acidosis (proximal and distal renal acidification
defects), and altered creatinine clearance. With the advancement of
renal disease, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and interstitial fibrosis become evident. In some patients, renal function has deteriorated
and progressed to failure, requiring dialysis and transplantation. Other
renal abnormalities include amyloidosis, a Fanconi-­like syndrome,
hypocitraturia, hypercalciuria, and a distal renal tubular acidification
defect. Patients with GSD Ib can have additional features of recurrent
bacterial infections from neutropenia and impaired neutrophil function. Oral involvement, including recurrent mucosal ulceration, gingivitis, and rapidly progressive periodontal disease, may occur in type Ib.
Intestinal mucosa ulceration culminating in GSD enterocolitis is also
common. Type 1b is also associated with a chronic inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD)–like picture involving the colon that may be associated
with neutropenia and/or neutrophil dysfunction and can resemble
ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease.

Diagnosis

The clinical presentation and laboratory findings of hypoglycemia,
lactic acidosis, hyperuricemia, and hyperlipidemia lead to a suspected
diagnosis of type I GSD. Neutropenia is noted in GSD Ib patients,
although neutrophil counts may be normal initially. Neutropenia has
also been noted in some patients with GSD Ia, especially those with the
p.G188A variant. Administration of glucagon or epinephrine leads to
a negligible increase, if any, in blood glucose levels, but the lactate level
rises significantly. Before the availability of genetic testing, a definitive
diagnosis required enzyme testing via liver biopsy. Gene-­based variant analysis using single-­gene sequencing or multigene panel testing provides a noninvasive way to diagnose most patients with GSD
types Ia and Ib and has become the primary recommended method of
diagnosis.

Treatment

Treatment focuses on maintaining normal blood glucose levels and
is achieved by continuous nasogastric (NG) infusion of glucose or
administration of uncooked cornstarch. In infancy, overnight NG drip
feeding may be needed to maintain normoglycemia. NG feedings can
consist of a sucrose-­and lactose-­free enteral formula or only glucose
or a glucose polymer to provide sufficient glucose to maintain euglycemia. During the day, frequent feedings with high-­complex carbohydrate content are typically sufficient.
Uncooked cornstarch acts as a slow-­release form of glucose and can
be introduced at a dose of 1.6 g/kg every 4 hours for children less than
2 years of age. The response of young children is variable. For older
children, the cornstarch regimen can be changed to every 4-­6 hours at
a dose of 1.6-­2.5 g/kg body weight and can be given orally mixed with
water or a sucrose-­, fructose-­, and lactose-­free beverage. Cornstarch
dosing may also be calculated based on hepatic glucose production
rate and can be administered more frequently in smaller amounts to
improve metabolic control. Other starch products, such as extended-­
release waxy maize starch with a high amylopectin content, are shown
to be beneficial in extending time between overnight feedings in some
individuals with hepatic GSD. Because fructose and galactose cannot
be converted directly to glucose in GSD type I, these sugars should be
restricted in the diet. Sucrose (table sugar, cane sugar, other ingredients), fructose (fruit, juice, high-­fructose corn syrup), lactose (dairy
foods), and sorbitol should be avoided or limited. As a result of these
dietary restrictions, vitamins and minerals such as calcium and vitamin D may be deficient, and supplementation is required to prevent
nutritional deficiencies.
Maintaining normoglycemia and avoiding hypoglycemia necessitate
frequent blood glucose measurements in patients with hepatic GSDs.
This can be accomplished by self-­monitoring blood glucose (SMBG)
using a finger prick before and after meals, before physical activity,

and overnight. Continuous glucose monitoring systems (CGMSs) are
a newer technique that allow for 24-­hour glucose monitoring. CGMSs
have been shown to be safe and effective tools for monitoring glucose
levels in patients with hepatic GSDs (GSD I, GSD III, GSD VI, GSD
IX) at all hours of the day. Furthermore, when accompanied with the
necessary dietary changes, CGMSs aid in metabolic control, improving
disease parameters, avoidance of hospitalizations, and blood glucose
stability in these patients.
Dietary therapy improves hyperuricemia, hyperlipidemia, and renal
function, as well as slowing the development of renal failure. Blood
uric acid and lipid levels may, however, be elevated in some individuals,
despite good dietary compliance, especially after puberty. The control
of hyperuricemia can be further augmented by the use of allopurinol,
a xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Hyperlipidemia can be reduced with
lipid-­lowering drugs, such as β-­hydroxy-­β-­methylglutaryl-­coenzyme
A (HMG-­CoA) reductase inhibitors and fibrate (see Chapter 106).
Microalbuminuria, an early indicator of renal dysfunction in type I disease, is treated with angiotensin-­converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.
Citrate supplements can be beneficial for patients with hypocitraturia
by preventing or ameliorating nephrocalcinosis and development of
urinary calculi. Products containing citric acid reduce the effectiveness
of cornstarch and should not be taken concurrently. Thiazide diuretics increase renal reabsorption of filtered calcium and decrease urinary
calcium excretion, thereby preventing hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis. Growth hormone (GH) should be used with extreme caution
and limited to only those with a documented GH deficiency. Even in
those patients, there should be close monitoring of metabolic parameters and for the presence of adenomas. Kidney transplantation may be
performed to treat end-­stage renal disease (ESRD). As needed, combined liver and kidney transplantation is sometimes recommended.
In patients with type Ib GSD, granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor is successful in correcting neutropenia, decreasing the number
and severity of bacterial infections, and improving chronic IBD; the
minimum effective dose should be used, given noted side effects with
this agent, including splenomegaly, hypersplenism, and bone pain,
with this agent. Vitamin E administration has been shown to improve
neutrophil count and function and to reduce the frequency and
severity of infections in GSD1b patients. The use of sodium glucose
cotransporter-­2 (SGLT2) inhibitors (empagliflozin) to improve neutrophil function and reduce neutropenia and IBD symptoms in GSDIb
is showing promising results. Bone marrow transplantation has been
reported to correct neutropenia in type Ib GSD.
Orthotopic liver transplantation is a potential cure for type I GSD,
especially for patients with liver malignancy, multiple liver adenomas,
metabolic derangements refractory to medical management, and liver
failure; however, because of the paucity of available organ donors, this
can be challenging. Large adenomas (>2 cm) that are rapidly increasing in size and/or number may necessitate partial hepatic resection.
Smaller adenomas (<2 cm) may be treated with percutaneous ethanol
injection or transcatheter arterial embolization. Recurrence of liver
adenomas is a challenge and may potentiate malignant transformation
in these patients, ultimately requiring a liver transplant. Before any surgical procedure, the bleeding status must be evaluated and good metabolic control established. Prolonged bleeding times can be normalized
with intensive intravenous (IV) glucose infusion for 24-­
48 hours
before surgery. Treatment with DDAVP (1-­
deamino-­
8-­
d-­
arginine
vasopressin) can reduce bleeding complications, but it should be used
with caution because of the risk of fluid overload and hyponatremia
when administered as an IV infusion. Lactated Ringer solution should
be avoided because it contains lactate and no glucose. Glucose levels
should be maintained in the normal range throughout surgery with the
use of 10% dextrose. Overall, metabolic control is assessed by growth,
improvement, and correction of the metabolic abnormalities such as
elevated lactate, glucose, triglyceride, cholesterol, and uric acid levels.
GSD I is a promising target for gene therapy because it is caused by
pathogenic variants in a single gene. An active phase 3 clinical trial
(NCT05139316) is being conducted to determine the efficacy and
safety of adeno-­associated virus serotype 8 (AAV8)–mediated G6P
gene replacement in patients ages 8 years and older with GSD type Ia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates

903

Prognosis

Inadequate metabolic control during childhood can lead to long-­term
complications in adults. Clinical outcomes have improved dramatically
with early diagnosis and effective treatment. However, serious complications such as renal disease and formation of hepatic adenomas with
potential risk for malignant transformation persist. The ability to identify
transformation of liver adenomas to hepatocellular carcinoma remains a
challenge as α-­fetoprotein (AFP) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
levels often remain normal in the setting of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Type III Glycogen Storage Disease (Cori Disease,
Forbes Disease, Debrancher Deficiency, Limit
Dextrinosis)

Type III GSD is caused by deficient activity of the glycogen debranching enzyme. This enzyme, together with phosphorylase and
phosphorylase kinase, are responsible for complete degradation of glycogen. When debranching enzyme is defective, glycogen breakdown
is incomplete, resulting in the accumulation of an abnormal glycogen
with short outer-­branch chains that resemble limit dextrin. GSD type
IIIa is the most common type and usually involves both liver and muscle; GSD type IIIb, seen in approximately 15% of patients, appears to
involve only the liver.
Type III GSD is an autosomal recessive disease that has been reported
in many different ethnic groups. The frequency is relatively high in
the Sephardic Jewish population from North Africa, inhabitants of
the Faroe Islands, and the Inuit population. The gene for debranching
enzyme (AGL) has been noted, with more than 260 different pathogenic variants. At least two pathogenic variants in exon 2, c.18_19del
(p.Gln6fs) and c.16C>T (p.Gln6Ter), are specifically associated with
GSD type IIIb. Carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis are possible
using DNA-­based testing.

Clinical Manifestations

In infancy and childhood, type III GSD may be indistinguishable from
type I because of overlapping features such as hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, hyperlipidemia, and growth stunting (Fig. 107.2). Hepatomegaly in most patients with type III GSD decreases with age; however,
liver fibrosis and/or cirrhosis progressing to liver failure are noted in
many in late adulthood. Some patients develop hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatic adenomas with transformation to carcinomas occur
less frequently in individuals with GSD III than in those with GSD I.
Alpha-­fetoprotein (AFP) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels
are not good predictors of malignant transformation.
In patients with GSD type IIIa, the muscle weakness is slowly progressive and associated with muscle wasting. The weakness can present in early childhood but can become severe after the third or fourth
decade of life. Myopathy does not follow a particular pattern of involvement, and both proximal and distal muscles are involved. Electromyography (EMG) reveals a widespread myopathy, and nerve conduction
studies may be abnormal.
Although overt cardiac dysfunction is rare, ventricular hypertrophy
is a frequent finding. Cardiac pathology has shown diffuse involvement of various cardiac structures, including vacuolation of myocytes,
fibrosis, glycogen accumulation in the conduction system, and hyperplasia of smooth muscles. Life-­threatening arrhythmia and the need
for heart transplant have been reported in some patients with GSD IIIa.
Hepatic symptoms in some patients may be mild and the diagnosis is
not made until adulthood, when patients show symptoms and signs of
neuromuscular disease.
The initial presentation can be confused with Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth
disease (see Chapter 653.1). Polycystic ovaries are noted; some patients
can develop hirsutism, irregular menstrual cycles, and other features of
polycystic ovarian syndrome. Fertility does not appear to be affected;
successful pregnancies have been reported. Low bone mineral density
and myopathy in patients with GSD IIIa put them at an increased risk
of potential fractures.
Hypoglycemia and hyperlipidemia are common. In contrast to type
I GSD, elevation of liver transaminase levels and fasting ketosis are
prominent, but blood lactate and uric acid concentrations are usually

Fig. 107.2 Growth and development in a patient with type IIIb gly-

cogen storage disease. The patient has debrancher deficiency in the
liver but normal activity in muscle. As a child, he had hepatomegaly,
hypoglycemia, and growth retardation. After puberty, he no longer had
hepatomegaly or hypoglycemia, and his final adult height is normal. He
had no muscle weakness or atrophy; this is in contrast to patients with
type IIIa, in whom a progressive myopathy is seen in adulthood.

normal. Glucagon administration 2 hours after a carbohydrate meal
provokes a normal increase in blood glucose. However, after an overnight fast, glucagon may provoke no change in blood glucose level.
Serum creatine kinase levels can be useful to identify patients with
muscle involvement, although normal levels do not rule out muscle
enzyme deficiency.

Diagnosis

The histologic appearance of the liver is characterized by a universal
distention of hepatocytes by glycogen and the presence of fibrous septa.
The fibrosis and the paucity of fat distinguish type III glycogenosis
from type I. The fibrosis, which ranges from minimal periportal fibrosis to micronodular cirrhosis, appears in most cases to be progressive.
Overt cirrhosis has been seen in some patients with GSD III.
Patients with myopathy and liver symptoms have a generalized
enzyme defect (type IIIa). The deficient enzyme activity can be demonstrated not only in liver and muscle but also in other tissues such
as heart, erythrocytes, and cultured fibroblasts. Patients with hepatic
symptoms without clinical or laboratory evidence of myopathy have
debranching enzyme deficiency only in the liver, with enzyme activity retained in the muscle (type IIIb). Before the availability of genetic
testing, a definitive diagnosis required enzyme assay in liver, muscle, or
both. Gene sequencing allows for diagnosis and subtype assignment in
the majority of patients.

Treatment

The mainstay of treatment of GSD III is dietary management, as in
GSD I, although it is less demanding. Patients do not need to restrict
dietary intake of fructose and galactose, although simple sugars should
be avoided to prevent sudden spikes in blood glucose levels. Hypoglycemia can be prevented by small frequent meals rich in complex carbohydrates, such as cornstarch supplements or nocturnal gastric drip
feedings. Additionally, a high-­protein diet during the daytime as well
as overnight protein enteral infusion is effective in preventing hypoglycemia. The exogenous protein can be used as a substrate for gluconeogenesis, which helps to meet energy needs and prevent endogenous

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

904 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
protein breakdown. Protein in the diet also reduces the overall starch
requirement. Overtreatment with cornstarch should be avoided, as
it can result in excessive glycogen buildup, which is detrimental and
can lead to excessive weight gain. Medium-­chain triglyceride (MCT)
supplementation and a high-­fat diet are being considered as alternative
sources of energy. There is no satisfactory treatment for the progressive
myopathy other than recommending a high-­protein diet, physical therapy, and high-­fat diet in some patients. Close monitoring with abdominal MRI is needed to detect progression of liver fibrosis to cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Additional imaging techniques, such
as hepatic elastography, are being developed. Liver transplantation has
been performed in GSD III patients with progressive cirrhosis and/or
HCC. There are reports of cardiac transplant in GSD III patients with
end-­stage cardiac disease.

Type IV Glycogen Storage Disease (Branching
Enzyme Deficiency, Amylopectinosis, Polyglucosan
Disease, Andersen Disease, Adult Polyglucosan Body
Disease)

Type IV GSD is caused by the deficiency of branching enzyme activity, which results in the accumulation of an abnormal glycogen with
poor solubility. The disease is also known as amylopectinosis because
the abnormal glycogen has fewer α-­1,6 branch points, more α-­1,4
linked glucose units, and longer outer chains, resulting in a structure
resembling amylopectin. These excessively long peripheral glucan
chains form polyglucosan bodies, which are positive on periodic acid–
Schiff (PAS) and resistant to diastase digestion. Polyglucosan body
accumulation is seen in all affected patients but to different degrees
and in different tissues.
Type IV GSD is an autosomal recessive disorder. The glycogen
branching enzyme (GBE1) gene has been noted, with more than 128
pathogenic variants responsible for type IV GSD, and their characterization in individual patients can be useful in predicting clinical
outcome. The nearly complete absence of glycogen branching enzyme
(GBE) activity with null alleles has been associated with perinatal death
and fatal neonatal hypotonia. Residual GBE activity results in a continuum of disease manifestations ranging from progressive hepatic
cirrhosis, slowly progressive or nonprogressive liver disease, cardiomyopathy, myopathy, peripheral neuropathy, motor neuron disease, and
leukodystrophy.

Clinical Manifestations

A high degree of clinical variability is associated with type IV GSD. The
most common and classic form is characterized by hepatic involvement with progressive cirrhosis of the liver and manifests in the first 18
months of life as hepatosplenomegaly and failure to thrive. Cirrhosis
may present with portal hypertension, ascites, and esophageal varices
and may progress to liver failure, usually leading to death by 5 years
of age. Some patients survive without progression of liver disease, and
they are considered to have a milder hepatic form and do not require
liver transplant. Extrahepatic involvement in some patients with GSD
IV consists of musculoskeletal involvement, particularly cardiac and
skeletal muscles, as well as central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS) involvement.
Neuromuscular forms of type IV GSD have been reported, with
four main subtypes recognized based on age at presentation. The perinatal form is characterized by a fetal akinesia deformation sequence
(FADS) and death in the perinatal period. The congenital form presents at birth with severe hypotonia, muscle atrophy, and neuronal
involvement, with death in the neonatal period; some patients have
cardiomyopathy. The childhood form presents primarily with myopathy or cardiomyopathy. The adult form, adult polyglucosan body disease
(APBD), presents with PNS dysfunction and diffuse CNS involvement,
accompanied by accumulation of polyglucosan material in the nervous
system. Symptoms of neuronal involvement include progressive muscle
weakness; gait spasticity; peripheral neuropathy; neuropathic bladder;
and, in many cases, leukodystrophy, mood disturbances, and cognitive
decline. APBD is often misdiagnosed as multiple sclerosis (MS), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or cerebral small-­vessel disease (CSVD).

Diagnosis

Deposition of amylopectin-­like materials varies and can be demonstrated in the liver, heart, muscle, skin, intestine, brain, brainstem, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves (i.e., sural nerve) in type IV
GSD. For patients with hepatic involvement, liver histology shows
micronodular cirrhosis and faintly stained basophilic inclusions
in hepatocytes. The inclusions are composed of coarsely clumped,
stored material that is PAS positive and partially resistant to diastase digestion. Electron microscopy (EM) shows, in addition to
the conventional α and β glycogen particles, the accumulation
of fibrillar aggregations that are typical of amylopectin. Similar
nonmembrane-­bound cytoplasmic inclusions (PAS positive, diastase resistant) are observed in the cardiomyocytes and skeletal
muscle fibers, and polyglucosan bodies may be present in the
muscle biopsy from those with neuromuscular manifestations. In
APBD, a peripheral nerve biopsy reveals intra-­axonal polyglucosan
bodies, and histologic examination of brain tissue shows polyglucosan bodies often visualized in the astrocytes and neurons. The
distinct staining properties of the inclusions, as well as EM findings, could be diagnostic. However, polysaccharides with histologic
features reminiscent of type IV disease but without enzymatic correlation have been observed. The diagnosis is confirmed by either
identification of two pathogenic variants in GBE1 or a reduction
of GBE activity in leukocytes or fibroblasts. Prenatal diagnosis is
possible by measuring enzyme activity in cultured amniocytes or
chorionic villi or by DNA-­based methodologies.

Treatment

There is no specific treatment for type IV GSD. Nervous system
involvement, such as gait problems and bladder involvement,
requires supportive, symptomatic management. Unlike patients
with other liver GSDs (I, III, VI, IX), those with GSD IV do not typically have hypoglycemia. Liver transplantation has been performed
for patients with progressive liver disease, but patients must be
carefully selected because this is a multisystem disease and, in some
patients, extrahepatic involvement may manifest or worsen after
transplant. Liver transplantation corrects the hepatic phenotype of
the disease but has no effects on the extrahepatic manifestations
such as myopathy and cardiomyopathy. Individuals with significant
diffuse reticuloendothelial involvement may have greater risk of
morbidity and mortality, which may affect the success rate for liver
transplant. Patients with symptomatic cardiomyopathy and skeletal myopathy may benefit from heart transplantation and physical
therapy, respectively.

Type VI Glycogen Storage Disease (Liver Phosphorylase Deficiency, Hers Disease)

Type VI GSD is caused by deficiency of liver glycogen phosphorylase. Patients usually present with hepatomegaly and growth stunting in infancy or early childhood. Hypoglycemia, hyperlipidemia,
and hyperketosis are of variable severity. Ketotic hypoglycemia may
present after overnight or prolonged fasting. Lactic acid and uric
acid levels are normal. Type VI GSD presents within a broad spectrum of involvement, some with a more severe clinical presentation.
Patients with severe hepatomegaly, recurrent severe hypoglycemia
and hyperketosis have been reported. Focal nodular hyperplasia of
liver, hepatocellular adenoma with transformation into carcinoma,
hepatic fibrosis, and cirrhosis have been reported in some patients.

Diagnosis

GSD VI is an autosomal recessive disease. Diagnosis can be confirmed
through molecular testing of the liver phosphorylase gene (PYGL).
Many pathogenic variants are known in this gene, and a splice-­site
variant in intron 13 has been identified in the Mennonite population. A
liver biopsy showing elevated glycogen content and decreased hepatic
phosphorylase enzyme activity can also be used to make a diagnosis,
especially in cases with inconclusive genetic results. However, with the
availability of DNA analysis and next-­generation sequencing (NGS)
panels, liver biopsies are usually unnecessary.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates
Treatment

Treatment is symptomatic and aimed at preventing hypoglycemia
while ensuring adequate nutrition. A low-­carbohydrate (45–50% of
total calories), high-­protein (2–3 g protein/kg body weight or 20–25%
of total calories) diet and frequent feeding are effective in preventing
hypoglycemia. Blood glucose and ketones should be monitored routinely, especially during periods of increased activity/illness. Long-­
term follow-­up of these patients is needed to monitor and manage the
complications and to expand the understanding of the natural history
of this disorder.

Type IX Glycogen Storage Disease (Phosphorylase
Kinase Deficiency)

Type IX GSD represents a heterogeneous group of glycogenoses
resulting from deficiency of the enzyme phosphorylase kinase
(PhK), which is involved in the rate-­limiting step of glycogenolysis.
This enzyme has four subunits (α, β, γ, δ), each encoded by different genes differentially expressed in various tissues. Pathogenic
variants in the PHKA1 gene cause muscle PhK deficiency; pathogenic variants in the PHKA2 and PHKG2 genes cause liver PhK
deficiency, and pathogenic variants in the PHKB gene cause PhK
deficiency in liver and muscle. Pathogenic variants in the PHKG1
gene have not been identified.
Clinical manifestations of liver PhK deficiency are usually recognizable within the first 2 years of life and include short stature
and abdominal distention from moderate to marked hepatomegaly.
The clinical severity of liver PhK deficiency varies considerably.
Hyperketotic hypoglycemia, if present, can be mild but may be
severe in some cases. Ketosis may occur even when glucose levels
are normal. Some children may have mild delays in gross motor
development and hypotonia. It is becoming increasingly clear that
GSD IX is not a benign condition. Severe phenotypes are reported,
with liver fibrosis progressing to cirrhosis and HCC, particularly
in patients with PHKG2 variants and also in some patients with
PHKA2 variants. Progressive splenomegaly and portal hypertension are reported secondary to cirrhosis. Interventricular septal
hypertrophy has been reported in a patient with GSD IX β (PHKB
variant). Cognitive and speech delays have been reported in a few
individuals, but it is not clear whether these delays are caused by
PhK deficiency or are coincidental. Renal tubular acidosis has
been reported in rare cases. Unlike in GSD I, lactic acidosis, bleeding tendency, and loose bowel movements are not characteristic.
Although growth is retarded during childhood, normal height and
complete sexual development are eventually achieved. As with
debrancher deficiency, abdominal distention and hepatomegaly
usually decrease with age. Some adults with liver PhK deficiency
are reportedly asymptomatic, although patients at the other end of
the spectrum develop cirrhosis and liver failure. Further studies are
needed to fully assess and understand the natural history of this
disorder in adults.
Phenotypic variability within each subtype is being uncovered with
the availability of molecular testing. The incidence of all subtypes of
PhK deficiency is approximately 1:100,000 live births.

Type IX α2 Glycogen Storage Disease (X-­Linked Liver
Phosphorylase Kinase Deficiency, PHKA2 Variant)

Glycogen storage disease IX α2 is one of the most common forms of
liver glycogenosis in males. A typical presentation for this condition
includes a young male (age 1-­5 years) with growth stunting, incidental
finding of hepatomegaly, and mild delays in motor development. In
addition to the liver, enzyme activity can also be deficient in erythrocytes, leukocytes, and fibroblasts, with normal enzyme activity in muscle. Cholesterol, triglycerides, and liver enzymes are elevated. Ketosis
may occur after fasting. Lactate and uric acid levels are normal. Hypoglycemia can range from mild to severe. The response in blood glucose to glucagon is normal. Although hepatomegaly and liver enzymes
might gradually reduce and normalize with age in some patients, other
groups exhibit an increase in these disease parameters comparable

905

to those observed in patients with GSD IX γ 2. Most adults achieve a
normal final height. It is increasingly recognized that this disorder is
not benign, as previously thought, and there are patients with severe
disease and long-­term hepatic sequelae. In some cases, liver fibrosis
can occur and progress to cirrhosis. Liver histology shows glycogen-­
distended hepatocytes, steatosis, fibrosis, and/or cirrhosis. Fibrous
septal formation and low-­grade inflammatory changes may be seen.
Adenomas have been also reported.
The gene for the common liver isoform of the PhK α subunit,
PHKA2, is located on the X chromosome (Xp22.2). Pathogenic variants in the PHKA2 gene account for 75% of all PhK cases. X-­linked
liver PhK deficiency is further subdivided into two biochemical subtypes: XLG1, with measurable deficiency of PhK activity in both blood
cells and liver, and XLG2, with normal in vitro PhK activity in blood
cells and variable activity in the liver. The mechanism through which
XLG2 exhibits normal or increased in vitro PhK activity is unknown.
Because of X-­inactivation leading to variable expression of the mutant
allele, some female carriers may develop symptoms ranging from mild
hepatomegaly to more severe symptoms.

Type IX β Glycogen Storage Disease (Autosomal
Liver and Muscle Phosphorylase Kinase Deficiency,
PHKB Variant)

PhK deficiency in liver and blood cells with an autosomal recessive
mode of inheritance has been reported. Similar to the X-­linked form,
chief symptoms in early childhood include hepatomegaly and growth
retardation. Some patients also exhibit muscle hypotonia. In a few
cases where enzyme activity has been measured, reduced PhK activity
has been demonstrated in muscle. Pathogenic variants are found in
PHKB (chromosome 16q12-­q13), which encodes the β subunit, and
result in liver and muscle PhK deficiency (GSD IX β). Several nonsense and missense variants, a single-­base insertion, splice-­site pathogenic variants, and a large intragenic pathogenic variant have been
identified.

Type IX γ2 Glycogen Storage Disease (Autosomal
Liver Phosphorylase Kinase Deficiency, PHKG2
Variant)

This form of PhK deficiency is caused by pathogenic variants in the
testis/liver isoform (TL) of the γ2 subunit of the PHKG2 gene. In contrast to GSD IX α2, patients with GSD IX γ2 typically have more severe
phenotypes, with recurrent hypoglycemia, prominent hepatomegaly,
significant liver fibrosis, and progressive cirrhosis. Hepatic adenomas
have been observed in several patients. Liver involvement occasionally
presents with cholestasis, bile duct proliferation, esophageal varices,
and splenomegaly. The spectrum of involvement continues to evolve
as more cases are recognized. Many pathogenic variants in the PHKG2
gene have been identified.

Diagnosis

Individuals with liver PhK deficiency usually have ketotic hypoglycemia, elevated transaminases, elevated triglycerides and cholesterol,
normal uric acid and lactic acid concentrations, and normal glucagon
response. PhK deficiency may be diagnosed by demonstration of the
enzymatic defect in affected tissues. Hepatic PhK activity can be measured in liver, leukocytes, and erythrocytes. The interpretation of PhK
activity results is complicated by the possibility of both false-­positive
and false-­negative results. False-­positive findings are possible, owing
to the labile nature of PhK, which is extremely sensitive to handling
circumstances and temperature exposure. As a result, extreme caution
is required when storing and transporting such diagnostic specimens.
Because the PhK enzyme has several isozymes, the diagnosis can easily be missed without the tissue where it is deficient (liver, muscle, or
cardiac studies).
Molecular genetic testing is preferable to enzyme assay for diagnosis,
as liver biopsy is an invasive procedure. Gene sequencing is used for
diagnostic confirmation and subtyping of GSD IX. The PHKA2 gene
encoding the α subunit is most frequently involved, followed by the
PHKB and PHKG2 genes encoding the β and γ subunits, respectively.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

906 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Treatment and Prognosis

The treatment for liver PhK deficiency is symptomatic and includes a
high-­protein (2-­3 g protein/kg body weight or 20–25% of total calories) diet with complex carbohydrates (45–50% of total calories) and
small, frequent feedings to prevent hypoglycemia. Cornstarch can be
administered, with symptom-­dependent dosage and timing (0.6-­2.5 g/
kg every 6 hours). Hypoglycemia should be treated with oral glucose, if
tolerated; if not, IV glucose should be given.
Patients with pathogenic variants in the γ subunit typically have
a more severe clinical course with progressive liver disease. In liver
biopsy samples, hepatic fibrosis/cirrhosis was detected in 50% and
95% of patients with PHKA2 and PHKG2 pathogenic variants, respectively. Two patients with GSD IX γ2 received liver transplantation, one
for liver failure secondary to cirrhosis and the other for HCC. Liver
involvement needs to be monitored in all patients with GSD IX by periodic imaging (abdominal ultrasound or MRI every 6-­12 months) and
serial hepatic function tests.

Type 0a Glycogen Storage Disease (Liver Glycogen
Synthase Deficiency)

Liver glycogen synthase deficiency type 0a (GSD 0a) is caused by
deficiency of hepatic glycogen synthase activity, leading to a marked
decrease of glycogen stored in the liver. It is caused by pathogenic variants in GYS2. The disease appears to be rare in humans and, in the
true sense, is not a type of GSD because the enzyme deficiency leads
to decreased glycogen stores. Patients present in infancy with early-­
morning (pre-­breakfast) drowsiness, pallor, emesis, and fatigue, and
occasional convulsions associated with hypoglycemia and hyperketonemia. Blood lactate and alanine levels are low, and there is no hyperlipidemia or hepatomegaly. Hyperglycemia, glycosuria, lactic acidosis,
and hyperalaninemia, with normal insulin levels after administration
of glucose or a meal, suggest a deficiency of glycogen synthase. Diagnosis may be through molecular testing that identifies pathogenic variants in GYS2 or by liver biopsy to measure the enzyme activity.
Treatment consists of frequent meals rich in protein and nighttime
supplementation with uncooked cornstarch to prevent hypoglycemia
and hyperketonemia. Most children with GSD 0a are cognitively and
developmentally age appropriate. Short stature and osteopenia are
common features. The prognosis seems good for patients who survive
to adulthood, with a decrease in the frequency and severity of hypoglycemia. Long-­term natural history studies are required to have a better understanding of the disease’s outcomes and the impact of dietary
therapy.

Hepatic Glycogenosis with Renal Fanconi Syndrome
(Fanconi-­Bickel Syndrome)

Fanconi-­Bickel syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused
by defects in the facilitative GLUT2, which transports glucose in and
out of hepatocytes, pancreatic β cells, and the basolateral membranes
of intestinal and renal epithelial cells. The disease is characterized by
proximal renal tubular dysfunction, impaired glucose and galactose
utilization, and accumulation of glycogen in the liver and kidney.
The affected child typically presents in the first year of life with failure to thrive, rickets, and a protuberant abdomen from hepatomegaly
and nephromegaly. The disease may be confused with GSD I because
a Fanconi-­like syndrome can also develop in that patient population.
Adult patients have short stature as a result of hypophosphatemic rickets. Patients are more susceptible to fractures because of early-­onset
generalized osteopenia. In addition, intestinal malabsorption and diarrhea may occur, and HCC has been seen. Laboratory findings include
glucosuria, phosphaturia, generalized aminoaciduria, bicarbonate
wasting, hypophosphatemia, increased serum alkaline phosphatase
levels, and radiologic findings of rickets. Mild fasting hypoglycemia
and hyperlipidemia may be present. Liver transaminase, plasma lactate, and uric acid levels are usually normal. Oral galactose or glucose
tolerance tests show intolerance, which could be explained by the functional loss of GLUT2 preventing liver uptake of these sugars. Tissue
biopsy results show marked accumulation of glycogen in hepatocytes
and proximal renal tubular cells, presumably from the altered glucose

transport out of these organs. Diffuse glomerular mesangial expansion,
along with glomerular hyperfiltration and microalbuminuria similar to
nephropathy in GSD Ia, and diabetes have been reported.
This condition is rare, and 70% of patients with Fanconi-­Bickel
syndrome have consanguineous parents. Most patients have homozygous pathogenic variants; some patients are compound heterozygotes. Several types of pathogenic variants in the SLC2A2 gene have
been described, including missense, nonsense, insertion/deletion, and
intronic variants.
There is no specific treatment. Symptom-­dependent treatment with
phosphate, bicarbonate, and uncooked cornstarch can result in growth
improvement. Growth may also improve with symptomatic replacement of water, electrolytes, and vitamin D and restriction of galactose
intake; a diet similar to that used for diabetes mellitus, with small, frequent meals using complex carbohydrates and adequate caloric intake,
is recommended.

MUSCLE GLYCOGENOSES

The role of glycogen in muscle is to provide substrates for the generation
of ATP for muscle contraction. The muscle GSDs are broadly divided
into two groups. The first group is characterized by hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, progressive skeletal muscle weakness and atrophy,
or both and includes deficiencies of acid α-­glucosidase, a lysosomal
glycogen-­
degrading enzyme (type II GSD); lysosomal-­
associated
membrane protein 2 (LAMP2/Danon disease); AMP-­activated protein kinase γ2 (PRKAG2/PRKAG2 syndrome); and muscle glycogen
synthase (type 0b). Glycogenin-­
1 deficiency (GYG1/polyglucosan
body myopathy 2) may manifest as muscle weakness and exercise
intolerance to exercise in the absence of cardiomyopathy.
The second group comprises muscle energy disorders characterized
by muscle pain, exercise intolerance, myoglobinuria, and susceptibility
to fatigue. This group includes myophosphorylase deficiency (McArdle
disease, type V GSD) and deficiencies of phosphofructokinase (type
VII), phosphoglycerate kinase, phosphoglycerate mutase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and muscle-­specific phosphorylase kinase (type IX
α1). Some of these latter enzyme deficiencies can also be associated
with compensated hemolysis, suggesting a more generalized defect in
glucose metabolism.

Type II Glycogen Storage Disease (Lysosomal Acid
α-­1,4-­Glucosidase Deficiency, Pompe Disease)

Pompe disease, also referred to as GSD type II or acid maltase deficiency, is caused by a deficiency of acid α-­1,4-­glucosidase, an enzyme
responsible for the degradation of glycogen in lysosomes. This enzyme
defect results in lysosomal glycogen accumulation in multiple tissues and
cell types, predominantly affecting cardiac, skeletal, and smooth muscle
cells and the nervous system. In Pompe disease, glycogen typically accumulates within lysosomes, as opposed to its accumulation in cytoplasm
in the other glycogenoses. However, as the disease progresses, lysosomal
rupture and leakage lead to the presence of cytoplasmic glycogen as well.
Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder. The incidence
was previously reported to be approximately 1 in 40,000 live births
in Whites and 1 in 18,000 live births in the Han Chinese population.
Newborn screening for Pompe disease in the United States suggests
that the prevalence is much higher than previously thought (between
1 in 10,000 and 1 in 25,000). More than 600 pathogenic variants have
been identified in the gene for acid α-­glucosidase (GAA) and are helpful in delineating the phenotypes. A splice-­site variant (c.-32-13 T > G,
formerly called IVS1-13 T > G) is commonly seen in White patients
with late-­onset disease.

Clinical Manifestations

Pompe disease is broadly classified into infantile and late-­onset forms.
The infantile presentation is a continuum and is further divided into
two categories: classic and nonclassic. Classic infantile Pompe disease (IPD) is uniformly lethal without enzyme replacement therapy
(ERT) with alglucosidase alfa. Affected infants present in the first days
to weeks of life with hypotonia, generalized muscle weakness with a
hypotonic floppy infant appearance, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates
with or without left ventricular outflow obstruction, feeding difficulties, macroglossia, and hepatomegaly; if untreated, the condition leads
to death from cardiorespiratory failure or respiratory infection by 1
year of age. Nonclassic IPD has a slower disease course and a less severe
cardiac phenotype at initial presentation.
Late-­
onset Pompe disease (LOPD; juvenile-­
, childhood-­
, and
adult-­onset disease) is characterized by proximal limb girdle muscle
weakness and early involvement of respiratory muscles, especially
the diaphragm. The distinguishing feature between IPD and LOPD
is absence of cardiomyopathy in the first year of life in patients with
LOPD. Symptoms related to progressive dysfunction of skeletal muscles can start within the first year of life to as late as the sixth decade.
The clinical picture is dominated by slowly progressive proximal muscle weakness, with truncal involvement and greater involvement of the
lower limbs than the upper limbs. The pelvic girdle, paraspinal muscles, and diaphragm are the muscle groups most seriously affected in
patients with LOPD. Cardiac involvement can occur and ranges from
cardiac rhythm disturbances to cardiomyopathy. Other symptoms may
include lingual weakness, ptosis, and dilation of blood vessels (e.g.,
basilar artery, ascending aorta). With disease progression, patients
become confined to a wheelchair and require artificial ventilation. The
initial symptoms in some patients may be respiratory insufficiency
manifested by somnolence, morning headache, orthopnea, and exertional dyspnea, which eventually lead to sleep-­disordered breathing
and respiratory failure. Respiratory failure is the cause of significant
morbidity and mortality in LOPD. Basilar artery aneurysms with rupture also contribute to mortality in some cases. Small-­fiber neuropathy
presenting as painful paresthesia has been identified in some LOPD
patients. Gastrointestinal disturbances such as postprandial bloating,
dysphagia, early satiety, diarrhea, chronic constipation, and IBD have
been reported. Genitourinary tract involvement is not uncommon and
may present as bladder and bowel incontinence, weak urine stream, or
dribbling. If untreated, the age of death varies from early childhood to
late adulthood, depending on the rate of disease progression and the
extent of respiratory muscle involvement. With the advent of ERT, a
new natural history is emerging for survivors of both IPD and LOPD.

Laboratory Findings

Pertinent laboratory findings include elevated levels of serum creatine
kinase (CK), aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT),
and LDH. Urine glucose tetrasaccharide (Glc4), a glycogen breakdown
metabolite, is a reliable biomarker for gauging disease severity and progression, as well as treatment response. Levels of Glc4 are extremely
elevated in patients with IPD. In the infantile form, a chest x-­ray film
showing massive cardiomegaly is frequently the first symptom detected.
Electrocardiographic findings include a high-­voltage QRS complex,
Wolff-­Parkinson-­White (WPW) syndrome, and a shortened PR interval. Echocardiography reveals thickening of both ventricles and/or the
intraventricular septum and/or left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. Dilated cardiomyopathy and a low ejection fraction have also
been reported. Muscle biopsy shows the presence of vacuoles that stain
positively for glycogen; acid phosphatase is increased, presumably from
a compensatory increase of lysosomal enzymes. EM reveals glycogen
accumulation within a membranous sac and with disease progression
also in the cytoplasm. EMG reveals myopathic features with excessive
electrical irritability of muscle fibers and pseudomyotonic discharges.
Serum CK is not always elevated in adult patients. Depending on the
muscle sampled or tested, the muscle histologic appearance and electromyography may not be abnormal. Some patients with infantile Pompe
disease who had peripheral nerve biopsies demonstrated glycogen
accumulation in the neurons and Schwann cells.

Diagnosis

A diagnosis of Pompe disease can be made by either enzyme assay in
dried blood spots, leukocytes, blood mononuclear cells, muscle, or
cultured skin fibroblasts demonstrating deficient acid α-­glucosidase
activity or gene sequencing showing two pathogenic variants in the
GAA gene. The enzyme assay should be done in a laboratory with
experience using maltose, glycogen, or 4-­methylumbelliferyl-­α-­d-­glu

907

copyranoside (4MUG) as a substrate. In fibroblast enzyme assays, the
infantile form has a more severe enzyme deficiency (less than 1% of
that in normal controls) than the late-­onset forms (between 1% and
30% of that in normal controls). Blood-­based assays, especially dried
blood spots, have the advantage of being quick and noninvasive and
are increasingly being used as the first-­line sample to make a diagnosis.
The presence of the neutral α-­glucosidase isoenzyme, which interferes
with acid glucosidase, was formerly considered to be a disadvantage
in blood-­based assays. However, the addition of an inhibitor to this
isozyme, acarbose, improves the assay’s reliability by blocking isoenzyme activity. A muscle biopsy is often done with suspected muscle
disease and a broad diagnostic differential, as it yields faster results
and provides additional information about glycogen content and site
of glycogen storage within and outside the lysosomes of muscle cells.
However, a normal muscle biopsy, especially in patients with LOPD,
does not exclude a diagnosis of Pompe disease. Late-­onset patients
show variability in glycogen accumulation in different muscles and
within muscle fibers, and muscle histology and glycogen content can
vary depending on the site of muscle biopsy. Because of the high risk
of complications, anesthesia in infantile cases with significant cardiomyopathy should be reserved for situations where it is necessary. Availability of NGS panels and whole exome or genome sequencing allow
for identification of additional patients with Pompe disease, especially
when the diagnosis is ambiguous. GAA enzyme activity can be measured in chorionic villi or amniocytes for prenatal diagnosis; however,
if the familial pathogenic variants are known, molecular genetic testing
is the recommended approach.

Treatment

ERT with recombinant human acid α-­glucosidase (alglucosidase alfa
and avalgluco) is available for treatment of Pompe disease. Recombinant acid α-­glucosidase can prevent deterioration or reversing abnormal cardiac and skeletal muscle functions (Fig. 107.3). ERT should be
initiated as soon as possible across the disease spectrum, especially for
infants with the infantile form, because the disease is rapidly progressive. Infants who are negative for cross-­reacting immunologic material
(CRIM) (i.e., infants that have no detectable GAA on a Western blot),
develop a high-­titer antibody against the infused enzyme and respond
to ERT less favorably. A subset of CRIM-­positive patients (presence of
some protein on a Western blot) can also develop high and sustained
antibody titers to ERT. Treatment using immunomodulating agents
such as methotrexate, rituximab, and intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) have demonstrated efficacy in preventing the development of
an immune response to ERT and immune tolerance. Nocturnal ventilatory support, when indicated, should be used. It has been shown to
improve the quality of life and is particularly beneficial during a period
of respiratory decompensation. In addition to ERT, other adjunctive
therapies have demonstrated benefit in patients with Pompe disease.
For patients with late-­onset disease, a high-­protein, low-­carbohydrate
diet may be beneficial. Respiratory muscle strength training has demonstrated improvements in respiratory parameters when combined
with ERT. Submaximal aerobic exercise regimens are beneficial in
improving muscle strength, pain, and fatigue.
A second-­generation ERT, avalglucosidase alfa (NeoGAA), has been
recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the
treatment of individuals with LOPD older than 1 year of age. Mannose-­6-­
phosphate (M6P) is more abundant in NeoGAA than in alglucosidase alfa,
which improves enzyme uptake into cells. Improvements in respiratory
function (forced vital capacity [FVC]) and 6-­minute walk test (6MWT) in
patients with LOPD have been shown by phase 1/2 and 3 trials.
There are other therapies in development for Pompe disease, including intravenous cipaglucosidase alfa (a novel recombinant human GAA
with high bis-­M6P content; functions as substrate reduction therapy),
miglustat (an oral chaperone; functions as enzyme stabilizer), small-­
molecule therapy, and gene therapy.
Early diagnosis and treatment are necessary for optimal outcomes.
Newborn screening using blood-­based assays in Taiwan and 28 U.S.
states has resulted in early identification of Pompe cases, and thus
improved disease outcomes, through the early initiation of ERT.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

908 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Pre-treatment

A

Post-treatment

B

Fig. 107.3 Chest radiograph and muscle histology findings of an infantile-­onset Pompe disease patient before (A) and after (B) enzyme replace-

ment therapy. Note the decrease in heart size and muscle glycogen with therapy. (Modified from Amalfitano A, Bengur AR, Morse RP, et al. Recombinant human acid alpha-­glucosidase enzyme therapy for infantile glycogen storage disease type II: results of a phase I/II clinical trial. Genet Med.
2001;3:132–138.)

Danon Disease

Danon disease is caused by pathogenic variants in the LAMP2 gene,
which leads to a deficiency of lysosomal-­associated membrane protein
2 (LAMP2). This disorder is inherited in an X-­linked dominant pattern.
Defects in LAMP2 lead to accumulation of glycogen in the heart and
skeletal muscle, presenting primarily as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
and skeletal muscle weakness. Danon disease can be distinguished from
the usual causes of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (defects in sarcomere-­
protein genes) by the electrophysiologic abnormalities, particularly
ventricular preexcitation and conduction defects. Patients present with
cardiac symptoms, including chest pain, palpitations, syncope, and cardiac arrest, usually between ages 8 and 15 years. Other clinical manifestations include peripheral pigmentary retinopathy, lenticular changes,
abnormal electroretinogram, and mild cognitive dysfunction. Diagnosis
can be established by molecular testing of the LAMP2 gene. The prognosis for LAMP2 deficiency is poor, with progressive end-­stage heart failure
early in adulthood. Treatment is directed toward management of symptoms in affected individuals, including management of cardiomyopathy,
correction of arrhythmias, and physical therapy for muscle weakness.
Cardiac transplantation has been successful in some patients. In male
patients with Danon disease, a nonrandomized open-­label phase 1 study
(NCT03882437) is currently being conducted to assess the safety of gene
therapy using recombinant adeno-­associated virus serotype 9 (AAV9)
containing the human lysosome-­associated membrane protein 2 isoform
B (LAMP2B) transgene.

PRKAG2 Syndrome (Adenosine Monophosphate
[AMP]–Activated Protein Kinase γ2 Deficiency)

PRKAG2 syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in the PRKAG2
gene that is required for the synthesis of the enzyme AMP-­activated
protein kinase (AMPK), which regulates cellular pathways involved
in ATP metabolism. PRKAG2 syndrome has an autosomal dominant
pattern of inheritance. Common presentations include hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and electrophysiologic abnormalities such as WPW

syndrome, atrial fibrillation, and progressive atrioventricular block.
Cardiac involvement is variable and includes supraventricular tachycardia, sinus bradycardia, left ventricular dysfunction, and sudden
cardiac death in some cases. In addition to cardiac involvement, there
is a broad spectrum of phenotypic presentations including myalgia,
myopathy, and seizures. Cardiomyopathy caused by PRKAG2 variants usually allows for long-­term survival, although a rare congenital form presenting in early infancy is associated with a rapidly fatal
course. Cardiomyopathy in PRKAG2 syndrome often mimics that in
other conditions, especially Pompe disease, and should be considered
as a differential diagnosis in infants presenting with severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Treatment is primarily symptomatic, including
management of cardiac failure and correction of conduction defects.
Patients with PRKAG2 deficiency are at risk for sudden cardiac death
and require close monitoring.

Type 0b Glycogen Storage Disease (Muscle Glycogen
Synthase Deficiency)

Muscle glycogen synthase deficiency (GSD 0b) results from biallelic loss-­
of-­function pathogenic variants in the gene GYS1. In the true sense, this
is not a type of GSD because the enzyme deficiency leads to decreased
glycogen stores in skeletal and cardiac muscles. The disease is extremely
rare and has only been reported in five cases. Muscle biopsies showed
lack of glycogen, predominantly oxidative fibers, and mitochondrial
proliferation. Glucose tolerance testing was normal. The phenotype
was variable and ranged from sudden cardiac arrest, muscle fatigability, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, abnormal heart rate, and hypotension
while exercising to mildly impaired cardiac function at rest.

Type XV Glycogen Storage Disease (Glycogenin-­1
Deficiency, Polyglucosan Body Myopathy 2, GYG1
Variant)

Polyglucosan body myopathy 2 is an autosomal recessive, slowly progressive skeletal myopathy caused by pathogenic variants in the GYG1

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates
gene disrupting glycogenin-­1 biosynthesis. There is a reduced or complete absence of glyogenin-­1, which is a precursor necessary for glycogen formation. Polyglucosan accumulation in skeletal muscles causes
juvenile-­or adult-­onset proximal muscle weakness, prominently affecting the hip and shoulder girdles. Some patients were noted to have a
cardiac phenotype. Exertion-induced chest pain, palpitations, and
shortness of breath are common early symptoms. Changes in electrophysiological (ECG) parameters and impairment of left ventricular
function were reported. Heart transplantation may be necessary in
some cases. The missense variant c.304G>C (p. Asp102His) has been
observed in homozygosity in the majority of these patients. Compared
with GSD IV–APBD, nervous system involvement is uncommon,
although polyglucosan deposition is seen in both disorders. Muscle
biopsies show PAS-­
positive, diastase-­
resistant storage material in
30–40% of muscle fibers. EM reveals the typical polyglucosan structure,
consisting of an ovoid form composed of partly filamentous material.

Type V Glycogen Storage Disease (Muscle Phosphorylase Deficiency, McArdle Disease)

GSD type V, the prototype of muscle energy disorders, is one of the
most common GSDs with a prevalence of ∼1 in 10,000 and is caused
by deficiency of myophosphorylase activity. Lack of this enzyme limits
muscle ATP generation from glycogenolysis, resulting in muscle glycogen accumulation. A deficiency of myophosphorylase impairs the
cleavage of glucosyl molecules from the straight chain of glycogen.

Clinical Manifestations

Symptoms usually first develop in late childhood or in the second
decade of life. Studies have shown that McArdle disease can manifest
in individuals as old as in their seventh decade and in infancy in a
fatal, early-­onset form characterized by hypotonia, generalized muscle weakness, and respiratory complications. Symptoms are generally
characterized by exercise intolerance with muscle cramps and pain
and are precipitated by two types of activity: (1) brief, high-­intensity
exercise, such as sprinting or carrying heavy loads and (2) less intense
but sustained activity, such as climbing stairs or walking uphill. Most
patients can perform moderate exercise, such as walking on level
ground, for long periods. Many patients experience a characteristic
second-­wind phenomenon, with relief of muscle pain and fatigue after
a brief period of rest. An increased blood flow of glucose derived from
either endogenous liver glycogenolysis or exogenous glucose and free
fatty acids, which may be used as an alternative energy source by the
exercising muscles, causes the second-­wind phenomenon. As a result
of the underlying myopathy, these patients may be at risk for statin-­
induced myopathy and rhabdomyolysis. Although patients typically
experience episodic muscle pain and cramping from exercise, up to
35% of patients with McArdle disease report permanent pain that has a
serious impact on sleep and other activities.
Approximately 50% of patients report burgundy-­colored urine after
exercise as a result of exercise-­induced myoglobinuria secondary to
rhabdomyolysis. Excessive myoglobinuria after intense exercise may
precipitate acute renal failure.
Laboratory findings include elevated serum CK levels at rest, which
further increase after exercise. Exercise also elevates the levels of blood
ammonia, inosine, hypoxanthine, and uric acid, which may be attributed to accelerated recycling of muscle purine nucleotides caused by
insufficient ATP production.

Diagnosis

Type V GSD is an autosomal recessive disorder. Testing of the gene for
muscle phosphorylase (PYGM) helps confirm the diagnosis of GSD V. A
common nonsense variant, c.148C>T (p.Arg50Ter) in exon 1, is found
in 80% of White patients; deletion of a single codon, c.2128_2130del
(p.Phe710del) in exon 17, is found in 61% of patients of Japanese origin. The c.148C>T (p.Arg50Ter) variant represents 55% of alleles in
patients of Spanish descent, and the c.2392T>C (p.Trp798Arg) and
c.613G>A (p.Gly205Ser) variants represent 10% and 9% of pathogenic
alleles in this population. Muscle biopsy can be used to measure glycogen content and enzyme activity in cases where genetic testing results

909

are inconclusive. Lack of an increase in blood lactate levels and exaggerated blood ammonia elevations suggest a defect in the conversion of
muscle glycogen or glucose to lactate. An ischemic exercise test offers
rapid diagnostic screening for patients suspected to have McArdle disease, though it should be noted that an abnormal response is not limited
to type V GSD, as other muscle defects in glycogenolysis or glycolysis
produce similar results (deficiencies of muscle phosphofructokinase,
phosphoglycerate kinase, phosphoglycerate mutase, or LDH). Additionally, such testing was also associated with severe complications and
false-­positive results. A nonischemic forearm exercise test with high
sensitivity that is easy to perform and is cost-­effective has been deemed
a more appropriate diagnostic tool; however, it also cannot differentiate
abnormal exercise responses due to type V disease from other defects
in glycogenolysis or glycolysis.

Treatment

To enhance patients’ outcomes and physical activity capacity, a
multidisciplinary team approach to care composed of a physician,
physiotherapist, psychologist, clinical nurse, and dietitian is advised.
Avoidance of strenuous exercise prevents symptoms; regular and moderate exercise is recommended to improve exercise capacity. Patients
are advised to take advantage of the second-­wind phenomenon by
commencing exercise slowly and to slow down or stop if muscle weakness or discomfort, increased heart rate, or increased respiratory effort
occurs. This slow-­pause-­resume pattern is intended to be maintained as
needed until considerable improvement in physical activity tolerance
occurs.
High-­dose oral ribose, glucagon, verapamil, vitamin B6, a high-­
protein diet, branched-­chain amino acid supplementation, dantrolene
sodium, high-­dose creatine, intravenous gentamicin, and intralipid
infusion treatments showed no benefit according to a revised and
updated systematic review in the Cochrane Database of nutritional and
pharmacologic trials for GSD V. Oral sucrose ingestion before exercise,
a carbohydrate-­rich diet, ramipril, and low-­dose creatine were treatments that showed some promise. There is ongoing research regarding
the benefits of a low-­carbohydrate ketogenic diet in patients with type
V GSD.

Type VII Glycogen Storage Disease (Muscle Phosphofructokinase Deficiency, Tarui Disease)

Type VII GSD is caused by pathogenic variants in the PFKM gene,
which result in a deficiency of muscle phosphofructokinase enzyme.
This enzyme is a key regulatory enzyme of glycolysis and is necessary for the ATP-­dependent conversion of fructose-­6-­phosphate to
fructose-­1,6-­diphosphate. Phosphofructokinase is composed of three
isoenzyme subunits according to the tissue type, encoded by different
genes: (PFKM [M: muscle], PFKL [L: liver], and PFKP [P: platelet]).
Skeletal muscle has only the M subunit, whereas red blood cells (RBCs)
express a combination of L and M forms. In type VII GSD, the M isoenzyme is defective, resulting in complete deficiency of enzyme activity
in muscle and a partial deficiency in RBCs.
Type VII GSD is an autosomal recessive disorder with increased
prevalence in individuals of Japanese ancestry and Ashkenazi Jewish background. A splicing defect and a nucleotide deletion in PFKM
account for 95% of pathogenic variants in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. Diagnosis based on molecular testing for the common variants
is possible in this population.

Clinical Manifestations

Although the clinical picture is similar to that of type V GSD, the following features of type VII GSD are distinctive:
• Exercise intolerance, which usually commences in childhood, is
more severe than in type V disease and may be associated with nausea, vomiting, and severe muscle pain. Vigorous exercise causes severe muscle cramps and myoglobinuria.
• Compensatory hemolysis occurs, as indicated by an increased level
of serum bilirubin and an elevated reticulocyte count.
• Hyperuricemia is common and exaggerated by muscle exercise to a
greater degree than that observed in type V GSD.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

910 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
In addition to normal glycogen, GSD VII is characterized by the
accumulation of polyglucosan bodies. The accumulation of glucose-­6-­
phosphate caused by PFKM deficiency and the inhibition of glycolysis
stimulate the glycogen synthase enzyme, resulting in the formation of
polyglucosan bodies.
Exercise intolerance is especially worse after carbohydrate-­
rich
meals because the ingested glucose prevents lipolysis, thereby depriving muscle of fatty acid and ketone substrates. This is called the out-­
of-­wind phenomenon, in contrast to patients with type V disease who
can metabolize blood-­borne glucose derived from either endogenous
liver glycogenolysis or exogenous glucose. Indeed, glucose infusion
improves exercise tolerance in patients with type V disease.
The second-­wind phenomenon is absent because of the inability to
break down blood glucose.
Several rare type VII presentations have been described. One form
presents in infancy with hypotonia and limb weakness and proceeds to
a rapidly progressive myopathy that leads to death by 4 years of age. A
second type occurs in infancy and results in congenital myopathy and
arthrogryposis, with a fatal outcome. A third form presents in infancy
with hypotonia, mild developmental delay, and seizures. An additional
presentation is hereditary nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia; although
these patients do not experience muscle symptoms, it remains unclear
whether these symptoms will develop later in life. Another group of
individuals with asymptomatic partial red cell PFK deficiency has been
described. One phenotype presents in adults and is characterized by
a slowly progressive, fixed muscle weakness rather than cramps and
myoglobinuria. It may also cause mitral valve thickening from glycogen buildup. Myopathy and hemolysis are hallmarks of the classic form.

established, patients with the diagnosis should be monitored for developmental concerns.
The gene for the muscle γ subunit (PHKG1) is on chromosome
7p11.2, and no pathogenic variants in this gene have been reported
to date.

Diagnosis

107.2 Defects in Galactose Metabolism

To establish a diagnosis, gene sequencing can identify pathogenic variants in the PFKM gene. Demonstration of the enzymatic deficiency
in muscle may be required in some cases. The absence of the M isoenzyme of phosphofructokinase can also be demonstrated in muscle,
blood cells, and fibroblasts.

Treatment

Strenuous exercise should be avoided to prevent acute episodes of muscle cramps, myoglobinuria, acute renal failure, and compartment syndrome. Continuous blood pressure monitoring or compressive devices,
as well as the use of tourniquets, are contraindicated in these patients.
Patients with GSD VII should follow the same slow-­pause-­resume routine as those with GSD V. Dietary therapy for GSD VII has not been
thoroughly investigated. A ketogenic diet has been reported to show
clinical improvement in a patient with GSD VII. Carbohydrate meals
and glucose infusions have demonstrated worsening symptoms because
of the body’s inability to use glucose. The administered glucose tends to
lower the levels of fatty acids in the blood—a primary source of muscle
fuel. Drugs such as statins should be avoided. Precautionary measures
should be taken to avoid hyperthermia, hypothermia, hypoglycemia,
and shivering while undergoing anesthesia in both GSD V and GSD VII.

Type IX α1 Glycogen Storage Disease (Muscle-­
Specific Phosphorylase Kinase Deficiency, PHKA1
Variant)

X-­linked muscle PhK deficiency (IX α1 GSD) is caused by pathogenic
variants in the PHKA1 gene, which encodes a muscle-­specific regulatory subunit (α subunit) of phosphorylase kinase and is located on
Xq13.11. The condition is male-­predominant, but affected heterozygous females have been reported. Patients generally present with mild to
severe exercise intolerance in childhood or adolescence. Most patients
have elevated serum CK and, in more involved cases, myoglobulinuria.
There is no evidence of hepatic or cardiac disease in these patients.
Blood phosphorylase kinase enzymatic activity is normal, and the
enzyme activity is decreased to deficient in the muscle. Muscle biopsy
reveals subsarcolemmal accumulations of glycogen, and some patients
have myopathic changes on EMG. One patient has been described with
comorbid muscle PhK deficiency and intellectual disability; although a
connection between PHKA1 and neurodevelopment has not yet been

Other Muscle Glycogenoses with Muscle Energy
Impairment

Five additional defects in enzymes—phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK),
phosphoglycerate mutase (PGAM), LDH, fructose-­1,6-­bisphosphate
aldolase (aldolase A), and β-­enolase in the pathway of the terminal
glycolysis—cause symptoms and signs of muscle energy impairment
similar to those in types V and VII GSD. Deficiency in PGAM, enolase,
or LDH causes a myopathic phenotype marked by exercise-­induced
cramps and myoglobinuria. Patients with aldolase A or PGK deficiencies may present with hemolytic anemia in conjunction with myopathy.
The failure of blood lactate to increase in response to exercise is a useful screening test and can be used to differentiate muscle glycogenoses
from disorders of lipid metabolism, such as carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency and very long-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, which also cause muscle cramps and myoglobinuria. Muscle
glycogen levels can be normal in the disorders affecting terminal
glycolysis, and molecular testing or muscle enzyme activity assay is
needed to make a definitive diagnosis. There is no specific treatment
(see preceding “Treatment” section).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Ghada Hijazi and Priya S. Kishnani
Milk and dairy products contain lactose, the major dietary source
of galactose. The metabolism of galactose produces fuel for cellular metabolism through its conversion to glucose-­1-­phosphate (see
Table 107.1). Galactose also plays an important role in the formation
of galactosides, which include glycoproteins, glycolipids, and glycosaminoglycans. Galactosemia is a term that refers to an abnormally
high quantity of galactose in the blood. It can be caused by one of
four distinct inborn defects in galactose metabolism involving one of
the following enzymes: galactose mutarotase (GALM), galactokinase
(GALK), galactose-­1-­phosphate uridyl transferase (GALT), and uridine diphosphate galactose-­4-­epimerase (GALE). Among these, the
most serious defect is severe GALT deficiency or classic galactosemia,
which is frequently referred to as galactosemia.

GALACTOSE-­1-­PHOSPHATE URIDYL TRANSFERASE
DEFICIENCY GALACTOSEMIA

Two forms of the deficiency exist: infants with complete or near-­
complete deficiency of the enzyme (classic galactosemia) and those
with partial transferase deficiency. Classic galactosemia is a serious
disease with onset of symptoms typically by the second half of the first
week of life. The incidence is approximately 1 in 60,000 live births. The
newborn infant receives high amounts of lactose (up to 40% in breast
milk and certain formulas), which consists of equal parts of glucose
and galactose. Without the transferase enzyme, the infant is unable to
metabolize galactose-­1-­phosphate, the accumulation of which results
in injury to the liver, kidney, and brain. This injury may begin prenatally in the affected fetus by endogenous fetal production of galactose.

Clinical Manifestations

The diagnosis of uridyl transferase deficiency should be considered in
newborn or young infants with any of the following features within a few
days or weeks after birth: jaundice, hepatomegaly, vomiting, hypoglycemia, seizures, lethargy, irritability, feeding difficulties, poor weight gain or
failure to regain birthweight, and aminoaciduria. Untreated children may
show nuclear cataracts, vitreous hemorrhage, hepatic failure, cirrhosis,
ascites, splenomegaly, or intellectual disability. Patients with galactosemia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates
are at increased risk for Escherichia coli neonatal sepsis; the onset of sepsis often precedes the diagnosis of galactosemia. Pseudotumor cerebri has
been reported in some patients, presenting with failure to thrive and a
bulging anterior fontanel. Complete withdrawal of lactose from the diet
results in improvement of the acute symptoms. If untreated, death from
liver failure and sepsis may follow within days. When the diagnosis is not
made at birth, damage to the liver (cirrhosis) and brain (intellectual disability) becomes increasingly severe and irreversible.
Partial transferase deficiency is classified into two subtypes: clinical variant galactosemia (erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity is ≥1% of
controls, but not more than 10–15%) and biochemical (Duarte) variant
galactosemia (erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity is ≥25% of controls).
Partial transferase deficiency is more common than classic galactosemia and is diagnosed in the newborn screening setting because of
moderately elevated blood galactose and/or low transferase activity.
Clinical variant galactosemia should be considered in the newborn or
young infant who is not thriving or who exhibits any of the classical
galactosemia-­related symptoms. Generally, biochemical (Duarte) variant galactosemia is asymptomatic. There is no evidence that individuals
with biochemical (Duarte) variant galactosemia have an increased risk
of neurodevelopmental problems or premature ovarian insufficiency.
Additional research is required to properly understand and describe
the natural history of this subtype.

Diagnosis

Historically, the detection of a reducing substance in several urine specimens obtained when the patient is on a diet containing human milk,
cow’s milk, or any other lactose-­containing formula was regarded as
strongly indicative of galactosemia. The clue was detecting a reducing
substance in urine by Clinitest strips (e.g., glucose, galactose) that is
negative by Clinistix (which is specific for glucose only). Galactose can
also be identified by chromatography or an enzymatic test specific for
galactose. Galactose can be detected in urine, provided the milk feeding
was within the last few hours and the child is not vomiting excessively.
The addition of galactosemia to the newborn screening panel resulted
in a considerable reduction in the utility of Clinitest strips for galactosemia screening. Amino acids may be detected in urine (aminoaciduria)
because they are excreted together with glucose as a result of proximal
renal tubular dysfunction. Because galactose is injurious to persons with
galactosemia, diagnostic challenge tests dependent on administering
galactose orally or intravenously should not be used. Direct enzyme assay
using erythrocytes establishes the diagnosis. The clinician must confirm
that the patient did not receive a blood transfusion before the collection of the blood sample for enzyme assay activity in RBCs, because this
may lead to a false-­negative result, and the diagnosis could be missed.
The activity of galactose-­1-­phosphate uridyl transferase in erythrocytes
can be measured in a variety of ways, one of which involves the use of
a nonradioactive assay using high-­performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) separation and ultraviolet (UV) light detection. Patients with
glucose-­6-­phosphate-­dehydrogenase deficiency can have false-­positive
results. In classic galactosemia, metabolites (urinary galactitol, red cell
galactose-­1-­phosphate, and blood galactose concentration) may be elevated and can be used to confirm the diagnosis and monitor the response
to dietary changes and metabolic control.

Genetics

GALT deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic
variants in the GALT gene. Based on newborn screening in the United
States, the frequency of the disease is approximately 1 in 47,000 live births.
There are several enzymatic variants of galactosemia. More than 327
pathogenic variants have been associated with GALT deficiency. The most
common pathogenic variants that result in classic galactosemia phenotype
are c.563A>G (p.Gln188Arg), c.855G>T (p.Lys285Asn), and c.584T>C
(p.Leu195Pro). In Whites, the p.Gln188Arg variant is linked to an
increased incidence of severe disease, premature ovarian insufficiency, and
speech problems in a homozygous state. In Blacks p.Ser135Leu is common,
which results in a milder phenotype (clinical variant galactosemia) despite
the absence of measurable GALT activity in erythrocytes. These patients
retain 10% of enzyme activity in the liver and intestinal mucosa. When

911

treated early, Blacks who are homozygous for this variant are not at risk
for neonatal E. coli sepsis or chronic complications (i.e., premature ovarian insufficiency and language delay). Four pathogenic variants are unique
to the Duarte variant (D2): a four–base pair (bp) deletion in the GALT
promoter region (c.-­119-­116delGTCA), a c.378-­27G>C, a c.508-­24G>A,
and a c.507+62G>A. A fifth variant is a single amino acid substitution
(c.940A>G, p.Asn314Asp, also called N314D), which has been observed
in both the Duarte variant and functionally normal GALT alleles. Individuals heterozygous for Duarte variant galactosemia typically have 25%
of normal galactose activity. Symptoms are minimal or absent, metabolites
range from elevated to normal, and there is no need for intervention. Carrier testing and prenatal diagnosis can be performed by molecular testing
or, less commonly, direct enzyme assay on amniocytes or chorionic villi.

Treatment and Prognosis

Consensus guidelines recommend treating patients with an RBC
GALT enzyme activity of ≤10% and erythrocyte galactose-­1-­phosphate
concentration of >10 mg/dL. The decision of whether to treat those
with 10–15% RBC residual GALT activity is still a matter of debate.
All galactose-­containing foods should be removed from the diet on
initial suspicion of galactosemia. Various non–lactose-­containing milk
substitutes are available (casein hydrolysates, soybean-­based formula).
A galactose-­restricted diet, along with adequate calcium and vitamin
D supplementation, reverses growth failure and hepatic dysfunction.
Cataracts regress, and most patients have no persistent impairment of
vision. Early diagnosis and treatment have improved the prognosis of
galactosemia. On long-­term follow-­up, patients still manifest ovarian
failure with primary or secondary amenorrhea, decreased bone mineral density, developmental delay, and learning disabilities that increase
in severity with age. Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism is reported in
80–90+% of female patients with classic galactosemia. Although most
females with classic galactosemia are infertile when they reach childbearing age, a small number have given birth. Females with the Duarte
variant galactosemia and who are homozygous for p.Ser135Leu do not
develop premature ovarian insufficiency. Most patients manifest speech
disorders, whereas a smaller number demonstrate poor growth and
impaired motor function and balance (with or without overt ataxia).
Strict dietary restriction and relative control of galactose-­1-­phosphate
levels do not always correlate with long-­term outcome, leading to the
belief that other factors such as elevated galactitol, decreased uridine
diphosphate galactose (a donor for galactolipids and proteins), and
endogenous galactose production may be responsible.

GALACTOKINASE DEFICIENCY

The deficient enzyme is galactokinase, which normally catalyzes the phosphorylation of galactose. The principal metabolites accumulated are galactose and galactitol. Two genes encode enzymes with galactokinase activity,
GALK1 and GALK2, although pathogenic variants have been noted only
in GALK1 that cause autosomal recessive galactokinase deficiency. Cataract is the most common manifestation of galactokinase deficiency, and
pseudotumor cerebri is a rare complication. The incidence of hypoglycemia and infection is comparable to those found in the general population.
There is a higher rate of bleeding diathesis, encephalopathy, and elevated
liver transaminases than in the general population during the newborn
period. Some patients have intellectual impairment and motor and language delays. Heterozygous carriers may be at risk for presenile cataracts.
Laboratory findings include increased concentration of blood galactose
levels and urinary galactitol, provided the infant has been fed a lactose-­
containing formula. The diagnosis is made by demonstrating an absence
of galactokinase activity in erythrocytes or fibroblasts. GALT activity is
normal. Treatment is dietary restriction of galactose.

URIDINE DIPHOSPHATE GALACTOSE-­4-­EPIMERASE
DEFICIENCY

There are three distinct forms of epimerase deficiency based on the
level of enzyme activity in different cell types. The first is a benign
form known as peripheral epimerase deficiency galactosemia, diagnosed
incidentally through newborn screening programs. Affected individuals are asymptomatic because the enzyme deficiency is limited to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

912 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
leukocytes and erythrocytes. This form does not require treatment. The
second subtype is called intermediate form and is caused by epimerase
deficiency in RBCs and circulating white blood cells, as well as epimerase activity below 50% of normal in all other cells. Neonates with the
intermediate form are typically asymptomatic, even when fed a normal
milk diet, and are diagnosed only as a result of newborn screening.
The long-­term consequences remain unknown. During infancy and
early childhood, these individuals are treated with a galactose-­/lactose-­
restricted diet. The third form is rarer and more severe as a result of
generalized epimerase deficiency. Clinical manifestations resemble
GALT transferase deficiency, with additional symptoms of hypotonia
and nerve deafness. Clinical symptoms improve with restriction of
galactose/lactose in the diet. Although this severe form of epimerase
galactosemia is rare, it must be considered in a symptomatic patient
with elevated RBC galactose-­
1-­
phosphate, urinary galactose, and
galactitol levels but with normal GALT transferase activity. The abnormally accumulated metabolites are similar to those in transferase deficiency, with the addition of an increase in cellular uridine diphosphate
(UDP) galactose. Biochemical diagnosis is confirmed by the assay
of epimerase in erythrocytes demonstrating reduced activity. UDP
galactose-­4-­epimerase is encoded by the GALE gene, and pathogenic
biallelic variants result in autosomal recessive disease. Carrier detection is possible by measurement of epimerase activity in the erythrocytes. Prenatal diagnosis for the severe form of epimerase deficiency
can be done using an enzyme assay of cultured amniotic fluid cells or
testing of known familial pathogenic variants.
Patients with the severe form of epimerase deficiency cannot synthesize UDP galactose from UDP glucose and are galactose dependent.
Because galactose is an essential component of many nervous system
structural proteins, patients are placed on a galactose-­restricted diet
rather than a galactose-­free diet. Galactose restriction is also indicated
for infants and young children with the intermediate form. Additional
outcome data are needed to optimize these approaches and develop
a better understanding of long-­term issues in this patient population.
Infants with mild epimerase deficiency have not required treatment.

Galactose Mutarotase Deficiency

GALM catalyzes the first step in the Leloir pathway, the conversion of
beta-­D-­galactose to alpha-­D-­galactose. There have been a few cases
of GALM deficiency reported, with an overall estimated incidence
of GALM deficiency in all populations of less than 1 in 200,000, with
higher incidences in Black and Japanese populations. Apart from cataracts, individuals with GALM deficiency are often healthy. In some
reported cases, elevated blood galactose-­1-­phosphate (Gal-­1-­P) and
galactose levels were identified during newborn screening. There are
no reports of long-­term implications of this condition and no formal
recommendations regarding optimal dietary intake in this population.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

107.3 Defects in Fructose Metabolism
Ghada Hijazi and Priya S. Kishnani
Two inborn errors are known in the specialized pathway of fructose
metabolism: benign or essential fructosuria and hereditary fructose
intolerance. Fructose-­
1,6-­
bisphosphatase deficiency, not formally a
defect of the specialized fructose pathway, is discussed in Chapter 107.4.

DEFICIENCY OF FRUCTOKINASE (ESSENTIAL OR
BENIGN FRUCTOSURIA)

Deficiency of fructokinase is not associated with clinical manifestations. Fructosuria is an incidental finding identified in asymptomatic
individuals with reducing substances in urine. No treatment is necessary, and the prognosis is excellent. Inheritance of this autosomal
recessive trait is caused by biallelic variants in the KHK gene, with an
incidence of 1 in 120,000 live births.

Fructokinase catalyzes the first step of metabolism of dietary fructose—conversion of fructose to fructose-­1-­phosphate (see Fig. 107.1).
Without this enzyme, fructose consumption results in a rise in the blood
level of fructose, which is partially excreted in the urine, as there is little to
no renal threshold for fructose. In adipose tissue and muscle, hexokinase
converts the remainder to fructose-­6-­phosphate, which is considered a
slower alternative process. Clinitest results reveal the urinary reducing
substance, which can be identified as fructose by chromatography.

DEFICIENCY OF FRUCTOSE-­1-­PHOSPHATE ALDOLASE (ALDOLASE B, HEREDITARY FRUCTOSE
INTOLERANCE)

In comparison to fructokinase, deficiency of fructose-­1-­phosphate
aldolase (aldolase-­B) is a severe condition in infants resulting from
a deficiency of activity in the liver, kidney, and intestine. Fructose-­1-­
phosphate aldolase hydrolyzes fructose-­1-­phosphate to glyceraldehyde
and dihydroxyacetone phosphate. In the glycolytic-­
gluconeogenic
pathway, this enzyme catalyzes the hydrolysis of fructose-­
1,6-­
bisphosphate to dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde
phosphate. In the absence of aldolase B activity, there is a rapid accumulation of fructose-­1-­phosphate and depletion of ATP, which presents with severe symptoms when fructose-­containing food is ingested.
Accumulation of fructose-­1-­phosphate also results in inhibition of
gluconeogenesis (via inhibition of aldolase A) and glycogenolysis (via
inhibition of glycogen phosphorylase A), resulting in decreased glucose production and a rapid decline in blood glucose. Because isozyme
fructose-­1,6-­bisphosphate aldolase (aldolase A) metabolizes fructose-­
1,6-­bisphosphate, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis are not affected in
patients with hereditary fructose intolerance in the fasting state.

Epidemiology and Genetics

The incidence of hereditary fructose intolerance (HFI) is estimated to
be as high as 1 in 26,000 live births. HFI is inherited in an autosomal
recessive manner because of biallelic pathogenic variants in the ALDOB
gene. At least 60 pathogenic variants causing HFI are known. The most
common pathogenic variant identified in the Northern European population is p.Ala150Pro. This variant, along with two other missense variants (p.Ala175Asp and p.Asn335Lys), account for 80–85% of HFI cases
in Europe and the United States. The diagnosis of HFI can be made by
gene sequencing or demonstration of hepatic fructose-­
1-­
phosphate
aldolase (aldolase B) activity deficiency on liver biopsy (uncommon).

Clinical Manifestations

Affected individuals remain asymptomatic until fructose, sucrose
(table sugar), or sorbitol is introduced in the diet (usually from fruit,
fruit juice, or sweetened cereal). Signs and symptoms typically manifest
in infancy when foods or formulas containing these sugars are introduced. Certain patients are very sensitive to fructose, whereas others
can tolerate moderate intake (up to 250 mg/kg/day). Early clinical manifestations resemble galactosemia and include jaundice, hepatomegaly,
vomiting, lethargy, irritability, and convulsions. There may also be a
higher incidence of celiac disease in patients with HFI (>10%) compared with the general population (1–3%). With age, affected individuals typically develop an aversion to fructose-­containing foods because
of associated symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain.
Characteristic laboratory findings include lactic acidosis, hypophosphatemia, hyperuricemia, and hypermagnesemia. A prolonged
prothrombin time, hypoalbuminemia, elevation of bilirubin and transaminase levels, and proximal tubular dysfunction are also seen. Acute
fructose ingestion produces symptomatic hypoglycemia as a result of
impaired gluconeogenesis, with higher intakes causing a more severe
clinical picture. Chronic ingestion results in failure to thrive and hepatic
disease. If the intake of fructose persists, hypoglycemic episodes recur,
leading to progressive renal and hepatic failure and eventually death.

Diagnosis

The presence of a reducing substance in urine during an acute episode
raises the possibility of HFI. Oral fructose challenge is no longer considered a diagnostic approach because of the high risk to the patient,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates
who can become acutely ill after the test. A definitive diagnosis is made
by demonstration of two pathogenic variants in ALDOB on molecular
genetic testing. A common pathogenic variant (p.Ala150Pro) accounts
for 53% of HFI alleles worldwide. An alternative approach to diagnosis is to demonstrate deficient hepatic fructose-­1-­phosphate aldolase
(aldolase B) activity on liver biopsy. Carbohydrate-­deficient transferrin
(CDT) testing (see Chapter 107.7) is generally abnormal in patients
with HFI and can be used to monitor fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol
consumption in the diet.

913

or to carbon dioxide and water via the mitochondrial enzymes of the
Krebs cycle. Figure 107.4 depicts the relevant metabolic pathways. Type
I GSD, fructose-­1,6-­bis phosphatase deficiency, and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase deficiency are disorders of gluconeogenesis associated
with lactic acidosis. Other metabolic disorders, including mitochondrial respiratory chain defects, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
deficiency, pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, defects of fatty acid oxidation, organic acidurias (see Chapters 105.6, 105.10, and 106.1), biotin
synthesis, and utilization defects also can cause lactic acidosis (Table
107.2). Some of these disorders are easily distinguishable by the presence of an abnormal acylcarnitine profile, amino acids in the blood,
and urine organic acids. Blood lactate, pyruvate, acylcarnitine profile,
and urine organic acids should be ordered in infants and children with
unexplained acidosis, especially if there is an increased anion gap.
Lactic acidosis unrelated to an enzymatic defect occurs in conditions associated with hypoxemia and/or hypoperfusion (type A
lactic acidosis). In this case, and in defects in the respiratory chain,
the serum pyruvate concentration may remain normal (<1.0 mg/dL,
with increased lactate to pyruvate ratio), whereas pyruvate is usually
increased when lactic acidosis results from an enzymatic defect in gluconeogenesis or pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (both lactate and
pyruvate are increased, and the ratio is normal). Lactate and pyruvate
should be measured in the same blood specimen and on multiple blood
specimens obtained when the patient is symptomatic because lactic
acidosis can be intermittent. Figure 107.5 is an algorithm for the differential diagnosis of lactic acidosis. Lactic acidosis is also noted with
various underlying diseases (type B1) and drugs or toxins (type B2)
(see Table 107.2).

Treatment

Acute episodes are managed symptomatically by correcting hypoglycemia with IV glucose (dextrose) administration, providing supportive treatment of hepatic and/or renal insufficiency, and correcting
metabolic acidosis. Complete elimination of fructose usually rapidly
reverses symptoms and results in normalization of related metabolic
disturbances. The cornerstone of long-­term treatment is the complete
restriction of all sources of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol from the diet.
It may be difficult because these sugars are widely used additives, found
even in many medicinal preparations. With treatment, liver and kidney dysfunction improve, and catch-­up in growth is common. Intellectual development is usually unimpaired. As the patient matures,
symptoms become milder even after fructose ingestion, and the long-­
term prognosis is good. Because of voluntary dietary avoidance of
sucrose, affected patients have few dental caries. Care should be taken
to avoid fructose-­containing IV fluids during hospitalizations. Regular
supplementation with a “sugar-­free” multivitamin is required to avoid
micronutrient deficiencies resulting from reduced fruit and vegetable
consumption.

DISORDERS OF GLUCONEOGENESIS
Deficiency of Glucose-­6-­Phosphatase (Type I
Glycogen Storage Disease)

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Type I GSD is associated with significant fasting lactic acidosis. The
chronic metabolic acidosis predisposes these patients to osteopenia;
acute lactic acidosis associated with hypoglycemia is a life-­threatening
condition in GSD I (see Chapter 107.1).

107.4 Defects in Intermediary Carbohydrate
Metabolism Associated with Lactic
Acidosis

Fructose-­1,6-­Bisphosphatase Deficiency

Ghada Hijazi and Priya S. Kishnani

Fructose-­1,6-­bisphosphatase (FBP) deficiency impairs the formation of glucose from all gluconeogenic precursors, including dietary
fructose. Hypoglycemia occurs when glycogen reserves are limited
or exhausted. The clinical manifestations are characterized by life-­
threatening episodes of acidosis, hypoglycemia, hyperventilation,

Lactic acidosis (type B3) occurs with inborn errors of metabolism,
including defects of carbohydrate metabolism, that interfere with the
conversion of pyruvate to glucose via the pathway of gluconeogenesis

E2

Hydroxyethyl-TPP
CO2
Carbanion of Thiamine
Pyrophosphate (TPP)
Acetyllipoamide
CoA

Dihydrolipoamide
Acetyl-CoA
Citric acid cycle

PDH Kinase

Pyruvate
carboxylase
Pyruvate

Phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase
Oxaloacetate
Phosphoenolpyruvate

Biotin
Acetyl-CoA

(5 steps)
Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate

NADH

Fructose1,6-bisphosphatase

NAD

Lipoamide
Dihydrolipoylacyltransferase

E3

Dihydrolipoyldehydrogenase

NADH

E1 active
pyruvate
dehydrogenase

Lactate
dehydrogenase

PDH phosphatase

Inactive
pyruvate
dehydrogenase*

NAD

Lactate
CO2,
H2O

Fructose-6-Phosphate
Glucose-6-phosphatase
Glucose

Glucose-6-Phosphate

Fig. 107.4 Enzymatic reactions of carbohydrate metabolism, deficiencies of which can give rise to lactic acidosis, pyruvate elevations, or hypoglycemia. The pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex comprises, in addition to E1, E2, and E3, an E3-­binding protein (not shown), previously called
protein X, and PDH kinase and phosphatase. NAD/NADH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

914 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 107.2  Causes of Type B Lactic Acidosis
TYPE B1—UNDERLYING DISEASES
Renal failure
Hepatic failure
Diabetes mellitus
Malignancy
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
Human immunodeficiency virus
TYPE B2—DRUGS AND TOXINS
Acetaminophen
Alcohols: ethanol, methanol, diethylene glycol, isopropanol, and
propylene glycol
Antiretroviral nucleoside analogs—zidovudine, didanosine, and
lamivudine
β-­Adrenergic agonists: epinephrine, ritodrine, and terbutaline
Biguanides: phenformin and metformin
Cocaine, methamphetamine
Cyanogenic compounds: cyanide, aliphatic nitriles, and nitroprusside
Diethyl ether
Fluorouracil
Halothane
Iron
Isoniazid
Linezolid
Nalidixic acid
Niacin

Propofol
Salicylates
Strychnine
Sugars and sugar alcohols: fructose, sorbitol, and xylitol
Sulfasalazine
Total parenteral nutrition
Valproic acid
Vitamin deficiencies: thiamine and biotin
TYPE B3—INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM
Glucose-­6-­phosphatase deficiency (von Gierke disease)
Fructose-­1,6-­diphosphatase deficiency
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) deficiency
Krebs cycle defects
Methylmalonic aciduria and other organic acidemias
Kearns-­Sayre syndrome
Pearson syndrome
Barth syndrome
Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes
Nuclear DNA respiratory chain defects
Mitochondrial DNA respiratory defects
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike
episodes (MELAS)
Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers (MERRF)

Adapted from Vernon C, LeTourneau JL. Lactic acidosis: recognition, kinetics, and associated prognosis. Crit Care Clin. 2010;26:255–283, Box 1.

Increased lactate

Urine organic acids
plasma acylcarnitine profile

Normal
or nonspecific findings

Abnormal
or diagnostic profile
Hypoglycemia
“Reye-like” syndrome

Fatty acid oxidation defects

Increased pyruvate
Normal lactate/pyruvate ratio

Glycogen storage disease type 1
Fructose, 1,6, diphosphatase
Phosphoenolypyruvate
carboxykinase

Diabetes mellitus

Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex

Propionic acidemia
Methylmalonic acidemia
Other organic aciduria

Metabolic acidosis

Biotinidase
Holocarboxylase
synthetase deficiency

Skin rash/alopecia

Decreased or normal pyruvate
increased lactate/pyruvate ratio

Hypoglycemia  Ketones

Normal O2 saturation

Hyperglycemia

Normal to low
3 Hydroxy butyrate:
acetoacetate

Normal glycemia
No ketosis

Decreased O2
saturation

Multisystem involvement
“ragged red fiber”
in muscle biopsy

Increased
3 Hydroxy
butyrate:
acetoacetate

Pyruvate carboxylase

Tissue hypoxia

Fig. 107.5 Algorithm of the differential diagnosis of lactic acidosis.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Respiratory
chain
mitochondrial
defects

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates
seizures, and coma. In about half of the cases, the deficiency presents in the first week of life. In certain cases, variable degrees of liver
impairment (elevated liver tests) and/or failure have been documented, requiring supportive therapy, including intravenous glucose infusion. In infants and small children, hypoglycemia and/or
hepatopathy-­like episodes are triggered by fasting or missing meals,
febrile infections, gastroenteritis, vomiting, and/or poor oral intake.
The frequency of these episodes decreases with age. Laboratory findings include low blood glucose, high lactate, glycerol, and uric acid
levels and high anion gap metabolic acidosis. Because of the inability
of current biochemical assays for plasma triglycerides to differentiate glycerol from triglycerides, FBP deficiency is usually associated
with elevated triglyceride levels. This phenomenon is referred to as
pseudo-­hypertriglyceridemia because the plasma has a high concentration of glycerol rather than triglycerides. In contrast to HFI, there
is usually no oral aversion to sweets and fruit. Between episodes,
renal tubular and liver function may be normal; however, long-­term
studies are limited.
The diagnosis is established by noninvasive molecular genetic testing for pathogenic variants or demonstrating an enzyme deficiency in
either liver biopsy or mononuclear white blood cells. The gene coding for fructose-­1,6-­bisphosphatase is FBP1, and pathogenic variants
are known, making carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis possible.
Treatment of acute attacks consists of correction of hypoglycemia
and acidosis by IV glucose infusion, and the response is usually rapid.
Avoidance of fasting, frequent feedings, aggressive management of
infections, and restriction of fructose, sucrose, glycerol, and/or sorbitol
from the diet can prevent further episodes. For long-­term prevention
of hypoglycemia, a slowly released carbohydrate such as cornstarch
is useful. Children remain asymptomatic in between crises, and the
majority have normal growth and psychomotor development. A few
children have been documented to have suffered brain injury and/
or cognitive disabilities, most likely as a result of early and untreated
hypoglycemia.

Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxykinase Deficiency

Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) is a key enzyme in gluconeogenesis. It catalyzes the conversion of oxaloacetate to phosphoenolpyruvate and carbon dioxide (see Fig. 107.4). PEPCK deficiency
may occur as a cytosolic or mitochondrial enzyme deficiency, as it is
encoded by two distinct genes (PCK1 and PCK2, respectively).
PEPCK deficiency has been reported in only a few cases. The clinical features are heterogeneous, with hypoglycemia, lactic acidemia,
hepatomegaly, hypotonia, developmental delay, and failure to thrive
as the major manifestations. There may be multisystem involvement,
with neuromuscular deficits, hepatocellular damage, renal dysfunction, and cardiomyopathy. The diagnosis is based on the reduced
activity of PEPCK in the liver, fibroblasts, or lymphocytes. Fibroblasts
and lymphocytes are not suitable for diagnosing the cytosolic form of
PEPCK deficiency because these tissues possess only mitochondrial
PEPCK. PEPCK deficiency can also occur as a secondary phenomenon
caused by other disease, such as mitochondrial depletion disorders. As
a result, molecular testing confirming the presence of two pathogenic
variants in either the PCK1 or PCK2 gene is the recommended gold
standard for diagnosis. To avoid hypoglycemia, patients should receive
treatment with slow-­release carbohydrates such as cornstarch, and
fasting should be avoided.

DISORDERS OF PYRUVATE METABOLISM

Pyruvate is formed from glucose and other monosaccharides, from
lactate, and from alanine. It is metabolized through four main enzyme
systems: LDH, ALT, pyruvate carboxylase, and pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Deficiency of the M subunit of LDH causes exercise
intolerance and myoglobinuria (see Chapter 107.1).

Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency

After entering the mitochondria, pyruvate is converted into acetyl-­CoA
by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) and then enters the
tricarboxylic acid cycle for ATP production. The complex comprises

915

three functional enzymes: E1, an α-­ketoacid decarboxylase; E2, a dihydrolipoyl acyltransferase; and E3, a dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase. The
complex also contains an E3-­binding protein (previously called protein X) and PDHC kinase and phosphatase, which regulate the complex’s activity via phosphorylation/dephosphorylation. Additionally, it
requires thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), lipoic acid, and flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD) as cofactors. The E1 subunit, which is made up of
two subunits, E1α and E1β, catalyzes the first and rate-­limiting step in
the reaction. The most common disorder is caused by a gene defect in
the E1α subunit (see Fig. 107.4).
Deficiency of the PDHC is the most common of the disorders leading to lactic acidemia and CNS anomalies and dysfunction. The CNS
dysfunction occurs because the brain obtains its energy primarily from
oxidation of glucose through glycolysis. Brain acetyl-­CoA is synthesized almost exclusively from pyruvate.
PDHC deficiency is mostly caused by pathogenic variants in the
gene coding for the E1α subunit, which is inherited in an X-­linked
dominant fashion; therefore both males and females with a pathogenic
variant exhibit features.

Clinical Manifestations

PDHC deficiency has a wide spectrum of presentations, from the most
severe neonatal presentation to a mild late-­onset form. The neonatal onset is associated with lethal lactic acidosis, white matter cystic
lesions, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and severe enzyme deficiency.
Infantile/childhood onset can be lethal or associated with psychomotor delay and chronic lactic acidosis, cystic lesions in the brainstem
and basal ganglia, and features of Leigh syndrome (see later and
Chapter 638.2). Late onset cases, including males, may have less acidosis, greater enzyme activity, and episodic ataxia upon consumption
of high-­carbohydrate-­containing foods. Intelligence in affected males
may be normal. Developmental delay, hypotonia, hypertonia, seizures,
ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, dystonia, dyskinesia, and/or hemiplegia
are among neurologic symptoms of PDHC deficiency. Patients of all
ages may have dysmorphic facial features, resembling those seen in
fetal alcohol syndrome, as a result of PDHC inhibition and reduction of
energy metabolism in the latter. Typically, patients with E1β deficiency
are more severely affected.
The E2 deficiency is rare and results in a milder phenotype with varying brain MRI findings and survival into adolescence and adulthood.
The E3 lipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency leads to reduced activity not only in the PDHC but also in the α-­ketoglutarate and branched-­
chain ketoacid dehydrogenase complexes. This deficiency is more
common in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. Individuals deficient in
E3 may present with hypotonia and lactic acidosis during infancy, and
affected infants typically die during the first few years of life. Surviving
children have been shown to have growth delay and severe neurologic
problems. Hepatic disease could be a component of this phenotype
or may manifest separately. Only a small number of patients exhibit
a myopathic phenotype including muscle weakness and elevated CK.
In urine organic acid analysis, α-­ketoglutarate and branched-­chain
ketoacids can be detected, and plasma amino acid analysis may reveal
elevated levels of leucine, isoleucine, valine, and allo-­isoleucine. These
findings depend greatly on the phenotype of the disease. The E3 binding protein deficiency can present with either neonatal lactic acidosis,
severe psychomotor retardation, or seizure, as well as abnormalities on
brain MRI. Pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase and kinase deficiencies have also been reported. These other PDHC defects have clinical manifestations within the variable spectrum associated with PDHC
deficiency caused by E1α deficiency.

Treatment

The general prognosis is poor, except in rare patients whose variants
are associated with altered affinity for thiamine pyrophosphate because
they may respond to thiamine supplementation. Because carbohydrates can aggravate lactic acidosis, a ketogenic diet is recommended.
The ketogenic diet has been found to decrease blood lactate levels and
to reduce seizures and improve ataxia and sleep habits. Modified ketogenic diets (a 1:1 fat-­to-­carbohydrate and protein ratio) have also been

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

916 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
helpful in patients who cannot tolerate a strict ketogenic diet. Infusions of glucose, lactated Ringer, or other drugs known to increase
the risk of lactic acidosis, such as metformin, are contraindicated. A
potential treatment strategy is to maintain any residual PDHC in its
active form by oral administration of dichloroacetate, an inhibitor of
E1 kinase. Beneficial effects of controlling postprandial lactic acidosis
have been shown in some patients. Young children generally tolerate dichloroacetate well, but continued exposure is associated with
peripheral neuropathy, a condition that could be attributable to the
drug or the disease. In vitro studies have demonstrated that phenylbutyrate increases PDC enzyme activity, especially in those with pathogenic variants linked to residual enzyme activity. In patients with E3
deficiency, branched-­chain amino acid restriction and riboflavin
supplementation are recommended.

Deficiency of Pyruvate Carboxylase

Pyruvate carboxylase is a mitochondrial, biotin-­containing enzyme
essential in the process of gluconeogenesis; it catalyzes the conversion
of pyruvate to oxaloacetate. The enzyme is also essential for Krebs cycle
function as a provider of oxaloacetate and is involved in lipogenesis
and formation of nonessential amino acids. Clinical manifestations of
this deficiency have varied from neonatal severe lactic acidosis accompanied by hyperammonemia, hypercitrullinemia, hyperlysinemia, and
hypoglycemia (type B) to late-­onset mild to moderate lactic acidosis
and developmental delay (type A). In both types, patients who survive
usually have severe psychomotor retardation with seizures, spasticity,
and microcephaly. Some patients have pathologic changes in the brainstem and basal ganglia that resemble Leigh syndrome. The clinical
severity appears to correlate with the level of the residual enzyme activity. A “benign” form of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency has also been
described, characterized by recurrent attacks of lactic acidosis and
ketoacidosis, as well as mild neurologic deficits (type C). Laboratory
findings include elevated levels of blood lactate, pyruvate, and alanine
and ketonuria. In type B, the lactate-­to-­pyruvate ratio is increased; this
ratio is normal in types A and C. Additionally, in type B, blood ammonia, citrulline, and lysine levels are elevated with low glutamine, which
might suggest a primary anaplerotic defect involving the urea cycle.
The mechanism is likely the result of depletion of oxaloacetate, which
leads to reduced levels of aspartate, a substrate for argininosuccinate
synthase in the urea cycle (see Chapter 105.12). The gene for pyruvate
carboxylase is PC, and many pathogenic variants have been identified.
Diagnosis of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency is made by the measurement of enzyme activity in cultured skin fibroblasts or lymphoblasts and must be differentiated from holocarboxylase synthase (HCS)
or biotinidase deficiency. Molecular genetic testing is presently the
preferred approach for diagnosis. Treatment consists of avoidance of
fasting and modifying the diet to include high amounts of carbohydrate and protein. During acute episodes of lactic acidosis, patients
should receive continuous IV glucose. Metabolic abnormalities have
been reduced with the use of anaplerotic compounds such as citrate,
aspartate, or more recently, triheptanoin, but no improvement has
been shown in neurologic symptoms or increased life span. Although
liver transplantation has been shown to correct biochemical abnormalities in two patients, the long-­term benefits of this procedure are still
unknown. Biotin is a cofactor used for this condition, but most patients
do not respond to biotin. Lactated Ringer solution is contraindicated
in this condition because of the theoretical risk of worsening lactic acidosis in these patients.

Deficiency of Pyruvate Carboxylase Secondary
to Deficiency of Holocarboxylase Synthase or
Biotinidase

Deficiency of either HCS or biotinidase, enzymes involved in biotin metabolism and recycling, respectively, results in multiple-­
carboxylase deficiency (pyruvate carboxylase, acetyl-­CoA carboxylase,
3-­methyl-­crotonyl-­CoA carboxylase, and propionyl-­CoA carboxylase) and in clinical manifestations associated with the respective
deficiencies, including rash, lactic acidosis, and alopecia (see Chapter
103.6). Both enzyme deficiencies are autosomal recessive disorders.

The incidence of HCS and biotinidase deficiency is approximately 1
in 87,000 and 1 in 80,000 live births, respectively. Ancestry-­specific
pathogenic variants in the HCS and biotinidase (BTD) genes have been
described. Two common pathogenic variants (c.98_104delinsTCC;
p.Cys33PhefsTer36 and c.1612C>T; p.Arg538Cys) in the BTD account
for 52% of all pathogenic alleles in symptomatic patients with biotinidase deficiency.
The course of HCS may be more protracted and less responsive to
therapy than BTD deficiency. Lack of treatment may be associated with
intermittent exacerbations on top of chronic lactic acidosis, failure to
thrive, seizures, and hypotonia leading to spasticity, lethargy, coma, and
death. Auditory and optic nerve dysfunction can lead to deafness and
blindness, respectively. The course of BTD deficiency may be severe if
left untreated. Late-­onset milder forms have also been reported. Laboratory findings include an anion gap metabolic acidosis, lactic acidosis,
and abnormal urine organic acids. Lactate, 3-­methylcrotonylglycine,
3-­
hydroxypropionate, 3-­
hydroxisovalerate, and methyl citrate may
accumulate in urine organic acid chromatography (OAC), though the
concentrations of metabolites differ according to the severity of the
enzyme deficiency. Blood and/or urine biotin levels can be used to
evaluate treatment adherence, but they do not contribute to diagnosis. Biotin concentrations in plasma and urine are normal in patients
with HCS deficiency and are often decreased in patients with BTD deficiency, particularly when the assay used does not detect biocytin.
Diagnosis of HCS deficiency and biotinidase deficiency can be
detected through newborn screening tandem mass spectroscopy,
which enables early treatment and improves outcomes. Molecular
genetic testing is required to confirm the diagnosis, which involves the
detection of two pathogenic variants. BTD deficiency can be diagnosed
by reduced enzyme activity in the patient’s serum or plasma, which
helps to classify the deficiency into two categories: profound deficiency (biotinidase activity less than 10% of mean normal serum BTD
activity) and partial deficiency (BTD activity between 10% and 30%
of mean normal serum BTD activity). HCS activity in skin fibroblasts
or lymphocytes can be assessed when HCS deficiency is suspected but
genetic testing is equivocal.

Treatment

Treatment consists of biotin supplementation 5-­20 mg/day and is generally effective if started early before the onset of symptoms or development of brain damage. Newborn screening has facilitated early
treatment for patients with partial or profound BTD deficiency, who
respond well to 5-­10 mg of biotin; some patients may require higher
doses during acute illness. Patients identified through newborn screening and treated with biotin have remained asymptomatic.

Mitochondrial Respiratory Chain Defects (Oxidative
Phosphorylation Disease)

The mitochondrial respiratory chain catalyzes the oxidation of fuel
molecules and transfers the electrons to molecular oxygen, with concomitant energy transduction into ATP (oxidative phosphorylation)
(see Chapter 108). The respiratory chain produces ATP from adenosine
diphosphate and inorganic phosphate, using the energy from electrons
transferred from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) or flavin
adenine dinucleotide, and includes five specific complexes (I: NADH–
coenzyme Q reductase; II: succinate–coenzyme Q reductase; III:
coenzyme QH2 cytochrome-­c reductase; IV: cytochrome-­c oxidase;
V: ATP synthase). Each complex is composed of 4-­35 individual proteins that are encoded by nuclear or maternally inherited mitochondrial DNA, with the exception of complex II, which is encoded solely
by nuclear genes. Alterations of these complexes or assembly systems
produce chronic lactic acidosis, presumably because of a change in the
reduction-­oxidation state with increased concentrations of NADH
(Table 107.3).
In contrast to PDHC or pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, skeletal
muscle and the heart are usually involved in the respiratory chain disorders. On muscle biopsy, ragged red fibers indicating mitochondrial
proliferation are suggestive of mitochondrial involvement when present, especially when observed in young patients with symptoms (see

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates

917

Table 107.3  Clinical and Genetic Heterogeneity of Disorders Related to Pathogenic Variants in Mitochondrial DNA*

SYMPTOMS, SIGNS, AND
FINDINGS

LARGE DELETIONS IN
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA

PATHOGENIC
VARIANT IN
TRANSFER RNA

PATHOGENIC
VARIANT IN
RIBOSOMAL RNA

PATHOGENIC VARIANT IN
MESSENGER RNA

KSS

PEO

PS

MERRF

MELAS

AID

NARP

MILS

LHON

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Seizures
Ataxia
Myoclonus
Psychomotor retardation
Psychomotor regression
Hemiparesis and hemianopia
Cortical blindness
Migraine-­like headaches
Dystonia

−
+
−
−
+
−
−
−
−

−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−

±
±
−
±
−
−
−
−
−

+++
+
+
−
±
−
−
±
−

+
+
±
±
+
+++
+
+
+

−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−

±
+
−
−
±
−
−
−
−

+
±
−
+
+
−
−
−
+

−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
±

PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Peripheral neuropathy

±

−

−

±

±

−

+

±

±

MUSCLE
Weakness ± exercise intolerance
Ophthalmoplegia
Ptosis

+
+
+

+++
+
+

±
±
±

+
±
±

+
±
−

−
−
−

+
±
−

+
±
±

±
−
−

EYE
Pigmentary retinopathy
Optic atrophy

+
−

−
−

−
−

±
±

±
±

−
−

+
±

±
±

−
+

BLOOD
Sideroblastic anemia

-­

−

+

−

−

−

−

−

−

ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
Diabetes mellitus
Short stature
Hypoparathyroidism

±
+
±

−
−
−

±
±
±

±
+
−

±
+
±

−
−
−

−
±
−

±
−
−

−
−
−

HEART
Conduction disorder
Cardiomyopathy

+
±

−
−

−
−

±
±

±
±

−
+

±
−

±
±

±
−

GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
Exocrine pancreatic dysfunction
Intestinal pseudoobstruction

±
−

−
−

±
−

−
−

−
±

−
−

−
−

−
±

−
−

EAR, NOSE, AND THROAT
Sensorineural hearing loss

±

−

−

+

+

+

±

±

−

KIDNEY
Fanconi syndrome/RTA

±

−

±

−

±

−

−

±

−

+
+

±
+

+
±

+
+

+
+

±
−

±
−

±
±

−
−

−
+

−
+

−
+

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

LABORATORY FINDINGS
Lactic acidosis
Ragged-­red fibers on muscle
biopsy
MODE OF INHERITANCE
Maternal
Sporadic

*Characteristic constellations of symptoms and signs are in bold.
+, Presence of a symptom, sign, or finding; −, absence of a symptom, sign, or finding; ±, possible presence of a symptom, sign, or finding; AID, aminoglycoside-­induced deafness;
KSS, Kearns-­Sayre syndrome; LHON, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; MERRF, myoclonic
epilepsy with ragged red fibers; MILS, maternally inherited Leigh syndrome; NARP, neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa; PEO, progressive external ophthalmoplegia; PS,
Pearson syndrome, RTA, renal tubular acidosis.
Modified from DiMauro S, Schon EA. Mitochondrial respiratory-­chain diseases. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2656–2668.

Fig. 107.5). Because of the ubiquitous nature of oxidative phosphorylation, a defect of the mitochondrial respiratory chain accounts for a vast
array of clinical manifestations and should be considered in patients
of all ages presenting with multisystem involvement. Some deficiencies resemble Leigh syndrome with lactic acidosis, whereas others present with strokelike episodes, myopathies, or ataxia including
MELAS (mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike
episodes), MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy and ragged red fibers), and
Kearns-­Sayre syndrome (external ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, metabolic

acidosis, retinal degeneration, heart block, myopathy, and high cerebrospinal fluid protein) (see Table 107.3) (see Chapters 638.2 and
651.4). There is a higher incidence of neuropsychiatric disorders in
adults with a primary oxidative phosphorylation disease than in the
general population.
Diagnosis requires identification of pathogenic variants in mitochondrial DNA or nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins or
demonstrating functional abnormalities of oxidative phosphorylation
enzyme complex activities in tissues (e.g., skin, muscle, or liver). In

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

918 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Parkinsonism,
aminoglycoside-induced deafness
LS, MELAS,
multisystem disease

MELAS,
myoglobinuria

Myopathy,
PEO

Cardiomyopathy
Cardiomyopathy,
ECM

PEO, LHON, MELAS,
Myopathy, cardiomyopathy,
diabetes and deafness
Myopathy, cardiomyopathy,
PEO

12s

F

V
16S

LHON

ECM, LHON, myopathy,
cardiomyopathy, MELAS
and parkinsonism

PT
Cyt b

Cardiomyopathy, ECM

L1
E

Myopathy, MELAS

ND1

Myopathy, lymphoma

I
Q
M

Cardiomyopathy,
LHON

LS, MELAS

ND2

ND5

LS, ataxia,
chorea, myopathy
Myopathy,
PEO

W
A
N
C
Y

PEO
ECM
PEO

PPK, deafness,
MERRF-MELAS

L2
S2
H
COXI

Myoglobinuria,
motor neuron disease,
siderblastic anemia

LHON, MELAS,
diabetes,
and dystonia

ND6

ND4

Cardiomyopathy, ECM
PEO, myopathy,
sideroblastic anemia
Diabetes and deafness
LHON, myopathy,
and dystonia

S1
D

COXII
A8
K

Cardiomyopathy,
myoclonus
myaclonus
Myopathy,
multisystem disease,
encephalomyopathy

A6

COXIII

ND4L
ND3 R
G

LHON
Progressive myoclonic
epilepsy, and optic atropy

NARP, MILS,
FBSN

LS, ECM,
myoglobinuria

Cardiomyopathy,
SIDS, ECM

Cardiomyopathy
PEO, MERRF,
MELAS, deafness

Fig. 107.6 Pathogenic variants in the human mitochondrial genome that are known to cause disease. Disorders that are frequently or prominently

associated with pathogenic variants in a particular gene are shown in bold. Diseases caused by pathogenic variants that impair mitochondrial protein
synthesis are shown in blue. Diseases caused by pathogenic variants in protein-­coding genes are shown in red. ECM, Encephalomyopathy; FBSN,
familial bilateral striatal necrosis; LHON, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy; LS, Leigh syndrome; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic
acidosis, and strokelike episodes; MERRF, myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers; MILS, maternally inherited Leigh syndrome; NARP, neuropathy,
ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa; PEO, progressive external ophthalmoplegia; PPK, palmoplantar keratoderma; SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome.
(From DiMauro S, Schon EA. Mitochondrial respiratory-­chain diseases. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2656–2668.)

some instances, combined molecular and functional testing may be
needed (Fig. 107.6). NGS of single or combined mitochondrial DNA
and nuclear gene panels is the preferred method of testing. Whole exome
sequencing with analysis of the mitochondrial genome or whole
genome sequencing may be considered if NGS panel testing is nondiagnostic. Biopsy and genetic analysis of clinically affected tissues,
with or without biochemical testing, is indicated when genetic testing
of blood is negative or inconclusive and there is clinical suspicion of
mitochondrial disease. Muscle biopsy was considered the most reliable
procedure for diagnosing mitochondrial diseases prior to the availability of molecular genetic testing. Muscle histology, including EM, can
detect ragged red fibers and other abnormalities typical of mitochondrial myopathies. Analysis of oxidative phosphorylation complexes
I-­IV from intact mitochondria isolated from fresh skeletal muscle can
be helpful for the diagnosis of mitochondrial disorders; however, electron transport chain testing of flash-­frozen muscle provides an alternative approach when fresh muscle testing is not available. The presence

of normal muscle biochemistry and histology does not rule out the
possibility of mitochondrial disease. Several disorders, such as defects
in mitochondrial maintenance, fusion/fission, translation, transcription, or abnormalities in mitochondrial membrane integrity or transport, may not manifest with substantial oxidative phosphorylation
deficiency and may have normal muscle biochemistry and histology.
Specific criteria may assist in making a clinical diagnosis (Table 107.4).
One study conducted to reevaluate the clinical utility of mitochondrial
disease criteria (MDC) determined that the criteria are still beneficial
and can aid in directing the diagnostic workup and in interpreting
results and deciding on muscle biopsy in certain instances. Additionally, the study demonstrated that whole exome sequencing might be
used to diagnose patients with lower MDC scores as having primary
mitochondrial disorders. Table 107.5 lists clues to the diagnosis of
mitochondrial diseases.
Numerous nuclear genes involved in mitochondrial function and
causative for the majority of mitochondrial disorders are included in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates

919

Table 107.4  Mitochondrial Disease Criteria (Simplified Version for Bedside Use)*
I. CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS, 1 POINT/SYMPTOM (max. 4 points)
A. MUSCULAR
B. CNS PRESENTATION
C. MULTISYSTEM
II. METABOLIC/IMAGING
PRESENTATION (max. 2 points)
(max. 2 points)
DISEASE (max. 3 points) STUDIES (max. 4 points)
Ophthalmoplegia†
Facies myopathica
Exercise intolerance
Muscle weakness
Rhabdomyolysis
Abnormal EMG

Developmental delay
Loss of skills
Stroke-­like episode
Migraine
Seizures
Myoclonus
Cortical blindness
Pyramidal signs
Extrapyramidal signs
Brainstem involvement

Hematology
GI tract
Endocrine/growth
Heart
Kidney
Vision
Hearing
Neuropathy
Recurrent/familial

Elevated lactate†
Elevated L/P ratio
Elevated alanine†
Elevated CSF lactate†
Elevated CSF protein
Elevated CSF alanine†
Urinary TA excretion†
Ethylmalonic aciduria
Strokelike picture/MRI
Leigh syndrome/MRI†
Elevated lactate/MRS

III. MORPHOLOGY
(max. 4 points)
Ragged red/blue fibers‡
COX-­negative fibers‡
Reduced COX staining‡
Reduced SDH staining
SDH positive blood vessels†
Abnormal mitochondria/EM†

*Score 1: unlikely mitochondrial disorder; score 2-­4: possible mitochondrial disorder; score 5-­7: probable mitochondrial disorder; score ≥8: definite mitochondrial disorder.

†This specific symptom scores 2 points.

‡This symptom in a higher percentage scores 4 points.

GI, Gastrointestinal; L/P, lactate/pyruvate; COX, cytochrome C oxidase; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase; EM, electron microscopy; EMG, electromyography; TA, tricarbon acid.
From Morava E, van den Heuvel L, Hol F, et al. Mitochondrial disease criteria – diagnostic applications in children. Neurology. 2006;67:1823–1826.

clinical testing panels that are used to diagnose mitochondrial disorders. An important consideration is that many genetic and multifactorial conditions have been associated with defects in one or more of the
four complexes assayed in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation
testing; these latter conditions feature so-­called secondary mitochondrial dysfunction because the conditions are not considered to be causative for primary mitochondrial dysfunction.
Treatment remains largely symptomatic and nonspecific and does
not cure or significantly alter the outcome of disease. Mitochondrial
drugs are mainly medicinal/nutritional supplements designed to sustain and boost the mitochondrial residual oxidative phosphorylation
function, while also reducing oxidative stress. Although there is no
consensus on which vitamins and cofactors should be used to treat
mitochondrial disease, the main supplementations used are CoQ10, l-­
carnitine, creatine, alpha-­lipoic acid (ALA), and B vitamins. Additional
medications/supplements are indicated based on the genetic diagnosis
and clinical symptoms of the patient. For example, arginine (IV, oral)
can be prescribed in patients with MELAS for treatment and prevention of metabolic strokes. Citrulline and taurine have also been used
with some success in ongoing clinical trials and case reports demonstrating promising results. Patients with mitochondrial disease should
be encouraged to exercise regularly. Patients with mitochondrial disorders are at a greater risk of developing anesthesia-­related complications. Avoiding prolonged fasting and receiving dextrose-­containing
IV fluids before, during, and after procedures and operations are critical for avoiding catabolism. There are an increasing number of clinical
studies evaluating various therapeutic approaches, including mitochondrial augmentation therapy in pediatric children with Pearson
syndrome (NCT03384420) and AAV gene therapy in individuals with
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) (NCT02161380).

neuropathy. Extraneurologic manifestations may include pericardial
effusion, cardiomyopathy, renal tubulopathy, liver involvement, hypertrichosis, and muscle weakness. Diagnosis is usually confirmed by
radiologic evidence of symmetric lesions affecting the basal ganglia,
brainstem, and subthalamic nuclei. Patients with Leigh syndrome have
defects in several enzyme complexes. Dysfunction in cytochrome-­c
oxidase (complex IV) is the most commonly reported defect, followed
by NADH–coenzyme Q reductase (complex I), PDHC, and pyruvate
carboxylase (see Chapter 108). Pathogenic variants in the nuclear
SURF1 gene, which encodes an assembly factor involved in the biogenesis of cytochrome-­c oxidase, and mitochondrial DNA variants in
the adenosine triphosphatase 6 (MT-­ATP6) coding region have been
reported in patients with Leigh syndrome in association with complex
IV deficiency. The most common mitochondrial DNA variant in Leigh
syndrome is the m.8993T>G variant in MT-­ATP6. The prognosis for
Leigh syndrome is poor. In a study of 14 cases, there were 7 fatalities
before age 1.5 years. Pathogenic variants in MTFMT had a milder clinical phenotype and disease progression, according to recent research.
Lactic acidosis and encephalopathy have also been reported in
patients with thiamine transporter 2 (THTR2) deficiency and with
pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy. Thiamine, either alone or in combination with biotin, is required for the treatment of THTR2 deficiency,
whereas pyridoxine is used to treat pyridoxine-­dependent epilepsy.

Leigh Syndrome (Subacute Necrotizing
Encephalomyelopathy)

Approximately 90% of glucose metabolism in the body is generated via
the glycolytic pathway, with the remaining 10% generated via the hexose monophosphate pathway. The hexose monophosphate shunt leads
to the formation of pentose and provides NADPH. One of the metabolites of this alternative pathway is ribose-­5-­phosphate, which is used in
the biosynthesis of ribonucleotides and deoxyribonucleotides. Through
the transketolase and transaldolase reactions, pentose phosphates can
be converted back to fructose-­6-­phosphate and glucose-­6-­phosphate.

Leigh syndrome is a heterogeneous neurologic disease historically
diagnosed based on neuropathologic findings of demyelination, gliosis, necrosis, relative neuronal sparing, and capillary proliferation in
specific brain regions (see Chapter 638.2). Leigh syndrome is characterized by decompensation (neurodevelopmental regression and lactic
acidosis) initiated by viral infection or other metabolic stress. Patients
frequently present with feeding and swallowing problems, failure to
thrive, and developmental delay. The presentation is highly variable
and may include seizures, altered consciousness, movement disorders, nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia, cerebellar ataxia, and peripheral

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

107.5 Defects in Pentose Metabolism
Ghada Hijazi and Priya S. Kishnani

ESSENTIAL PENTOSURIA

Essential pentosuria is a benign asymptomatic disorder encountered
principally in the Ashkenazi Jewish population and is inherited in an

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

920 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 107.5  Clues to the Diagnosis of Mitochondrial
Disease
NEUROLOGIC
Cerebral strokelike lesions in a nonvascular pattern
Basal ganglia disease
Encephalopathy, recurrent or with low/moderate dosing of valproate
Neurodegeneration
Epilepsia partialis continua
Myoclonus
Ataxia
MRI findings consistent with Leigh syndrome
Characteristic MRS peaks
Lactate peak at 1.3 ppm TE (time to echo) at 35 and 135
Succinate peak at 2.4 ppm
CARDIOVASCULAR
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with rhythm disturbance
Unexplained heart block in a child
Cardiomyopathy with lactic acidosis (>5 mM)
Dilated cardiomyopathy with muscle weakness
Wolff-­Parkinson-­White arrhythmia
OPHTHALMOLOGIC
Retinal degeneration with signs of night blindness, color vision
deficits, decreased visual acuity, or pigmentary retinopathy
Ophthalmoplegia/paresis
Fluctuating, dysconjugate eye movements
Ptosis
Sudden-­or insidious-­onset optic neuropathy/atrophy
GASTROENTEROLOGIC
Unexplained or valproate-­induced liver failure
Severe dysmotility
Pseudoobstructive episodes
OTHER
A newborn, infant, or young child with unexplained hypotonia,
weakness, failure to thrive, and a metabolic acidosis (particularly
lactic acidosis)
Exercise intolerance that is not in proportion to weakness
Hypersensitivity to general anesthesia
Episodes of acute rhabdomyolysis
Elevated GDF-­15 level
MRI, Magnetic resonance imaging, MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy; GDF,
growth and differentiation factor.
From Haas RH, Parikh S, Falk MJ, et al. Mitochondrial disease: a practical approach for
primary care physicians. Pediatrics. 2007;120:1326–1333, Table 1.

autosomal recessive fashion. The urine contains l-­xylulose, which is
excreted in increased amounts because of a block in the conversion of
l-­xylulose to xylitol as a result of xylitol dehydrogenase deficiency.
The condition is usually discovered incidentally in a urine test for
reducing substances. No treatment is required.

TRANSALDOLASE DEFICIENCY

Transaldolase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of
the pentose phosphate pathway. It is more common in Middle Eastern countries and can manifest in three distinct phenotypes. Prenatal intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), oligohydramnios, and/or
hydrops fetalis occur with the most severe phenotype. The second is
a neonatal phenotype, where patients may have dysmorphic facial features (triangular-­shaped face, low-­set ears, wide mouth, and thin lips),
cardiovascular abnormalities (ventricular and atrial septal defects),
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and hepatosplenomegaly noted in the
newborn period. In some cases, hepatic dysfunction was described
associated with fibrosis and/or cirrhosis, and transplantation of the
liver was indicated in a number of patients. Endocrine abnormalities
(abnormal genitalia, vitamin D insufficiency, hypergonadotrophic

hypogonadism), renal tubulopathy, and skin abnormalities (cutis laxa,
wrinkled skin, capillary hemangioma) have been observed. A third,
milder phenotype is described as presenting later in life. Biochemical abnormalities reveal elevated levels of the polyols arabitol, ribitol,
and erythritol and the seven-­carbon sugars sedoheptitol, perseitol,
sedoheptulose, mannoheptulose, and sedoheptulose-­7P in the urine.
The diagnosis is established with the detection of biallelic pathogenic
variants in the TALDO1 gene. When genetic testing is inconclusive,
low transaldolase activity in lymphoblasts, fibroblasts, and liver tissue
can be used to confirm the diagnosis. The available treatment is symptomatic. Supportive management of the disease manifestations (e.g.,
hepatic dysfunction) is needed. Transplantation of the liver may be
indicated. Regular follow-­up and monitoring for complications such
as anemia and thrombocytopenia is required. N-­acetylcysteine (NAC)
supplementation delayed the progression of disease and restored normal alpha fetoprotein levels in a research trial. Additional long-­term
studies are required to evaluate the broader effectiveness of NAC
supplementation.

RIBOSE-­5-­PHOSPHATE ISOMERASE DEFICIENCY

Only four cases of ribose-­5-­phosphatase isomerase deficiency disorder
have been reported. Affected patients may present with psychomotor
delay or regression, epilepsy, peripheral neuropathy, and leukoencephalopathy. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) and urine analysis
usually reveal elevated levels of polyols arabitol and ribitol in these
patients. Confirmation of diagnosis is established by identification
of biallelic RPIA pathogenic variants or by enzyme assay in cultured
fibroblasts.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

107.6 Disorders of Glycoprotein
Degradation and Structure
Margaret M. McGovern and Robert J. Desnick
The disorders of glycoprotein degradation and structure include several lysosomal storage diseases that result from defects in glycoprotein
degradation and the congenital disorders of glycosylation (see Chapter
107.7). Glycoproteins are macromolecules composed of oligosaccharide chains linked to a peptide backbone. They are synthesized by two
pathways: the glycosyltransferase pathway, which synthesizes oligosaccharides linked O-­glycosidically to serine or threonine residues, and
the dolichol, lipid-­linked pathway, which synthesizes oligosaccharides
linked N-­glycosidically to asparagine.
The glycoprotein lysosomal storage diseases result from the deficiency of the enzymes that normally participate in the degradation of
oligosaccharides and include sialidosis, galactosialidosis, aspartylglucosaminuria, and α-­mannosidosis. In some instances, the underlying
abnormality that leads to glycoprotein accumulation also results in
abnormal degradation of other classes of macromolecules that contain similar oligosaccharide linkages, such as certain glycolipids and
proteoglycans. In these cases the underlying enzymatic deficiency
results in the accumulation of both glycoproteins and glycolipids. The
classification of these types of disorders as lipidoses or glycoproteinoses
depends on the nature of the predominantly stored substance. In general, the glycoprotein disorders are characterized by autosomal recessive inheritance and a progressive disease course with clinical features
that resemble those seen in the mucopolysaccharidoses.

SIALIDOSIS AND GALACTOSIALIDOSIS

Sialidosis is an autosomal recessive disorder that results from the primary deficiency of neuraminidase because of pathogenic variants in
the gene (NEU1) that encodes this protein. In contrast, galactosialidosis is caused by the deficiency of two lysosomal enzymes—neuraminidase and β-­galactosidase. The loss of these enzymatic activities results
from pathogenic variants in a single gene, CTSA, that encodes the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates
protective protein cathepsin A, which functions to stabilize these enzymatic activities. Neuraminidase normally cleaves terminal sialyl linkages of several oligosaccharides and glycoproteins. Its deficiency results
in the accumulation of oligosaccharides and the urinary excretion of
sialic acid terminal oligosaccharides and sialylglycopeptides. Examination of tissues from affected individuals reveals pathologic storage
of substrate in many tissues, including liver, bone marrow, and brain.
The clinical phenotype associated with neuraminidase deficiency
is variable and includes type I sialidosis, which usually presents in
the second decade of life with myoclonus and cherry-­red spots in the
macula. These patients typically present secondary to gait disturbances,
myoclonus, or visual complaints. In contrast, type II sialidosis occurs
at several ages of onset (congenital, infantile, and juvenile), depending on the severity of the gene pathogenic variant. The congenital
and infantile forms result from isolated neuraminidase deficiency,
whereas the juvenile form results from both neuraminidase and β-­
galactosidase deficiency. The congenital type II disease is characterized
by hydrops fetalis, neonatal ascites, hepatosplenomegaly, stippling of
the epiphyses, periosteal cloaking, and stillbirth or death in infancy.
The type II infantile form presents in the first years of life with dysostosis multiplex, moderate global developmental delays, visceromegaly,
corneal clouding, cherry-­red maculae, and seizures. The juvenile type
II form of sialidosis, which is sometimes designated galactosialidosis, has a variable age of onset ranging from infancy to adulthood. In
infancy, the phenotype is similar to that of GM1 gangliosidosis, with
edema, ascites, skeletal dysplasia, and cherry-­red spots. Patients with
later-­onset disease have dysostosis multiplex, visceromegaly, intellectual disability, dysmorphism, corneal clouding, progressive neurologic
deterioration, and cherry-­red spots.
No specific therapy exists for any form of the disease, although studies in animal models have demonstrated improvement in the phenotype after bone marrow transplantation. The diagnosis of sialidosis
and galactosialidosis is achieved by the demonstration of the specific
enzymatic deficiency or by pathogenic variants in the responsible gene.
Prenatal diagnosis using cultured amniotic cells or chorionic villi is
available by demonstrating the enzyme defect and/or specific gene
pathogenic variants.

ASPARTYLGLUCOSAMINURIA

This is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder, except
in Finland, where the carrier frequency is estimated at 1 in 36 adults,
the high frequency due to a founder gene. The disorder results from
the deficient activity of aspartylglycosaminidase and the subsequent
accumulation of aspartylglycosamine, particularly in the liver, spleen,
and thyroid. The gene for the enzyme is AGA, and in the Finnish
population, a single AGA pathogenic variant encoding p.Cys163Ser
accounts for most mutant alleles. Outside of Finland, a large number of
private pathogenic variants have been described.
Affected individuals with aspartylglucosaminuria typically present
in the first year of life with recurrent infections, diarrhea, and umbilical
hernias. Coarsening of the facies and short stature usually develop later.
Other features include joint laxity, macroglossia, hoarse voice, crystal-­
like lens opacities, hypotonia, and spasticity. Psychomotor development is usually near normal until age 5 years, when a decline is noted.
Behavioral abnormalities are typically seen, and IQ values in affected
adults are usually <40 (severe intellectual disability). Survival to adulthood is common, with most early deaths attributable to pneumonia or
other pulmonary causes. Definitive diagnosis requires demonstration
of markedly deficient aspartylglucosaminidase in peripheral blood leukocytes and/or the specific AGA pathogenic variant(s). Several patients
have undergone allogeneic bone marrow transplants, but this approach
has not proved effective, and no specific treatment is available. Prenatal diagnosis is available by the determination of aspartylglucosaminidase deficiency and/or the specific AGA pathogenic variants in
cultured amniocytes or chorionic villi.

α-­MANNOSIDOSIS

This autosomal recessive disorder results from the deficient activity of
α-­mannosidase and the accumulation of mannose-­rich compounds.

921

The gene MAN2B1 encodes the enzyme, and to date, >140 gene pathogenic variants have been reported. Affected patients display clinical
heterogeneity. There is a severe infantile form, or type I disease, and a
milder juvenile variant, type II disease. All patients have psychomotor
retardation, facial coarsening, and dysostosis multiplex. The infantile
form of the disorder, however, is characterized by more rapid cognitive deterioration, with death occurring between ages 3 and 10 years.
Patients with the infantile form also have more severe skeletal involvement and hepatosplenomegaly. The juvenile disorder is characterized
by onset of symptoms in early childhood or adolescence, with milder
somatic features and survival to adulthood. Hearing loss, destructive
synovitis, pancytopenia, and spastic paraplegia have been reported in
type II patients. The diagnosis is made by identification of biallelic
pathogenic variants in MAN2B1 and may be supplemented by the
demonstration of the marked deficiency of α-­mannosidase activity
in white blood cells or cultured fibroblasts. Clinical trials of ERT with
recombinant human α-­mannosidase are underway. Prenatal diagnosis can be made by demonstrating the enzyme defect and/or known
pathogenic variants in cultured amniocytes or chorionic villi.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

107.7 Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation
Eva Morava and Peter Witters
Glycosylation is the complex multistep metabolic process of adding
(oligo)saccharides to macromolecules such as proteins and lipids. The
classification of disorders of hypoglycosylation is based on biochemical structures: (1) defects in protein N-­linked glycosylation, (2) defects
in protein O-­linked glycosylation, (3) defects in glycosphingolipid and
in glycosylphosphatidylinositol-­anchor glycosylation, and (4) defects
in multiple glycosylation pathways and in other pathways (Fig. 107.7).
No disorders are known to result from abnormal C-­linked glycosylation. Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) are labeled based
on their genetic defect.
Protein glycosylation is an essential process. Most functional
proteins are glycosylated, including serum proteins (e.g., transferrin,
ceruloplasmin, thyroxine-­binding globulin [TBG]), hormones (e.g.,
thyroid-­
stimulating hormone [TSH], follicle-­
stimulating hormone
[FSH], luteinizing hormone [LH], adrenocorticotropic hormone
[ACTH], IGFBP3), and clotting and anticoagulation factors (e.g., factors IX and XI, antithrombin). Membrane proteins are also highly glycosylated. Important intracellular glycoproteins include enzymes such
as glycosyltransferases or lysosomal enzymes.
N-­glycans are linked to the amide group of asparagine. They are synthetized in a complicated process throughout the cytoplasm, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and Golgi complex, starting with sugar activation
and nucleotide sugar synthesis, then oligosaccharide assembly, and
finally glycan processing (see Fig. 107.7). Most of the pediatric glycosylation disorders are the result of N-­glycosylation defects. O-­glycans
are linked to the hydroxyl group of serine or threonine. These diverse
glycoproteins are mostly formed in the Golgi complex; their defects
can involve xylosylation, fucosylation, mannosylation, or other modifications. An important focus is O-­mannosylation defects because of
their relevance for dystroglycanopathies.
Lipid glycosylation is an essential process for the synthesis of
ceramide and ganglioside synthesis. Glycosylphosphatidylinositols
(GPIs) are very special glycolipids that link various proteins to the
plasma membrane, as complex lipid-­sugar anchors (GPI anchors, see
Fig. 107.7).
CDGs are predominantly multisystem diseases caused by more
than 150 different genetic defects in glycoprotein and glycolipid glycan synthesis. Most patients described with CDG have N-­glycosylation
defects, followed by the fastest-­growing groups of CDGs, involving
multiple glycosylation pathways and dolicholphosphate synthesis.
Smaller groups are O-­glycosylation disorders and disorders of GPI.
The “oldest” and most common CDG is PMM2-­CDG, in which the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

922 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders

Fig. 107.7 Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG): an overview of the currently known subtypes. The picture shows a schematic illustration

of the individual 137 CDG subtypes known to date, designated by the symbol of the affected gene, which are categorized according to the nature
of the biochemical event impaired within the glycosylation pathway. Glycosylation is a complex metabolic process resulting in the attachment of an
oligosaccharide chain of varying length and composition (a glycan) to proteins and lipids. It involves a set of enzyme-­catalyzed reactions that take
place mainly in the cytosol (1.), endoplasmic reticulum (ER; 3.) and Golgi apparatus (4.), after which the newly formed glycoconjugates are, generally,
incorporated into membranes or secreted out of the cell. Depending on how a glycan is linked to the polypeptide backbone, protein glycosylation is
classified into N-­linked (a bond via the amide group of asparagine) or O-­linked (a bond via the hydroxyl group of serine, threonine, or hydroxylysine).
N-­glycoproteins share a common core structure of the glycan, which is first assembled on a dolichol anchor and then transferred onto the protein
in the ER; this is later followed by further modifications of the N-­glycan, removing and adding different monosaccharides, in the Golgi apparatus.
O-­glycosylation consists of a stepwise addition of individual monosaccharide units in the ER and Golgi apparatus, while six subclasses can be distinguished based on which sugar (Man, GalNac, GlcNAc, Glc, Fuc, or Xyl) is the first one attached to the protein, and thus more varied O-­glycan
structures are produced. Other specific types of glycosylation involve lipid glycosylation and the modification of proteins by the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. The substrates for glycosylation in the form of nucleotide-­monosaccharides are synthesized predominantly in the cytosol,
and because they are used in different glycosylation reactions, their deficiency possibly influences the structure of various glycoconjugates. Similarly,
several defects have been described that affect multiple glycosylation pathways, and, often, other cellular processes might be disturbed as well
(e.g., because of altered ion homeostasis in the Golgi apparatus). ADP, adenosine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; COG, conserved
oligomeric Golgi (complex); ER, endoplasmic reticulum; Fru-­6-­P, fructose-­6-­phosphate; Fuc, fucose; GalNAc, N-­acetylgalactosamine; Glc, glucose;
GlcNAc, N-­acetylglucosamine; GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; H+, protons; LLO, lipid-­linked oligosaccharides; Man, mannose; MPI, mannose
phosphate isomerase; PGM1, phosphoglucomutase 1; PMM2, phosphomannomutase 2; UDP, uridine diphosphate; UMP, uridine monophosphate;
Xyl, xylose. (From Ondruskova N, Cechova A, Hansikova H, et al. Congenital disorders of glycosylation: still “hot” in 2020. Biochim Biophys Acta
Gen Subj. 2021;1865[1]:129751, Fig. 1.)

genetic defect leads to the loss of phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2),
the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of mannose-­6-­phosphate
into mannose-­1-­phosphate. The majority of CDGs have an autosomal
recessive inheritance. Only two N-­linked CDGs are autosomal dominant: GANAB-­CDG and PRKCSH-­CDG. The dominantly inherited O-­
linked CDGs include EXT1-­CDG, H63ST-­CDG, and POFUT1-­CDG.
Some CDGs have both an autosomal dominant and recessive phenotype

such as EXT2-­CDG, POGLUT1-­CDG, GNE-­CDG, DHDDS-­CDG,
NUS1-­
CDG, COG4-­
CDG, and SEC23B-­
CDG. X-­
linked CDGs
include ALG13-­CDG, MAGT1-­CDG, SSR4-­CDG, HS6ST2-­CDG,
OGT-­CDG, PIGA-­CDG, SLC35A2-­CDG, TRAPPC2-­CDG, VMA21-­
CDG, ATP6AP2-­CDG, ATP6AP1-­CDG, and SLC9A7-­CDG.
CDGs can be lethal, with 20% of PMM2-­CDG patients dying in
the first 2 years of life. Some patients, however, stabilize throughout

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates

A

B

C

D

E

F

923

Fig. 107.8 Patients with phosphomannomutase-­2 deficiency (PMM2-­CDG) and recognizable clinical features. A, Inverted nipples. B and C, Abnor-

mal fat distribution. D, Muscle atrophy caused by peripheral neuropathy after puberty. E, Characteristic facial features with strabismus, short nose,
anteverted nares, long philtrum, and large ears. F, T1-­weighted sagittal MRI of the brain showing cerebellar vermis hypoplasia (arrow) and brain
atrophy.

young adulthood. Almost any clinical phenotype can be present in a
patient with CDG. It can affect any organ or organ system and most
often includes the CNS. The most common clinical features include
developmental and speech delay, seizures, ataxia, spasticity, peripheral
neuropathy, hypotonia, strabismus, abnormal fat distribution, visual
loss, cardiomyopathy, feeding difficulties, liver dysfunction, endocrine
abnormalities, bleeding diathesis, and thrombosis (Fig. 107.8 and Table
107.6). Single-­organ presentations are rare in CDGs, although some
do exist, including TUSC3-­CDG and ST3GAL3-­CDG: brain; DHDDS-­
CDG: retina; ALG14-­CDG: neuromuscular junction; POFUT1-­CDG
and POGLUT1-­CDG: skin; SEC23B-­CDG: red cell lineage; EXT1/
EXT2-­CDG: cartilage; and TMEM199-­CDG: liver. Many CDGs are
recognizable syndromes. CDG should be considered in any patient with
a developmental disability or an unexplained clinical condition, especially in multisystem disease with neurologic involvement.
There are also congenital disorders of deglycosylation, including
known lysosomal disorders and a severe neurologic condition caused
by a defective N-­glycanase function (NGLY1 defect).
Laboratory evaluations in most N-­linked CDGs rely on transferrin glycoform analysis in serum or plasma. A common screening
method is called serum transferrin isoelectric focusing (TIEF).

Transferrin isoforms, which are hyposialylated (missing terminal
sialic acid residues), show different cathodal shifts depending on
either missing glycan chains or truncated glycans. A type 1 pattern suggests an early metabolic defect in the cytosolic-­ER–related
glycan synthesis and assembly. A type 2 pattern suggests Golgi-­
related glycan-­processing defects (Fig. 107.9). Isoelectric focusing of apolipoprotein C-­III (IEF apoC-­III), a serum mucine type
O-­g lycosylated protein, can detect some O-­g lycosylation disorders
(combined N-­ and O-­linked glycosylation defects). Mass spectrometry of intact (glycosylated) transferrin in serum is highly
sensitive for mild type 1 glycosylation abnormalities and diagnostic in most CDGs affecting N-­g lycosylation. Mass spectrometry of apoC-­III is useful specifically in type II CDG. Glycomics
by matrix-­assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight
(MALDI-­TOF) can be diagnostic in specific types of CDG (mostly
Golgi related with a type 2 pattern). Dolichol-­linked glycan or
lipid-­linked oligosaccharide (LLO) analysis is a complicated but
sensitive method to detect ER-­related N-­g lycan assembly (CDG
type 1) defects in patient fibroblasts. GPI-­anchor defects can be
suspected based on recurrent elevation of alkaline phosphatase levels in blood.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

924 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 107.6  Clinical and Laboratory Features in Common Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDGs), with Clinically
Recognizable Phenotype and Abnormal Glycosylation, Detectable by Serum Transferrin Isoform Analysis (TIEF)
DEFECTIVE
GENE

MOST FREQUENT CLINICAL
FEATURES

SUGGESTIVE FEATURES

LABORATORY
ABNORMALITIES

OTHER BIOCHEMICAL
ANOMALIES

PMM2

Strabismus, nystagmus, smooth philtrum,
large ears, vomiting, diarrhea, FTT,
axial hypotonia, cerebellar vermis
hypoplasia, ataxia, psychomotor
disability, seizures, spasticity,
neuropathy, pigmentary retinitis

Inverted nipples and/
or abnormal fat pads,
strokelike episodes

Elevated serum
transaminases;
hypoalbuminemia,
decreased factor IX,
XI, and AT activity; low
serum ceruloplasmin and
TBG levels

Type 1 serum TIEF,
decreased PMM activity
in leukocytes and
fibroblasts

MPI

Cholestasis, hepatomegaly, feeding
difficulties, recurrent vomiting,
chronic diarrhea, ascites, recurrent
thrombosis, gastrointestinal bleeding

Hyperinsulinism, protein-­
losing enteropathy
Normal intelligence and
absence of neurologic
features

Elevated transaminases;
hypoalbuminemia;
hypoglycemia;
decreased factor IX, XI,
and AT-­III activity

Type 1 serum TIEF,
decreased PMI activity in
leukocytes and
fibroblasts

ALG6

Hypotonia, muscle weakness, seizures,
ataxia, intellectual disability, behavioral
abnormalities

Distal limb malformations

Elevated serum
transaminases;
hypoalbuminemia;
decreased factor IX,
XI, and AT activity; low
serum IgG level

Type 1 serum TIEF,
abnormal LLO results in
fibroblasts

DPAGT1

Microcephaly, brain malformations,
hypotonia, severe psychomotor
disability, seizures, spasticity, proximal
weakness, failure to thrive, joint
contractures

Congenital myasthenia
phenotype
In multisystem phenotype:
cataract

Decreased AT, protein C,
and protein S activity;
increased creatine kinase;
hypoalbuminemia;
normal creatine kinase in
myasthenia

Type 1 serum TIEF

SRD5A3

Developmental delay, hypotonia,
ataxia, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia,
intellectual disability, speech delay,
visual loss

Congenital cataract, retinal
and iridic coloboma,
glaucoma, optic nerve
dysplasia, ichthyosis

Low anticoagulation
factors (AT, protein C,
and protein S activity),
increased serum
transaminases

Type 1 serum TIEF but
reported false-­negative
TIEF

ATP6V0A2

Generalized cutis laxa, hypotonia,
strabismus, characteristic facial
features, joint laxity, seizures, motor
and language developmental delay,
spontaneous improvement of cutis
laxa by aging

Cobblestone-­like brain
dysgenesis

Mild coagulation
abnormalities, increased
serum transaminase levels

Cardiovascular anomalies

Mild coagulation
abnormalities and
increased serum
transaminase levels,
hypercholesterolemia

Type 2 serum TIEF but
reported false-­negative
TIEF
Abnormal apoC-­III IEF,
characteristic MALDI
TOF profile (Note
abnormal skin histology)

PGM1

Pierre Robin sequence, cholestasis,
short stature, dilated cardiomyopathy

Cleft palate,
hyperinsulinism, normal
intelligence

Hypoglycemia, increased
serum transaminase
levels, decreased AT

Mixed type 1/ serum TIEF,
decreased fibroblast
PGM1 activity

MAN1B1

Developmental delay, speech delay,
intellectual disability, muscle
weakness

Obesity, autistic features,
inverted nipples,
characteristic face

Increased serum
transaminase levels, low
AT

Type 2 serum TIEF,
abnormal apoC-­III IEF,
diagnostic MALDI TOF
profile

TMEM199

Cholestasis, hepatomegaly, liver
steatosis, liver fibrosis, liver failure,
spontaneous bleedings, motor
developmental delay

Normal intelligence

Decreased serum
ceruloplasmin,
increased serum
transaminase levels,
hypercholesterolemia,
high AP

Type 2 serum TIEF,
abnormal apoC-­III IEF,
characteristic MALDI
TOF profile

Seizures, hypsarrhythmia, hypotonia,
developmental and speech delay,
FTT

Dwarfism, craniosynostosis,
rhizomelia, Leigh disease

Decreased serum
manganese, high serum
transaminases, abnormal
coagulation

Type 2 serum TIEF,
abnormal apoC-­III,
characteristic MALDI
TOF profile

ATP6V1A and
ATP6V1E1

CCDC115
ATP6AP1 and
ATP6AP2
SLC39A8

Hepatomegaly
Immune deficiency

AP, Alkaline phosphatase; AT, antithrombin; apoC-­III: apolipoprotein C-­III; FTT, failure to thrive; LLO, lipid-­linked oligosaccharides; MALDI-­TOF, matrix-­assisted laser desorption/
ionization time of flight; TBG, thyroxine-­binding globulin; TIEF, transferrin isoelectric focusing.

Fluorescence-­
activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis of the
membrane-­anchored markers CD16 and CD24 in leukocytes is highly
suggestive for a GPI-­anchor abnormality, especially when alkaline
phosphatase in the blood is significantly elevated. Enzyme analysis in

blood is only available for a few, more common CDGs (PMM2-­CDG,
MPI-­CDG, PGM1-­CDG); it is more reliable in fibroblasts. Dystroglycanopathies can be confirmed based on abnormal immunohistochemistry in a muscle biopsy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates

925

Suspicion of CDG
Unexplained syndrome with or without ID3

CDT% / Capillary zone electrophoresis

Abnormal

Serum Tf1 isoelectrofocusing (IEF)

Type 1 pattern

Type 2 pattern

Normal pattern

PMM2-CDG or
MPI-CDG phenotype

No PMM2-CDG or
MPI-CDG phenotype

MAN1B1-CDG or
PGM1-CDG phenotype

No MAN1B1-CDG or
PGM1-CDG phenotype

Enzymatic analysis

NGS2

Gene sequencing

Serum ApoC3 IEF

Gene sequencing

Fig. 107.9

NGS

2

Clinical suspicion
eg, of PMM2-CDG
(ID3, fat pads, CH4)

Biochemical suspicion
eg, of GPI-CDG5
(increased serum AP6)

Validation by gene
sequencing or NGS

CDG diagnosis algorithm. 1Transferrin; 2Next-­generation sequencing (CDG panel analysis, WES, WGS); 3Intellectual disability; 4Cer-

ebellar hypoplasia; 5Glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor synthesis defect; 6Alkaline phosphatase. ID, intellectual disability; WES, whole exome
sequencing; WGS, whole genome sequencing. (From Quelhas D, Martins E, Azevedo L, et al. Congenital disorders of glycosylation in Portugal – two
decades of experience. J Pediatr. 2021;231:148–156.)

With an abnormal TIEF pattern result or clinical suspicion
of any type of CDG, most metabolic centers use a direct CDG
gene panel analysis or NGS (whole exome sequencing) (see
Fig. 107.9).

CONGENITAL DISORDERS OF PROTEIN
N-­GLYCOSYLATION
Phosphomannomutase-­2 Deficiency (PMM2-­CDG)
Clinical Manifestations

PMM2-­CDG is the most common and easily recognizable CDG.
Over 900 patients have been identified with an estimated incidence of 1:20,000-­1:80,000. Most patients have alternating strabismus, characteristic facial features (short nose, long philtrum,
large ears) (see Fig. 107.8E), inverted nipples and/or abnormal fat
pads (see Fig. 107.8A-­C), feeding difficulties, axial hypotonia, and
decreased reflexes already in the first few months of life. Nystagmus (caused by pontocerebellar and vermis hypoplasia; see Fig.
107.8F) is also common. Psychomotor disability is present in most
patients, but normal intellectual development has been described
in a few patients. Most patients develop a multisystem disease, and
<25% show an isolated neurologic phenotype without other organ
involvement, normal endocrine regulation, and no coagulopathy.
The neurologic involvement is quite diverse, with ataxia, seizures,
spasticity, and peripheral neuropathy (see Fig. 107.8D) the most
common features. Dystonia, strokelike episodes, and proximal
myopathy can also occur. PMM2-­CDG is not a progressive disease,
but certain features, when present, typically appear at a different
age during the disease. From birth, pericardial fluid collection,
cardiomyopathy, or chronic vomiting/diarrhea can occur; after the
age of 7 years, retinitis pigmentosa and cataracts; and after puberty,
scoliosis, neuropathy, and recurrent thrombotic events. Liver function anomalies are mild and usually improve by age, and only a few

patients develop cholestasis or liver fibrosis. Most patients have a
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism; no successful pregnancies have
been reported. Intellectual disability can be mild to severe; speech
development is frequently delayed and can even be absent. Autistic
behavior is common, although most patients have a cheerful personality. The oldest patient is 72 years old.

Pathophysiology

PMM2 catalyzes the conversion of mannose-­6-­phosphate to mannose-­
1-­phosphate and is essential for the formation of activated mannose
units used in the synthesis of the growing glycan chain in the ER.
Hypoglycosylation leads to abnormal function affecting many essential
glycoproteins, such as coagulation and anticoagulation factors; endocrine regulation; transport proteins; liver function; and immune, membrane, and receptor proteins.

Diagnosis

The primary screening method for PMM2-­CDG is serum transferrin
glycoform analysis, which is most frequently performed by TIEF or
mass spectrometry. Intact transferrin has four negatively charged sialic
acid residues (tetrasialotransferrin). Transferrin glycoforms, missing terminal sialic acid residues, show different cathodal shifts, less
abundant tetrasialotransferrin, increased disialotransferrin, and some
a-­sialotransferrin. This is the so-­called type 1 pattern, suggestive of a
defect in glycan assembly in the cytosol-­ER. Transferrin isoforms are
detectable by mass spectrometry, which is a more reliable diagnostic
method compared with TIEF. Certain other disorders can cause a false-­
positive transferrin isoform pattern, including galactosemia, hereditary
fructose intolerance, and excessive alcohol use. PMM enzyme analysis
is available in leukocytes and fibroblasts.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

926 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
The presence of elevated serum transaminases, hypoalbuminemia,
decreased factor IX and XI and antithrombin activity, or low ceruloplasmin or TBG level is highly suggestive of CDG, including the most common type, PMM2-­CDG.
PMM2-­CDG is autosomal recessive. Genetic testing is mostly performed by direct sequencing. The most frequent pathogenic variant
(c.422G>A; R141H) is present in 75% of White patients. Prenatal diagnosis is only reliable by genetic testing.

Treatment

The therapy in PMM2-­CDG relies on supportive treatment. Even
with the best treatment, mortality is about 20% in the first 2 years
of life, mostly from cardiac or kidney involvement and severe infections. Recommended therapy includes adequate nutrition, diet or
tube feeding if needed, cardiac support, hormone supplements,
physical and occupational therapy, speech therapy, seizure management, and strabismus surgery. Treatment with acetazolamide (7-­17
mg/kg/day) resulted in improvement of ataxia and a decrease in
disease severity (measured by the Nijmegen Pediatric CDG rating
scale). This is likely mediated by the function of the glycosylated
CaV2.1 channel. Possible dehydration, changes in plasma pH, and
bicarbonate levels (renal tubular acidosis) need to be monitored
throughout therapy.
Therapeutic developments include targeted (liposomal) mannose-­
phosphate treatment, drug repurposing, and chaperone therapy; these
are only in early trial phases.

Mannosephosphoisomerase Deficiency (MPI-­CDG)
Clinical Manifestations

MPI deficiency is a recognizable and treatable CDG. Approximately
35 patients have been published. Most patients show early symptoms
of liver disease (cholestasis, elevated transaminases) and feeding
difficulties, with recurrent vomiting and chronic diarrhea, most frequently with protein-­losing enteropathy. Life-­threatening episodes
might appear as early as the first few months of life with recurrent
thrombosis and severe gastrointestinal bleeding because of severe
coagulation abnormalities. Hypoglycemia is usually caused by hyperinsulinism. Hypoalbuminemia can be severe; patients might develop
visible abdominal distention from a combination of ascites and hepatomegaly. Patients with MPI-­CDG have no other organ involvement,
and the CNS is not affected. There are no dysmorphic features. The
liver disease frequently progresses to fibrosis or cirrhosis.

Pathophysiology

Mannosephosphoisomerase (MPI) catalyzes the conversion of fructose-­
6-­phosphate to mannose-­6-­phosphate, one step before PMM2, therefore
blocking the formation of activated mannose units (GDP mannose) for
oligosaccharide synthesis. Hypoglycosylation leads to abnormal glycoprotein function, the same as in PMM2-­CDG, especially coagulation
and anticoagulation factors, liver function, and hormone receptors.

Diagnosis

The primary screening method in a suspected MPI-­CDG patient is
serum transferrin isoform analysis by mass spectrometry or screening by TIEF (see Fig. 107.9). MPI deficiency leads to a type 1 pattern,
as seen in PMM2 deficiency. MPI enzyme analysis is available in leukocytes and fibroblasts. The presence of elevated serum transaminases,
hypoalbuminemia, decreased factor IX and XI and antithrombin activity, hyperinsulinism, and nonketotic hypoglycemia are highly suggestive for MPI-­CDG.
MPI-­CDG is autosomal recessive. Genetic testing is mostly performed by direct sequencing. The exact incidence of MPI-­CDG is not
known, but it is estimated at 1 in 800,000 in Europe. Prenatal diagnosis
is only reliable by genetic testing. Although this is a rare CDG, early
diagnosis is imperative because it is treatable.

Treatment

MPI-­CDG is the first CDG type treatable by dietary therapy (Table
107.7). Mannose therapy is clinically effective by both IV and oral
supplementation. The dose of oral mannose is 150-170 mg/kg/dose
for four or five doses per day (maximum dosing 600-1200 mg/kg/
day and maximum of six doses per day). IV mannose should be
used only in life-threatening conditions when oral intake is not possible. The maximum dose of IV mannose is 1 g/kg/day as a continuous infusion, combined with IV glucose to prevent hypoglycemia.
A known side effect is hemolysis. The treatment uses an alternative
pathway: mannose can be phosphorylated by hexokinases to mannose 6-­phosphate, bypassing the MPI defect. The clinical symptoms
improve rapidly, but liver function may further deteriorate. Liver
fibrosis and cirrhosis may necessitate liver transplantation, which
will resolve the metabolic disease. The oldest patient known with
MPI-­CDG has survived into their late 30s.

Glucosyltransferase-­1 Deficiency (ALG6-­CDG)
Clinical Manifestations

ALG6-­CDG is the second most common CDG. Most patients have
hypotonia, muscle weakness, seizures, and ataxia. No patient with
ALG6-­CDG has been reported with normal intelligence. Speech delay
and nystagmus are common neurologic signs. Brachydactyly, skeletal
abnormalities, and transverse limb defects have been observed. Strabismus and characteristic facial dysmorphism are rare (hypertelorism,
oval face, short nose). Inverted nipples and/or abnormal fat pads are
exceptional in ALG6-­CDG.
The most severe ALG6-­CDG patients show a multisystem phenotype in the first few months of life, including severe infections, protein-­
losing enteropathy, hypoalbuminemia, anemia, and failure to thrive.
Autistic behavior and mood changes have been observed in several
patients. The oldest patient to date is almost 50 years old.

Pathophysiology

The metabolic problem is caused by defective binding of the first
of three glucoses to the lipid-­linked oligosaccharide in the ER. This
glucose binding is essential for attachment of the oligosaccharyltransferase enzyme complex to the newly built oligosaccharide
chain and the ability to transfer it to the protein. This leads to protein hypoglycosylation and abnormal glycoprotein function similar
to PMM2-­CDG and MPI-­CDG. Laboratory abnormalities are also
similar, including abnormalities in coagulation and anticoagulation
factors, liver function, thyroid hormones, and immunoglobulins
(IgGs).

Diagnosis

The primary screening method in a suspected ALG6-­CDG patient
is serum transferrin glycoform analysis by mass spectroscopy or
TIEF analysis. ALG6 deficiency leads to a type 1 pattern (see Fig.
107.9), as seen in PMM2 and MPI deficiency. There is no available enzyme analysis, although LLOs could be evaluated in patient
fibroblasts.
ALG6-­CDG is autosomal recessive. Genetic testing is mostly performed by direct sequencing. The most common pathogenic variants are p.A333V and p.I299Del. Prenatal diagnosis is only reliable by
genetic testing. The exact incidence of ALG6-­CDG is not known.

Treatment

The current therapy in ALG6-­CDG relies on supportive treatment.
Mortality is about 10% in the first years of life, mostly from protein-­
losing enteropathy and severe infections.

UDP-­GlcNAc:Dol-­P-­GlcNAc-­P Transferase Deficiency
(DPAGT1-­CDG)
Clinical Manifestations

DPAGT1 deficiency is a recognizable and potentially treatable
CDG. About one third of patients show the congenital myasthenia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates

927

Table 107.7  Effective Therapies in CDG
CDG

TREATMENT

RECOMMENDED
DOSE

CLINICAL EFFECTS

SIDE EFFECTS

MPI-­CDG

Mannose

600-­1200 mg/kg BW/
day in 4-­6 oral doses

Improvement of digestive symptoms (13/14),
coagulopathy (12/12), and hypoglycemia
(9/9); no long-­term effect on liver symptoms

Abdominal pain and diarrhea
(5/10; responding to dose
adjustment)

PGM1-­CDG

Galactose

1 g/kg/day (500-2500
mg/kg/day; max 50
g/day), divided in up
to 6 oral doses per
day

Improvement of hepatopathy (15/18), muscle
symptoms (14/14), coagulopathy (10/12),
hypoglycemia (10/13), and pubertal delay
(2/2); minimal effect on growth (1/8), ID
(0/2), and cardiologic symptoms (0/2)

Not reported

SLC35C2-­CDG

Galactose

1.5 g/kg/day (up to 3
g/kg/day), divided
in up to 5 oral doses
per day

Improvement of psychomotor development
(5/10), growth (n.s.), gastrointestinal
symptoms (n.s.), and seizures (3/5)

Not reported

SLC35C1-­CDG

Fucose

400 mg/kg/day (up
to 1.2 g/kg/day
in severe cases),
divided into 2-3 oral
doses per day

Normalization of neutrophil count (5/5),
decreased incidence of severe infections
(3/3), improvement of psychomotor
development (1/5), no effect on adult form
of the disease (ID, ataxia, epilepsy, autism)

Autoimmune neutropenia and
hemolysis (responding to
dose adjustment)

CAD-­CDG

Uridine

100 mg/kg/day in 4
oral doses

Cessation of pharmacoresistant seizures
(3/3), significant developmental progress
(3/3), resolution of anemia (2/2), and
anisopoikilocytosis (3/3)

Not reported

SLC39A8-­CDG

Manganese

15-­20 mg MnSO4/kg
BW/day in 5 oral
doses

Improvement of glycosylation (2/2), motor
abilities (2/2), epilepsy (1/1), ataxia (1/1),
and hearing (1/1)

Not reported, risk of manganism

Galactose

500-­3750 mg/kg BW/
day in 5 oral doses

Improvement of glycosylation (2/2), no
clinical improvement reported

Not reported

TMEM165-­CDG

Galactose

1000 mg/kg/day orally

Improvement of glycosylation (2/2),
hepatopathy (2/2), coagulopathy (2/2), and
IGF1 levels (2/2) (clinical improvement not
mentioned)

Not reported

GFPT1-­CDG

Pyridostigmine
(cholinesterase
inhibitors)

2.5-­15 mg/kg/day in 3
oral doses

Improvement of muscle weakness (52/56)

Muscle twitching, depression,
and anxiety (2/56)

ALG2-­CDG

Pyridostigmine
(cholinesterase
inhibitors)

Oral, dose n.s.

Improvement of muscle weakness (1/1)

Not reported

ALG14-­CDG

Pyridostigmine
(cholinesterase
inhibitors)

5-­8 mg/kg/day in 2-­6
oral doses

Improvement of muscle weakness (4/4, in 1
patient the effect was only temporary)

Not reported

PIGM-­CDG

Sodium butyrate

60-­90 mg/kg/day in 3
oral doses

Effect on seizures (3/3), developmental delay Not reported
(2/2), and increase in the expression of GPI-­
linked blood cell surface markers (2/4)

PMM2-­CDG

Acetazolamide

7-­17 mg/kg/day in 2
oral doses

Effect on cerebellar symptoms (20/23),
speech (20/23), anxiety (20/23), some
coagulation parameters (20/23), stereotypic
movements (5/5), and SLE (1/1). No
improvement of ID and non-­neurologic
symptoms.

Acidosis with significant
decrease of serum
bicarbonate (9/23), asthenia
(4/23), and paresthesia
(2/23) responding to
dose adjustments; risk of
urolithiasis, osteopenia

BW, Body weight; GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; ID, intellectual disability; IGF1, insulin-­like growth factor 1; n.s., not specified; SLE, strokelike episodes.
Modified from Ondruskova N, Cechova A, Hansikova H, et al. Congenital disorders of glycosylation: still “hot” in 2020. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj. 2021;1865(1):129751, Table 2.

phenotype, indistinguishable from other genetic congenital myasthenias. CK levels are normal. These patients have a relatively good
prognosis, especially with early myasthenia therapy. The other
patients show a multisystem phenotype with microcephaly, brain
malformations, hypotonia, severe psychomotor disability, seizures,
spasticity, failure to thrive, joint contractures, and cataracts.

Pathophysiology

The DPAGT1 defect leads to very early arrest of glycan synthesis
outside the ER membrane by slowing the addition of the second
GlcNAc sugar to the phosphorylated dolichol arm. Abnormal
receptor glycosylation in the neuromuscular junction leads to
myasthenia. Hypoglycosylation in the multisystem type leads to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

928 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
abnormal glycoprotein function similar to PMM2-­CDG, especially
involving the anticoagulation factors, and interestingly leading to
high serum CK (in contrast to the congenital myasthenia phenotype) and hypoalbuminemia.

Diagnosis

The primary screening method is serum transferrin glycoform analysis by mass spectroscopy or TIEF analysis. Most patients show a type
1 pattern (see Fig. 107.9), but patients with the congenital myasthenia
phenotype can show normal screening. There is no clinically available
enzyme analysis.
DPAGT1-­CDG is autosomal recessive. Genetic testing is mostly
performed by direct sequencing. The exact incidence is not known.
Prenatal diagnosis is only reliable by genetic testing. Because of the
false-­negative TIEF results in several patients with the myasthenic
phenotype, congenital myasthenia panel testing is suggested in suspected cases, especially for determining the potential therapy.

Treatment

The congenital myasthenia phenotype is frequently treatable by high-­
dose pyridostigmine, eventually enhanced with salbutamol and a
potassium channel blocker (amifampridine). In the multisystem phenotype of DPAGT1-­CDG, treatment is supportive.

CONGENITAL DISORDERS OF PROTEIN
O-­GLYCOSYLATION
Cerebro-­Ocular Dysplasia–Muscular Dystrophy and
Muscle-­Eye-­Brain Disease Spectrum (POMT1-­CDG,
POMT2-­CDG, POMGNT1-­CDG)

From isolated muscular dystrophy to Walker Warburg syndrome,
this group of O-­linked glycosylation disorders presents with severe
muscle weakness, congenital eye malformations, and neuronal
migration defects. Pachygyria, cobblestone dysgenesis, hydrocephalus, polymicrogyria, heterotopias, and corpus callosum agenesis are
variably present. Eye malformations include anophthalmia, microphthalmia, congenital cataract, or colobomas. Congenital muscular dystrophy is associated with significant CK elevations. There is
severe psychomotor disability.
The underlying metabolic defect is the abnormal synthesis of the O-­
mannosylglycan core, which is essential for the proper glycosylation
of α-­dystroglycan. The α-­dystroglycan is heavily O-­glycosylated with
mannose residues and is expressed in both muscle and brain. Defective mannosylation of α-­dystroglycan leads to muscle degeneration
and migration defects. Muscle biopsy shows abnormal α-­dystroglycan
staining on immunohistochemistry.
Transferrin glycoform analysis, including TIEF, is normal in patients
with isolated O-­mannosylation defects. There is also no clinically available enzyme analysis. Diagnosis is based on histology (muscle biopsy)
and genetic analysis.
POMT1-­
CDG, POMT2-­
CDG, and POMGNT1-­
CDG are the
most common autosomal recessive α-­dystroglycanopathies. Additional gene defects occur in the pathway; POMK, FKTN, FKRP,
LARGE, B3GALNT2, B4GAT1, DAG1, TMEM5, and ISPD have been
described in association with human disease. The exact incidence of
α-­dystroglycanopathies is not known.
The treatment for α-­dystroglycanopathies is supportive.

DEFECTS IN LIPID GLYCOSYLATION AND IN
GLYCOSYLPHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL ANCHOR
BIOSYNTHESIS
Hyperphosphatasia–Intellectual Disability
Syndromes: PIGA Deficiency (PIGA-­CDG)

This clinically recognizable syndrome is an epilepsy syndrome with
intellectual disability, hypotonia, dysmorphic facial features, skin anomalies, congenital brain malformations, and behavioral abnormalities,

including autism. Other organ malformations, including cardiac and
renal defects, have also been reported. Somatic pathogenic variants with
a PIGA defect can also lead to paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
N-­acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) cannot be efficiently transferred to
phosphatidylinositol for glycophosphatidylinositol synthesis. Abnormal anchoring of alkaline phosphatase leads to hyperphosphatasemia
in the blood and loss of specific surface antigens on blood cells.
Transferrin isoform analysis is normal in GPI-­anchor defects.
FACS analysis demonstrating reduction of membrane-­
anchored
markers CD16 and CD24 in leukocytes is highly suggestive for a
GPI-­anchor abnormality, especially in association with increased
levels of serum alkaline phosphatase. Pathogenic variant analysis
confirms the defect.
PIGA-­CDG is X-­linked. The exact incidence is not known. A similar
phenotype has been described in PIGO, PIGV, PIGY, PIG, PGAP2, and
PGAP3 defects.
In PIGA-­CDG the treatment is supportive.

DEFECTS IN MULTIPLE GLYCOSYLATION PATHWAYS
AND IN OTHER PATHWAYS, INCLUDING DOLICHOLPHOSPHATE BIOSYNTHESIS DEFECTS
Steroid 5α-­Reductase Deficiency (SRD5A3-­CDG)
Clinical Manifestations

SRD5A3 deficiency is a clinically recognizable CDG, originally
described as a multiple-­congenital malformation syndrome. About
20 patients have been diagnosed at different ages, including one at
45 years of age. Patients have hypotonia, ataxia, and eye abnormalities, including congenital cataracts, retinal and iridic colobomas,
glaucoma, optic nerve dysplasia, and visual loss. Cerebellar vermis
hypoplasia can be variable. Intellectual disability has been described
in all affected patients thus far. About 30% of patients have severe
congenital ichthyosis. Hypertrichosis and dysmorphic facial features
are common, including squared face, high forehead, large ears, and
coarsening. Some children with SRD5A3-­CDG have a severe autism
spectrum disorder. Skeletal abnormalities (scoliosis) and cardiac
malformations are less common.

Pathophysiology

SRD5A3 deficiency leads to abnormal dolichol synthesis affecting early glycan synthesis outside the ER membrane and affects O-­
mannosylation and GPI-­anchor synthesis. Hypoglycosylation affects
anticoagulation factors and leads to increased serum transaminases.

Diagnosis

The primary screening method in a suspected SRD5A3-­CDG patient
is serum transferrin glycoform analysis or mass spectroscopy analysis. Most patients show a type 1 pattern (see Fig. 107.9), but several
false-­negative cases have been described. There is no clinically available
enzyme analysis.
SRD5A3-­CDG is autosomal recessive. Genetic testing is mostly
performed by direct sequencing. The exact incidence is not known.
SRD5A3-­CDG treatment is supportive.

Autosomal Recessive Cutis Laxa Type 2
(ARCL-­2A or ATP6V0A2-­CDG, ATP6V1A-­CDG and
ATP6V1E1-­CDG)
Clinical Manifestations

ATP6V02-­CDG is a multiple-­malformation syndrome originally
described as cutis laxa syndrome and recently discovered to be a
combined N-­ and O-­linked glycosylation disorder. Patients show
generalized cutis laxa with inelastic, sagging skin at birth, hypotonia, strabismus, myopia, characteristic facial features, and joint
laxity. The facial features include hypertelorism, short nose, long
philtrum, downslanting palpebral fissures with sagging eyelids,
and sagging cheeks. Cardiovascular involvement is rare, and there
is variable CNS involvement. Seizures and motor and language

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 107 u Defects in Metabolism of Carbohydrates
developmental disability are common, but normal intelligence has
been described as well. Sensorineural hearing loss is sometimes
observed. Some patients have vermis hypoplasia, and several children have been described with cobblestone-­like dysgenesis and
partial pachygyria on brain MRI. Skeletal abnormalities and short
stature are common, as are late-­closing fontanels and/or brachydactyly and scoliosis. There is frequently enamel dysplasia. The skin
features spontaneously improve with age. ATP6V1A-­CDG and
ATP6V1E1-­CDG show a highly overlapping phenotype with associated cardiovascular symptoms and hypercholesterolemia.

Pathophysiology

ATP6V0A2 is a membrane subunit of the proton pump of the
vesicular adenosine triphosphatase (V-­ATPase) complex. Abnormal function of the V-­ATPase complex alters the pH gradient in the
secretory pathway and affects the maturation and transport of several glycosyltransferases and elastic fibers (e.g., elastin). ATP6V1A
and ATP6V1E1 are other complex subunits affecting ATP6V0A2
function and cause secondary ATPase deficiency. Both N-­ and O-­
linked glycosylation are affected. There are mild coagulation abnormalities and high serum transaminase levels in some patients.

Diagnosis

The primary screening method in a suspected ATP6V0A2-­CDG
patient is serum transferrin glycoform analysis by mass spectroscopy or TIEF analysis. Most patients show a type 2 pattern (see Fig.
107.9), but false-­negative cases have been described before the age
of 6 weeks. Apolipoprotein III-­C (apoC-­III) is a mucin-­type secretory glycoprotein that is only O-­glycosylated. ApoC-­III TIEF shows
a hypoglycosylation pattern by mass spectroscopy in patients, even
when the TIEF is falsely negative. Skin biopsies in patients show
classic histologic changes of cutis laxa with diminished, short,
abnormal, and fuzzy elastic fibers.
ATP6V0A2-­CDG is autosomal recessive. Genetic testing is mostly
performed by direct sequencing. The exact incidence is not known.
ATP6V1A and ATP6V1E1 defects have been recently described.

Treatment

In autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 2, the treatment is supportive. Fortunately, there is continuous and spontaneous improvement of skin symptoms throughout the disease course, especially in
ATP6V0A2-­CDG.

Golgi-­α1-­2 Mannosidase-­1 Deficiency (MAN1B1-­CDG)
Clinical Manifestations

The MAN1B1 defect was originally described as an intellectual disability syndrome in association with dysmorphic features. Additional
patients were recognized with psychomotor disability, muscle hypotonia, and inverted nipples in association with truncal obesity. The
degree of intellectual disability is quite variable. Autistic behaviors, eating disorders, and aggressive behavior are frequent features. More than
30 patients have been reported.

Pathophysiology

MAN1B1 codes for a Golgi mannosidase, which is essential for the
final “trimming” of mannose units during the glycan processing in the
Golgi apparatus. Hypermannosylation leads to abnormal, truncated
glycans and CDG-­II. The glycosylation abnormality in serum is relatively mild. Increased serum transaminases and abnormal coagulation
are uncommon.

Diagnosis

Most patients show a mild type 2 pattern by TIEF, but false-­negative
cases have been described. MALDI-­TOF analysis shows characteristic,
hybrid glycans in serum. In suspected cases, direct sequence analysis is
recommended, even if the TIEF is normal.

929

MAN1B1-­
CDG is autosomal recessive. The exact incidence is
unknown; several adult patients are known.

Treatment

Only supportive treatment is available.

Phosphoglucomutase-­1 Deficiency (PGM1-­CDG)
Clinical Manifestations

PGM1-­CDG is a disorder presenting with midline malformations
(cleft palate, Pierre Robin sequence, bifid uvula), liver dysfunction,
hypoglycemia, and short stature in almost all patients. Hypoglycemia is
usually caused by hyperinsulinism in the first years of life. It can resolve
with aging; ketotic hypoglycemia has also been observed. Cholestasis,
liver fibrosis, and even cirrhosis have been described in a few patients.
About one third of patients also show proximal muscle weakness and
dilated cardiomyopathy; the latter led to mortality in at least seven
reported cases. Other malformations, including cardiac and skeletal
anomalies, have also been described. Wound healing is frequently
abnormal, and there is a very high risk for bleeding during surgery.
Intelligence is normal.

Pathophysiology

Phosphoglucomutase 1 (PGM1) is an essential enzyme for glycogenolysis and glycolysis. It also provides substrates for the nucleotide sugars
needed for normal glycosylation. PGM1 regulates the bidirectional
conversion of glucose-­1-­phosphate and glucose-­6-­phosphate. During
fasting it leads to a glycogenosis-­like phenotype (also called GSD XIV,
MIM 614921). PGM1-­CDG affects both the ER-­and Golgi-­related
glycosylation and causes a mixed type 1/type 2 hypoglycosylation pattern. Abnormal serum proteins include coagulation and anticoagulation factors, insulin-­like growth factor–binding protein 3 (IGFBP3),
TBG, and TSH, in addition to serum transaminases, hypoglycemia,
and elevated CK.

Diagnosis

The primary screening method in a suspected PGM1-­CDG patient is
serum transferrin glycoform analysis or mass spectroscopy analysis.
Patients show a mixed type 1/type 2 pattern.
PGM1-­CDG is autosomal recessive. It is among the relatively common CDGs; >40 patients have been described. Enzyme testing is possible in blood but is more reliable in fibroblasts. Direct sequencing is
available for testing.

Treatment

PGM1-­
CDG is a treatable CDG (see Table 107.1). d-­Galactose
replenishes depleted levels of different nucleotide-­sugars (galactose-­
1-­phosphate, UDP-­galactose, and UDP-­glucose). Adding 1 g/kg/day
d-­galactose (500–2500 mg/kg/day, maximum 50 g/day, divided in up
to six doses/day) to the diet improves glycosylation significantly after
a few weeks, although the transferrin glycoform pattern does not fully
normalize. This treatment improves liver transaminases and antithrombin levels and in some patients the hormonal status. The effect of
d-­galactose on hypoglycemic episodes, cardiomyopathy, and myopathy is not yet clear.

Disorders of Golgi Homeostasis: TMEM199-­CDG,
CCDC115-­CDG, ATP6AP2-­CDG, and ATP6AP1-­CDG
Clinical Manifestations

These four disorders are clinically and biochemically indistinguishable. They have been described with liver function anomalies, cholestasis, fibrosis, and cirrhosis with liver failure, necessitating liver
transplantation in a few patients. The phenotype resembles Wilson
disease, especially because of low serum ceruloplasmin and copper
levels, but there is no Kayser-­Fleischer ring. In CCDC115-­CDG there
are frequently also neurologic features. The intellectual outcome is
variable. Additional abnormalities include hypercholesterolemia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

930 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
and elevated alkaline phosphatase. In ATP6AP1-­CDG there is also
immunologic involvement.

Pathophysiology

TMEM199-­, CCDC115-­, ATP6AP1-­CDG, and ATP6AP2-­CDG
are important for Golgi homeostasis. The exact pathologic mechanism is not yet known, but it is hypothesized that the secondary
Golgi dysfunction affects and delays the normal glycosylation
process.

Diagnosis

The primary screening method in a patient with one of these suspected
CDGs is serum transferrin glycoform analysis by mass spectroscopy or
TIEF analysis. Patients show a type 2 pattern (see Fig. 107.9). ApoC-­
III TIEF is abnormal. Glycomics results by MALDI-­TOF analysis are
characteristic but cannot discriminate between the three defects. The
final diagnosis requires pathogenic variant analysis. TMEM199-­CDG
and CCDC115-­
CDG are autosomal recessive, whereas ATP6AP1-­
CDG and ATP6AP2-­CDG are X-­linked.

Treatment

Treatment is supportive. Two patients successfully underwent liver
transplantation.

Manganese Transporter Defect: SLC39A8-­CDG
Clinical Manifestations

This intriguing disorder was originally described as a neurologic disease with hypotonia, seizures (hypsarrhythmia), and developmental disability. Some of the later-­described patients had severe skeletal
dysplasia with rhizomelic chondrodysplasia, craniosynostosis, and
dwarfism. Mitochondrial dysfunction (Leigh disease, cerebral lactic
acidemia, dystonia) may also be present.

Pathophysiology

SLC39A8 is a membrane transporter, responsible for manganese
(Mn) transmembrane transport. SLC39A8 deficiency affects all Mn-­
dependent enzymes and therefore different parts of the metabolism.
Because several glycosyltransferases (e.g., β-­1,4-­galactosyltransferase)
are Mn dependent, a secondary Golgi glycosylation occurs with a type
2 glycosylation defect. Low serum Mn levels are suggestive but not
always present in patients.

Diagnosis

The primary screening method in a suspected patient with SLC39A8-­
CDG is serum transferrin glycoform analysis by mass spectroscopy
or TIEF analysis. Patients show a type 2 pattern (see Fig. 107.9).
MALDI-­
TOF analysis is suggestive but not discriminative. Low
serum Mn levels are not always present in patients. The final diagnosis requires pathogenic variant analysis. SLC39A8-­CDG is an autosomal recessive disease. The exact incidence for this rare disease is
unknown.

Treatment

Besides supportive treatment, a few patients have shown biochemical
and clinical improvement (better seizure control) with oral d-­galactose
(1-­3.75 g/kg/day) and manganese (II)-­sulfate monohydrate (15-­20 mg/
kg/day) therapy (see Table 107.7).

CONGENITAL DISORDERS OF DEGLYCOSYLATION
N-­Glycanase 1 Deficiency (NGLY1 Defect)
Clinical Manifestations

Patients with NGLY1 deficiency have a glycosylation disorder, but not
from the deficient synthesis; rather, it is caused by deficient breakdown of
glycoproteins. The phenotype comprises severe CNS involvement, microcephaly, intellectual disability, seizures, neuropathy, movement disorders,
and hypotonia. The presence of alacrimia or hypolacrimia is highly suggestive for the diagnosis, but not all patients have problems with tearing.
Other features include failure to thrive, IUGR, and liver involvement.
Some patients have a recognizable oval face with a short nose, flat profile,
and hypertelorism. Masklike face also occurs, imitating the phenotype of
mitochondrial disorders, especially when serum lactic acid levels are also
elevated.

Pathophysiology

N-­glycanase is responsible for the deglycosylation of misfolded N-­
linked glycoproteins. The enzyme is essential for cutting off the glycans before the proteins are degraded in the ER. The exact disease
pathomechanism, however, is not yet clear. Serum transaminase and
α-­fetoprotein levels are also frequently increased.

Diagnosis

Serum transferrin isoform analysis shows a normal pattern. In some
patients the excretion of a specific urine biomarker (aspartylglucosamine; Neu5Ac1Hex1GlcNAc1-­Asn) is present and can be used as
screening. The final diagnosis requires genetic analysis.
NGLY1-­CDG is an autosomal recessive disease. The most common
pathogenic variant is c.1201A>T/p.R401X. The exact incidence of the
condition is unknown, but >50 patients have been reported in the few
years since the discovery of the disease.

Treatment

Only supportive treatment is available for the patient with NGLY1
deficiency.

THERAPEUTIC SUMMARY (SEE TABLE 107.7)

Most CDGs are treatable only with supportive therapy. The initially discovered oral mannose treatment in MPI-­CDG (1 g/kg/day) has proved to
be efficient for coagulation problems and protein-­losing enteropathy but
cannot prevent liver fibrosis in all patients. Liver transplantation in MPI-­
CDG has been successful in a few patients. Oral d-­galactose in PGM1-­
CDG (1g/kg/day) can improve serum transaminases and coagulation and
have a positive effect on endocrine function but cannot restore glycosylation fully. Seizure frequency improved in patients with SLC39A8-­CDG
receiving oral d-­galactose treatment (1 g/kg/day) and oral manganese
intake. The congenital myasthenic syndrome in DPAGT1-­CDG, GFPT1-­
CDG, and GMPPB-­CDG has been successfully treated with a high dose
of cholinesterase inhibitors. Several CDGs have been positively controlled
by transplantation, including DOLK-­CDG (DK1-­CDG; heart transplantation), PGM3-­CDG (hematopoietic stem cell transplantation), ATP6AP1-­
CDG, and CCDC155-­CDG (liver transplantation).
Patients with CAD-­CDG show significant clinical improvement on
receiving oral uridine therapy, especially with seizure control. Two children with SLC35C1-­CDG–defective immune function improved on
oral fucose therapy. GNE-­CDG patients showed significant improvement in muscle strength on N-­acetylmannosamine therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 108 u Mitochondrial Disease Diagnosis

Chapter 108

Mitochondrial Disease
Diagnosis
Elizabeth M. McCormick and Marni J. Falk
See also Chapters 107.4, 638.2.
Mitochondrial diseases are multisystemic energy failure states with
extensive clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Their common basis is best
understood through recognition that mitochondria function as biologic “fuel cells” or “batteries,” producing chemical energy in the form
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by aerobic metabolism of nutrient-­
derived reducing equivalents, through the integrated function of the
five-­complex mitochondrial respiratory chain (RC) (Fig. 108.1). Mitochondria also play other essential roles that can be variably disrupted
in disease states, such as regulating calcium homeostasis, diverse
aspects of intermediary nutrient metabolism, nucleotide metabolism,

931

and oxidative stress. Primary mitochondrial disease results from deficient RC function, which can be caused by pathogenic variants in genes
that encode RC subunits, assembly factors or cofactors, components of
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) metabolism and maintenance, or a host
of other basic metabolic processes ongoing within mitochondria (Table
108.1). Approximately 1,500 proteins exist within the mitochondrial
proteome of different tissues, with variants in more than 350 unique
genes across both the nuclear and the mitochondrial genomes already
implicated as causal in human mitochondrial disease.
Collectively recognized as the most common group of inherited metabolic diseases, primary (genetic based) mitochondrial disease has a combined minimal prevalence of 1 in 4,300 individuals across all ages. In
addition, secondary mitochondrial dysfunction is broadly implicated in
the pathogenesis of a host of complex diseases, ranging from metabolic
syndrome to ischemia-­reperfusion injury after stroke, to neurodegenerative diseases. Failure of high-­energy-­demand organs in mitochondrial
diseases may clinically present as severe neurodevelopmental, cardiac,
myopathic, renal, hepatic, endocrine, immune, gastrointestinal (GI),
hearing, and vision disabilities, as well as global metabolic instability with
lactic acidosis (Fig. 108.2) (see Tables 107.2 and 107.3). In most mitochondrial disorders, the phenotype may vary depending on the patient’s age,
the specific gene or genetic variant, or tissue affected. Particularly common mitochondrial disease clinical syndromes that present in children

I
IV

II

III

V

Fig. 108.1 Electron transport chain. The electron transport chain consists of four protein complexes (I-­IV) coupled to a fifth (V) unlinked complex,

ATP synthase. Together, these five complexes are known as the respiratory chain and are the site where oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) occurs
to generate energy. The transport chain accepts electrons from NADH (complex I) or FADH2 (complex II) that have been produced by glycolysis,
the formation of acetyl–coenzyme A, and the TCA cycle (green arrows). Electrons flow from one complex to another (red arrows) because of the
redox potential of each complex and lose a small amount of energy as they move through the chain. Three of the four complexes act as pumps,
driven by electron flow, moving H+ ions from the matrix to the intermembrane space (blue arrows). This pumping builds a concentration gradient
and creates an electrochemical force that is used by ATP synthase to produce ATP. Under normal conditions, this machinery provides almost all
(90%) of the ATP in a cell. However, a small proportion of electrons escape the electron transport chain even under normal conditions and can react
with oxygen and complexes I and III to form superoxide (O2−). ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; Cyt c, cytochrome c; Q,
coenzyme Q; NADH, nicotinamide dinucleotide; Pi, inorganic phosphate; TCA, tricarboxylic acid cycle; FADH2, 1,5-­dihydro-­flavin adenine dinucleotide. (Adapted from Hagberg H, Mallard C, Rousset CI, Thornton C. Mitochondria: hub of injury responses in the developing brain. Lancet Neurol.
2014;13[2]:217–232.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

932 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 108.1  Current Mitochondrial Gene Defects and Pathomechanisms
GENE(S)
OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION DEFICIENCY
Complex I subunits and assembly factors NDUFA1, NDUFA2, NDUFA6, NDUFA9, NDUFA10, NDUFA11, NDUFA12, NDUFA13 NDUFB3,
NDUFB8, NDUFB9, NDUFB10, NDUFB11, NDUFS1, NDUFS2, NDUFS3, NDUFS4, NDUFS6,
NDUFS7, NDUFS8, NDUFV1, NDUFV2, NDUFAF1, NDUFAF2, NDUFAF3, NDUFAF4, NDUFAF5,
NDUFAF6, NDUFAF7, NDUFAF8, ACAD9, ECSIT, FOXRED1, NUBPL, TIMMDC1, TMEM126B,
MT-­ND1, MT-­ND2, MT-­ND3, MT-­ND4, MT-­ND4L, MT-­ND5, MT-­ND6
Complex II subunits and assembly factors SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF1, SDHAF2
Complex III subunits and assembly factors UQCRB, UQCRC2, UQCRFS1, UQCRQ, CYC1, BCS1L, HCCS, TTC19, LYRM7, UQCC2, UQCC3, MT-­CYB
Complex IV subunits and assembly
COX4I1, COX4I2, COX5A, COX6A1, COX6B1, COX7B, COX8A, NDUFA4, SURF1, SCO1, SCO2,
factors
COX10, COX15, COA3, COA5, COA6, COA7, COX14, COX20, FASTKD2, PET100, PET117, CEP89,
MT-­CO1, MT-­CO2, MT-­CO3
Complex V subunits and assembly factors ATP5A1, ATP5D, ATP5E, ATPAF2, TMEM70, USMG5, MT-­ATP6, MT-­ATP8
DISORDERS OF MITOCHONDRIAL DNA MAINTENANCE
Nucleotide pool maintenance
ABAT, AK2, DGUOK, RRM2B, SAMHD1, SUCLA2, SUCLG1, TK2, TYMP
Replication, maintenance, and
DNA2, FBXL4, MGME1, MPV17, POLG, POLG2, SSBP1, SLC25A4, TWNK
transcription of mtDNA
MITOCHONDRIAL TRANSLATION DEFECTS
Mitochondrial tRNAs
MT-­TA, MT-­TC, MT-­TD, MT-­TD, MT-­TE, MT-­TF, MT-­TG, MT-­TH, MT-­TI, MT-­TK, MT-­TL1, MT-­TL2, MT-­TM,
MT-­TN, MT-­TP, MT-­TQ, MT-­TR, MT-­TS, MT-­TT, MT-­TV, MT-­TW, MT-­TY
Mitochondrial aminoacyl-­tRNA
AARS2, CARS2, DARS, DARS2, EARS2, FARS2, GARS, HARS2, IARS, IARS2, KARS, LARS, LARS2,
synthetases
MARS2, NARS2, PARS2, QARS, RARS2, SARS2, TARS2, VARS2, WARS2, YARS2
tRNA modification
ELAC2, MTFMT, NSUN3, PDE12, QRSL1, TRIT1, TRMT5, TRMT10C, TRNT1
Mitochondrial rRNA
MT-­RNR1, MT-­RNR2
RNA processing
PNPT1
Mitoribosome subunits and assembly
ERAL1, MRPL3, MRPL12, MRPL44, MRPS2, MRPS7, MRPS16, MRPS22, MRPS23, MRPS34, MRM2, RMND1
Protein synthesis
C12orf65, GFM1, GFM2, GTPBP3, GUF1, LRPPRC, MTO1, MTPAP, PUS1, TACO1, TRMU, TSFM, TUFM
MITOCHONDRIAL QUALITY CONTROL DEFECTS
Mitochondrial membrane phospholipid
AGK, CHKB, DNAJC19, GFER, MIPEP, PAM16, PLA2G6, PMPCA, SERAC1, SLC25A3, SLC25A10,
and import machinery
SLC25A12, SLC25A22, TAZ, TIMM8A, TIMM50, XPNPEP3
Mitochondrial dynamics
DNM1L, GDAP1, MFF, MFN2, MSTO1, OPA1, STAT2, TRAK1, YME1L1
MICOS complex
CHCHD10, QIL1, SLC25A46
ER-­mitochondrial tethering
EMC1
Mitochondrial protein quality control
AFG3L2, ATAD3A, CLPB, CLPP, CLPX, HSPA9, HSPD1, HSPE1, LONP1, PITRM1, SACS, SPG7, TRAP1
Toxicity
ECHS1, ETHE1, HIBCH
Antioxidant defense
NNT, TXN2
METABOLIC DEFECTS
Tricarboxylic acid cycle enzymes
Pyruvate metabolism
Fatty acid metabolism
CoA metabolism and transport

ACO2, DHTKD1, FH, IDH3A, IDH3B, MDH2, OGDH
DLAT, DLD, MPC1, PC, PDHA1, PDHB, PDHX, PDK3, PDP1, PDPR
CRAT, ETFA, ETFB, ETFDH, FA2H, HSD17B10, PYCR1, SLC25A1
COASY, PANK2, SLC25A42

VITAMIN AND COFACTOR METABOLISM DEFECTS
Coenzyme Q10 biosynthesis
COQ2, COQ4, COQ5, COQ6, COQ7, COQ8A, COQ8B, COQ9, PDSS1, PDSS2
Iron-­sulfur cluster protein biosynthesis
ABCB7, FDXR, FDX1L, FXN, ISCA1, ISCA2, ISCU, LYRM4, NFS1, NFU1
Lipoic acid biosynthesis
BOLA3, GLRX5, IBA57, LIAS, LIPT1, LIPT2, MECR
Cytochrome c
CYCS
Biotin metabolism
BTD, HLCS
Thiamine metabolism and transport
SLC19A2, SLC19A3, SLC25A19, TPK1
Mitochondrial one-­carbon metabolism
SLC25A26, SLC25A32
Heavy metal metabolism
SLC25A24, SLC33A1, SLC39A8
Selenoprotein biosynthesis
SECISBP2, SEPSECS
NADPH metabolism
NADK2, NAXD, NAXE
Riboflavin metabolism and transport
FLAD1, SLC52A2, SLC52A3
OTHER CELLULAR DEFECTS ASSOCIATED WITH MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTION
Ca2+ homeostasis
ANO10, C19ORF70, CISD2, CYP24A1, MICU1, MICU2, WFS1
Heme biosynthesis
ABCB6, ALAS2, SFXN4, SLC25A38
Apoptosis defects
AIFM1, APOPT1, DIABLO, HTRA2, PTRH2
DNA repair
APTX, XRCC4
Miscellaneous or unknown function
ALDH1B1, ALDH18A1, BDH1, CA5A, CTBP1, C1QBP, C19ORF12, DCC, DIAPH1, FHF1, KIF5A, OPA3,
PNPLA4, PNPLA8, POP1, PPA2, ROBO3, RTN4IP1, SLC44A1, STXBP1, TANGO2, TMEM65, TMEM126A
mtDNA, Mitochondrial DNA; MICOS, mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system; ER, endoplasmic reticulum.
From Rahman J, Rahman S: Mitochondrial medicine in the omics era. Lancet. 2018;391:2560–2574, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 108 u Mitochondrial Disease Diagnosis
Muscle weakness
Chronic fatigue
Exercise intolerance
Gastrointestinal
Imbalance
Sleep problems
Decreased vision
Headache
Dehydration
Peripheral neuropathy
Eye muscle problems
Delayed milestones
Speech problems
Mood disorder
Ptosis
Dysautonomia
Learning disability
Difficulty gaining weight
Heart rhythm problems
Difficulty losing weight
Intellectual disability
Sleep apnea
Behavioral problems
Tinnitus
Hearing loss
Hyperlipidemia
Epilepsy or seizures
Optic nerve problems
Heart muscle problems
Autism spectrum disorder
Retinal problems
Diabetes
Stroke
Liver disease
Kidney disease
0

25

50

Subjects affected (%)

75
Yes

100
No

Fig. 108.2 Mitochondrial disease subject cohort experienced symptoms. Frequency of experienced symptoms as reported by the Rare Diseases Clinical Research Network (RDCRN) self-­reported cohort revealed
muscle weakness, chronic fatigue, exercise intolerance, imbalance, and
gastrointestinal problems to be the top five common symptoms. (Modified from Zolkipli-­Cunningham Z, Xiao R, Stoddart A, et al. Mitochondrial disease patient motivations and barriers to participate in clinical
trials. PLoS ONE. 2018;13[5]:e0197513. Fig. 2.)

include Leigh syndrome (for which there are more than 110 causal genes;
for gene listing visit https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/conditions/
MONDO:0009723.), mtDNA depletion syndrome (MDS, for which
there several dozen causal genes), mtDNA deletion syndromes (Pearson, Kearns Sayre), primary lactic acidosis, and pyruvate dehydrogenase
deficiency. Common clinical features in children present in at least 90%
of patients include fatigue, exercise intolerance, weakness, GI and hepatic
dysfunction, ataxia, and developmental delay. Thus mitochondrial diseases present to and must be considered by clinicians across every medical
specialty.
Reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency is an unusual mitochondrial disorder that presents in early (≤3 months) infancy with muscle
weakness, hypotonia, poor feeding, and lactic acidosis and spontaneously
resolves beginning around 1 year of age. Responsible maternal inherited
genes include mt-­tRNAGlu (MT-­TE) (in 100%) and possible modifier
genes (EARS2, TRMU). Muscle biopsy may show ragged red fibers.
Patients with suspected mitochondrial disease often have an extensive
phenotypic heterogeneity without a common biomarker, which presents
a challenge to the accurate clinical diagnosis of mitochondrial disorders.
Lactate and growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF-­15) are screening tests
that may be elevated in some mitochondrial diseases, particularly those
involving mtDNA deletions or depletion. In addition, their extensive
genetic heterogeneity involving known etiologies in >300 nuclear genes
and all 37 mtDNA genes can make the accurate genetic diagnosis of an
individual patient challenging. The diagnostic uncertainty can be further
compounded by poor genotype-­phenotype correlations and variable clinical presentations of individual gene disorders, high locus heterogeneity
(i.e., multiple different causal disease genes) for similar clinical phenotypes, incomplete penetrance for some gene disorders, variable life stressors or environmental exposures that may exacerbate a given child’s disease,
and the unique biologic aspects of maternal inheritance for the subset of
mitochondrial diseases caused by mtDNA pathogenic variants.

WHEN TO SUSPECT MITOCHONDRIAL DISEASE

Because of failure in the ability to generate cellular energy, mitochondrial diseases can involve any organ system at any age (see Fig. 108.2).
Mitochondrial disease should be suspected when classic symptoms are

933

present or if unexplained symptoms occur in three or more apparently
unrelated organs. Individuals may present with a vast array of symptoms, including fatigue, muscle weakness, exercise intolerance, metabolic strokes, seizures, cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, developmental or
cognitive disabilities, autism, diabetes mellitus, and other endocrinopathies (adrenal, thyroid), dysautonomia, and autoimmune disorders,
as well as impairment of hearing, vision, growth, liver, GI, or kidney
function. Although individuals may have just one or a few symptoms
and a fluctuating disease course in terms of symptom severity, most
patients with primary mitochondrial disease tend to develop progressive symptoms over time. A study of patients with mitochondrial diseases showed an average of 16 different clinically significant symptoms
per patient, with a range of 7-­35. When considering the diagnosis, it
is helpful to recognize that most symptoms of mitochondrial disease
involve functional, rather than structural, problems.
When mitochondrial disease is considered in the differential diagnosis,
it is often helpful to obtain several laboratory screening studies for common biochemical features of mitochondrial disease and overlapping disorders at baseline and, if unrevealing, during an acute illness or period of
decompensation. Blood-­based metabolic screening studies include comprehensive chemistry panel, complete blood count with differential, blood
lactate and pyruvate, plasma amino acid quantitative analysis, carnitine
analysis (total, free, acyl-­carnitine profile), ammonia, creatine kinase, and
testing for common secondary manifestations of mitochondrial disease
(e.g., thyroid screen, lipoprotein profile, hemoglobin A1c). Urine-­based
metabolic screening studies include urinalysis, urine organic acid quantitative analysis, and urine amino acid quantitative analysis. Consideration
should also be given for screening for congenital disorders of glycosylation
or vitamin deficiencies, which may have overlapping clinical features in
some cases with mitochondrial disease. Lactic acidemia is neither highly
sensitive nor specific for primary mitochondrial disease, but laboratory
findings suggestive of primary mitochondrial disease include elevations
of blood lactate, pyruvate, lactate:pyruvate ratio, alanine, ratios of alanine
to lysine (>3) and alanine to the sum of phenylalanine and tyrosine (>4),
and anion gap. Biochemical alterations further suggestive of mitochondrial disease may include secondary impairment of fatty acid oxidation
with elevation of dicarboxylic acids on acyl-­carnitine profile, increased
branched-­chain amino acids and proline on plasma amino acid analysis, increased tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates and lactate excretion
on urine organic acid analysis, and generalized aminoaciduria on urine
amino acid analysis. GDF-­15 may be a useful screening test for mitochondrial depletion-­based myopathies.
Similarly, when mitochondrial disease is considered in the differential
diagnosis, obtaining additional clinical evaluations to carefully phenotype the patient for prevalent or highly morbid and potentially modifiable
features of mitochondrial disease is important. Because many individuals
with mitochondrial disease develop problems with their vision (reduced
visual acuity not correctable with glasses, photophobia or nyctalopia with
reduced peripheral vision associated with retinal disease or optic atrophy,
ophthalmoplegia, ptosis), hearing (high-­frequency sensorineural hearing
loss), and heart (arrhythmia, conduction block, cardiomyopathy), carefully evaluating for involvement of these high-­energy systems is indicated.
Neurologic evaluation is essential because many mitochondrial disease
patients experience a range of central (metabolic stroke in cortical or deep
gray matter, including basal ganglia, midbrain, and/or brainstem; white
matter changes; seizures; ataxia; movement disorder; migraine; cognitive
changes), peripheral (axonal sensorimotor neuropathy), or autonomic nervous system dysfunction; brain imaging (MRI), spectroscopy (MRS), and,
on occasion, electromyogram or nerve conduction velocity (EMG/NCV)
studies can be helpful to support the diagnosis. Formal exercise physiology evaluation can also be useful to quantify and advise patients on their
exercise capacity and safety, with some specific features (e.g., reduced Vo2
maximal capacity) suggestive of quantifiable mitochondrial dysfunction.
A sleep study may be useful for individuals with sleep dysfunction because
sleep disorders may mimic mitochondrial disease symptoms, and sleep
problems are common and potentially treatable in mitochondrial disease.
Gastrointestinal symptoms are common and underrecognized in mitochondrial disease patients, usually involving dysmotility of any portion of
the GI tract with reflux, swallowing dysfunction, delayed gastric emptying,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

934 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
feeding and/or growth problems, pseudoobstruction, malabsorption, and
constipation. Endocrine abnormalities are also common but underappreciated in many patients, including pituitary, adrenal, thyroid, and pancreatic dysfunction.
Such careful phenotyping of patients with suspected mitochondrial
disease can thus provide reassurance that the common, and potentially treatable, clinical aspects of mitochondrial disease are not present
although they may develop over time, or conversely if identified, increase
diagnostic suspicion and direct further diagnostic evaluation. A screening tool for mitochondrial diseases is noted in Table 108.2. The differential diagnosis of mitochondrial disorders is extensive (Table 108.3).

Table 108.2  Mitochondrial Disease Criteria
FEATURES
Muscular

Myopathy
Abnormal EMG
Motor developmental delay
Exercise intolerance

Maximal score for
muscle is 2

Neurologic

Developmental delay or ID
Speech delay
Dystonia
Ataxia
Spasticity
Neuropathy
Seizures or encephalopathy

Maximal score for
neurologic is 2

Multisystem

Any gastrointestinal tract
disease
Growth delay or failure to thrive
Endocrine
Immune
Eye (vision) or hearing
Renal tubular acidosis
Cardiomyopathy

Maximal score for
multisystem is 3

MITOCHONDRIAL DISEASE INHERITANCE

Primary mitochondrial disease may result from variants in either nuclear
genes or mtDNA genes, which may be inherited from a parent or occur
de novo in an affected individual (for a list of genes curated for their association with primary mitochondrial disease, visit https://search.clinicalgenome.org/kb/affiliate/10027). Thus all mendelian (autosomal recessive,
autosomal dominant, X-­linked) or maternal (mtDNA) inheritance patterns can be consistent with mitochondrial diseases. Obtaining a detailed,
three-­generation pedigree is important to potentially highlight the specific
inheritance pattern in a family. Individuals with inherited mtDNA disorders may report family members related through their maternal lineage
(both males and females may be affected, but only affected individuals
will be connected through the female germline), with a range of functional problems in different organs, such as migraines, fatigue, exercise
intolerance, stroke, diabetes mellitus, thyroid dysfunction, irritable bowel
syndrome, mood disorder, or vision and hearing problems (for a list of
curated mtDNA variants, visit https://erepo.clinicalgenome.org). Inherited
X-­linked disorders typically present with symptoms only or, more severely,
in males related through unaffected or minimally affected females. Autosomal recessive disorders are common in pediatric mitochondrial disease,
particularly in consanguineous pedigrees, where a rare variant in the general population becomes enriched and passed down through both maternal and paternal lineages to become homozygous in the affected proband
and also affect multiple individuals in a given generation without having
affected individuals in earlier generations. Autosomal dominant variants may occur de novo or are passed on from either parent to their child,
although many disorders may have reduced penetrance, which may make
the genetic disorder appear to skip a generation. Identifying a likely inheritance pattern through pedigree analysis can inform accurate interpretation
of large-­scale genetic diagnostic evaluations, such as multigene sequencing
and deletion/duplication analysis panels and exome or genome sequencing. Establishing a correct genetic diagnosis for mitochondrial disease in
an affected individual is essential to enable reliable recurrence risk counseling and testing options in a given family, whether in a future pregnancy by
chorionic villus sampling (CVS, typically performed at 10-­12 weeks’ gestation) or amniocentesis (typically performed at 16-­20 weeks’ gestation)
or in the in vitro fertilization (IVF) setting with preimplantation genetic
testing (PGT) for a specific disease-­causing variant. Of note, PGT is readily available to families for known nuclear gene disorders but remains of
limited availability in known pathogenic mtDNA variants.
Special mention is warranted to consider the unique aspects of maternal inheritance that typify mtDNA disorders. More than 300 disease-­
causing mtDNA variants have been identified, with extensive variation
in disease manifestations and features. Most disease-­causing variants
are present in only a portion of an individual’s mtDNA genomes, a
concept known as heteroplasmy. For heteroplasmic mtDNA variants,
the precise pathogenic variant level (percent) can vary between an
individual’s different tissues and can change over time, with symptom
severity corresponding to different threshold pathogenic variant levels
that can be difficult to define and that typically vary between organs.
An individual’s mtDNA genome background set of fixed sequence
variants, known as a haplogroup, can also influence the penetrance
or severity of an mtDNA disease. When a novel or rare mtDNA variant is identified in a given individual, it may be helpful to use highly
sensitive sequencing methods to test the levels of that pathogenic variant (which may be accurate to detect 1% of pathogenic variant levels)
in their different tissues (blood, urine, buccal, skin cells, muscle), as
well as tissues from their mother or maternal relatives, to accurately

Total clinical

Total maximal
clinical score is 4

Metabolic

Lactate high at least 2×: (score 2)
Alanine high at least 2×
Krebs cycle intermediatesa
Ethyl malonic and methyl
malonic acid
3 methyl glutaconic acid
CSF lactate, alanine

Imaging/other

Leigh disease (score 2)
Strokelike episodes (score 2)
Lactate peak on MRS
Leukoencephalopathy with
brainstem and spinal cord
involvementb
Cavitating
leukoencephalopathyb
Leukoencephalopathy with
thalamus involvementb
Deep cerebral white matter
involvement and corpus
callosum agenesisb

Total MDC
score (clinical,
metabolic,
imaging)

Total metabolic
and MRI maximal
score is 4
Total maximal
score is 8

aKrebs cycle intermediates: alpha-­ketoglutarate, succinate, fumarate.
bNumerous MRI patterns characteristic of mitochondrial disease have been described

in addition to Leigh syndrome and basal ganglia with brainstem involvement. We
include leukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal cord involvement (DARS2),
cavitating leukoencephalopathy (LYRM7), leukoencephalopathy with thalamus
involvement (EARS2), and deep cerebral white matter involvement and corpus
callosum agenesis (NUBPL).
Every element scores 1 unless indicated differently. The severity of each finding is not taken
into account because of the progressive nature of the disease. A total score of 1 indicates
unlikely mitochondrial disorder; score 2–4, possible mitochondrial disorder; score 5–7,
probable mitochondrial disorder; and score ≥8, definite mitochondrial disorder.
COX, Cytochrome c oxidase; EMG, electromyography; L/P, lactate/pyruvate; SDH,
succinate dehydrogenase.
From Witters P, Saada A, Honzik T, et al. Revisiting mitochondrial diagnostic criteria in
the new era of genomics. Genetics Med. 2018;20(4):444–451, Table 2.

determine whether it may be causal of disease in that family. Research-­
based functional testing may also be necessary to characterize fully the
effects of a newly recognized mtDNA variant. When it is not known
whether an mtDNA variant is maternally inherited or occurs de novo,
the recurrence risk to future offspring of their asymptomatic parent is
empirically estimated at 1 in 25 (4%), although the empirical recurrence risk rises to 1 in 2 (50%) when the mother is symptomatic.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 108 u Mitochondrial Disease Diagnosis

935

Table 108.3  Differential Diagnosis of Selected Phenotypes Commonly Associated with Mitochondrial Disease
PHENOTYPE

MITOCHONDRIAL CAUSE

LIMITED DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Dystonia

Leigh syndrome, deafness-­dystonia
syndrome, other mitochondrial
encephalomyopathies

Biotinidase deficiency, thiamine transporter deficiency
2, ADAR pathogenic variants (Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome
6), organic acidemias (especially glutaric aciduria type I),
NBIA, acute (viral) necrotizing encephalopathy, pathogenic
variants in NUP62, RANBP2, and PDE8B, primary genetic
dystonias

Epileptic encephalopathy

Alpers-­Huttenlocher syndrome, many other
mitochondrial disorders

Many genetic epileptic encephalopathies, including Dravet
syndrome and KCNQ2 pathogenic variants, pyridoxine-­
dependent epilepsies (antiquitin deficiency, PNPO
deficiency), viral encephalitis

Progressive myoclonic epilepsy

MERRF

Ramsay Hunt syndrome, Unverricht-­Lundborg disease, Lafora
body disease, sialidosis, PRICKLE1 pathogenic variants

Leukoencephalopathy

Complex I deficiency, complex II deficiency,
SURF1 deficiency (rarely), disorders of
mitochondrial translation and Fe-­S cluster
assembly

Vanishing white matter disease, lysosomal storage
disorders, Canavan disease, Alexander disease,
Pelizaeus-­Merzbacher(-­like), hypo/dysmyelination

Ataxia

ADCK3 pathogenic variants, ataxia-­
neuropathy syndromes, for example, SCAE,
MIRAS, MERRF, NARP, disorders of
coenzyme Q10 biosynthesis

Spinocerebellar ataxias, CAPOS syndrome

Demyelination

MNGIE

ADEM, multiple sclerosis

Peripheral neuropathy

Pathogenic variants in POLG, MPV17,
KARS, and SURF1; part of multisystem
disease in many mitochondrial disorders,
for example, MNGIE

Other nonmitochondrial genetic causes of Charcot-­Marie-­
Tooth syndromes, riboflavin transporter deficiency, toxic
neuropathies, critical illness

Ptosis and ophthalmoplegia

PEO, KSS, MNGIE, MELAS

Some congenital myopathies, pseudo-­upgaze impairment
in OPMD, horizontal gaze palsy and scoliosis (ROBO3
pathogenic variant)

Optic neuropathy

LHON, ADOA, Leigh syndrome

Toxic optic neuropathy (e.g., methanol, cyanide, tobacco)

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
with lactic acidosis

Complex I deficiency, TMEM70 pathogenic
variants, Sengers syndrome (AGK
deficiency), disorders of mitochondrial
translation

Viral infection

Dilated cardiomyopathy with
lactic acidosis

Barth syndrome, disorders of mitochondrial
phospholipid remodeling, other
mitochondrial cardiomyopathies

Viral infection

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Pearson syndrome

Cystic fibrosis

Diabetes and deafness

MIDD, other mtDNA pathogenic variants

Type 2 diabetes mellitus with incidental nonsyndromic
deafness

Sideroblastic anemia

Pearson syndrome, MLASA, TRNT1
Blackfan-­Diamond syndrome, Schwachman-­Diamond
deficiency, PUS1 or YARS2 pathogenic variants
syndrome, X-­linked sideroblastic anemia

B-­cell immune deficiency

TRNT1 deficiency

Primary immunodeficiency disorder

Liver failure

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion
syndromes

NBAS, LARS, and IARS deficiencies, viral infection, lysosomal
storage disorders, other syndromic genetic conditions

Renal tubulopathy/failure

Pearson and Kearns-­Sayre
syndromes, RMND1-­related disease

Gitelman syndrome, Fanconi Bickel (SLC2A2 pathogenic
variants) syndrome, other syndromic genetic conditions

Myopathy

Part of multisystem disease in many
mitochondrial disorders, especially mtDNA
depletion syndromes

Congenital muscular dystrophies, myositis, many other
disorders

Rhabdomyolysis

Mitochondrial myopathies
(e.g., MTCO1, MTCO2, MTCO3, and
MTCYB pathogenic variants)

LPIN1 pathogenic variants, fatty acid oxidation defects
(VLCAD, LCHAD), TANGO deficiency, glycolytic defects,
toxic, postexercise

Low copper

Cytochrome oxidase deficiency

Menkes, SLC33A1 pathogenic variants

Complex multisystem disorders

Many mitochondrial disorders, particularly in
childhood

Congenital disorders of glycosylation, peroxisomal disorders,
lysosomal storage disorders, other syndromic genetic
conditions

ADEM, Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; ADOA, autosomal dominant optic atrophy; CAPOS, cerebellar ataxia, areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy and sensorineural hearing
loss; Fe-­S, iron-­sulfur; KSS, Kearns-­Sayre syndrome; LHON, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy; MERRF, myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers; MIDD, maternally inherited
diabetes and deafness; MIRAS, mitochondrial recessive ataxia syndrome; MLASA, myopathy, lactic acidosis, sideroblastic anemia; MNGIE, mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal
encephalomyopathy; NBIA, neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation; PEO, progressive external ophthalmoplegia; SCAE, spinocerebellar ataxia with epilepsy.
Modified from Parikh S, Karaa A, Goldstein A, et al. Diagnosis of “possible” mitochondrial disease: an existential crisis. J Med Genet. 2019;56(3):123–130, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

936 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING FOR MITOCHONDRIAL
DISEASE

The diagnosis of mitochondrial disease relies foremost on genetic testing (genomic analysis), with biochemical screens useful in blood or
urine and invasive tissue testing often seen as secondary or sometimes
not required at all (Fig. 108.3).
When the clinical evaluation—medical history; detailed review of systems; careful physical, neurologic, and dysmorphic examinations; pedigree
review; blood-­and urine-­based biochemical screening studies; and additional phenotyping clinical evaluations—is suggestive of mitochondrial
disease, a range of clinical diagnostic testing options can be pursued. Without a known molecular etiology in an affected family member, first-­line
genetic diagnostic testing should include whole exome sequencing (WES)
and mtDNA genome sequencing using methodologies that will detect
both single-­nucleotide variants and larger-­scale gene deletions and duplications. WES is more comprehensive for genes known not only to cause
mitochondrial disease but also to cause all human genetic diseases. The
rationale for this diagnostic testing approach includes the following factors:
• The mtDNA genome sequence is often included at no extra cost
when clinical WES is ordered in blood or buccal samples but may
need to be repeated in a symptomatic tissue (e.g., muscle, liver) to
detect heteroplasmic mtDNA variants that may not be present in
more accessible tissues such as blood or buccal cells.
• The utility of performing concurrent proband and both parental
sample sequencing (trio-­based testing), as usually pursued with WES
but not panel-­based testing, thereby allowing concurrent segregation analysis of a suspected pathogenic variants as well as ready identification of de novo dominant variants in the proband.
• The ability to use WES raw data (either on a research basis or for
reanalysis at a later date by the clinical diagnostic laboratory) to
highlight and/or identify “novel” gene disorders not previously recognized or associated with human disease.
Exome sequencing including mtDNA is estimated to identify the definitive genetic etiology for mitochondrial disease in at least 60% of patients

in whom it is strongly suspected. Whole genome sequencing (WGS)
is increasingly used when routine molecular testing such as WES with
mtDNA sequencing is unrevealing of the genetic etiology. A mitochondrial disease community resource to centrally curate all mitochondrial
disease, gene, and variant knowledge across both genomes is publicly
accessible at https://mseqdr.org/.
Tissue-­based diagnostic testing has decreased in frequency as a front-­
line test in all patients with suspected mitochondrial disease, although it
still has clinical utility. These include (1) in the setting of rapidly deteriorating clinical status when genetic testing results may not be available in
a timely fashion; (2) when a variant of uncertain significance identified
on genomic testing has unclear biochemical consequences; and (3) when
uninformative genomic sequencing in blood in an individual with myopathy or muscle symptoms raises concern for other disease processes that may
be evident on histology, electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, or
enzymatic tissue testing. In addition, some mitochondrial diseases are only
evident by tissue-­based diagnostic testing. These include mtDNA deletion
disorders (typically involving several thousand nucleotides) not present in
blood that cause chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO)
or Kearns-­Sayre syndrome (KSS) spectrum disorder, as well as different
tissue (muscle or liver)-­specific mtDNA depletion disorders (e.g., reduced
mtDNA tissue content) that confirm a mitochondrial pathophysiology in
a given patient and highlight a likely underlying nuclear gene cause for
their disease, because mtDNA maintenance requires a host of nuclear-­
encoded proteins. Electron transport chain enzyme activity analyses
are the accepted gold standard to evaluate for mitochondrial dysfunction
in a previously frozen tissue sample. Skin biopsies are useful to establish
fibroblast cell lines in which these same studies of mitochondrial function
can be clinically performed. If detected, abnormalities can be revealing of
a specific type of mitochondrial disorder, although not all mitochondrial
diseases may be expressed or detectable in skin analysis. Thus if fibroblast
testing is unrevealing, more invasive tissue studies may subsequently need
to be pursued. RNA sequencing may lead to identification of the genetic
etiology in an additional 10% of individuals with mitochondrial disease in

High index of suspicion
• Detailed clinical assessment and exam
• Pedigree analysis
• Further phenotyping of symptoms

Non-invasive
laboratory screening
Biochemical analyte testing
• Blood, urine
• Evaluates for evidence of
mitochondrial dysfunction
Screening labs
• Blood, urine
• Evaluates for other organ
system involvement

Genetic diagnostic testing
Whole exome sequencing
• Blood or buccal/saliva
• Ideally performed in proband and parents
mtDNA sequencing (NGS)
• Blood, urine, buccal cells, and/or hair

NEGATIVE or
INCONCLUSIVE

Additional genetic diagnostic testing
Whole genome sequencing
• Blood or buccal/saliva
• Ideally performed in proband and parents
Research-based analysis
• Goal to identify novel genetic etiology

Tissue testing
Skin and/or skeletal muscle biopsy
• Can be done in liver if symptomatic
• Histology
• Immunohistochemistry
• ETC enzyme activity
• mtDNA sequencing
• mtDNA content analysis
• RNA sequencing

POSITIVE

Treatment and management
• Standardized clinical care
• Clinical trials

Fig. 108.3 Diagnostic algorithm for suspected mitochondrial disease. (Modified from Muraresku CC, McCormick EM, Falk MJ. Mitochondrial
disease: advances in clinical diagnosis, management, therapeutic development, and preventative strategies. Curr Genet Med Rep. 2018;6:62–72.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 108 u Mitochondrial Disease Diagnosis
whom DNA-­based sequencing did not identify the disease-­causing variants. Only a small number of clinical laboratories offer this testing; this
test can be performed in muscle, fibroblasts, or blood. Fibroblast cell lines,
and occasionally blood-­based lymphoblastoid cell lines, also provide a
minimally invasive cell source to allow other clinical enzymatic analyses to
be performed, as well as novel disease gene validation and research-­based
therapeutic modeling.

937

Although few mitochondrial diseases have efficacious therapies that
have gained regulatory approval, improved molecular delineation has
enabled selected therapies to advance from the theoretical, empirical,
and largely ineffective stage to a promising horizon of rational, personalized, and effective interventions. An increasing number of mitochondrial disease diagnoses have interventions involving the initiation or
avoidance of specific medications (corticosteroids, valproic acid, phenytoin, barbiturates, propofol for prolonged duration beyond 30-­60
minutes, certain anesthetics, statins, β-­blocking agents, amiodarone,
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors), provision of cofactors or
diets, and screening regimens for progressive clinical involvement of
modifiable manifestations. General therapies for Leigh syndrome such
as l-­arginine and citrulline may prevent or reverse neurodevelopmental sequelae from a metabolic stroke. Nutritional therapies in these disorders are tailored to specific disease genes, such as thiamine and biotin
for SLC19A3 disease, ubiquinol for PDSS2 (CoQ10 deficiency) disease,
and thiamine and the ketogenic diet for PDHA1 (pyruvate dehydrogenase) deficiency. Establishing the precise molecular diagnosis can
further be lifesaving by avoiding fasting and mitochondrial-­toxic medicines or general anesthetics in specific mitochondrial disease subsets,
improving recurrence counseling for risk reduction of manifesting
mitochondrial disease, enabling targeted screening for reported medical complications, and in some cases providing necessary cofactors or
vitamins that may not otherwise have been considered. In addition,
reproductive methodologies emerging in some countries for mitochondrial disease prevention, such as PGD and mitochondrial replacement technologies (MRTs), are only appropriate to consider in the
setting of known pathogenic, inherited mtDNA variants.

TREATMENT PRINCIPLES FOR MITOCHONDRIAL
DISEASE

Effective therapies for both primary and secondary mitochondrial
diseases are lacking. Clinical complexity and imprecisely defined or
understood biochemical phenotypes of different mitochondrial disease subtypes have made it difficult for clinicians to effectively apply
or monitor targeted therapies for RC disease. Mitochondrial cocktails
consisting of combinatorial regimens of vitamins and supplements
variably include vitamins (B1, B2, C), antioxidants (CoQ10, lipoic acid,
vitamin E, N-­acetylcysteine), and metabolic modifiers (creatine, l-­
carnitine, l-­arginine, folinic acid, taurine). Although the efficacy, toxicity, and optimal dose of these drugs are not known and have not been
objectively assessed via clinical trials in human RC disease patients,
they continue to be empirically prescribed in hopes of enhancing residual RC enzymatic function or quenching toxic metabolites theorized to
accumulate in RC dysfunction and because of patient-­based reports of
improved well-­being. However, provision of these therapies has often
adopted a one-­size-­fits-­all approach, ignoring the inherent variation
in primary mitochondrial disease subtypes, the tissue-­specific manifestations, and the major pathogenic factors, such as the predominant
downstream metabolic and signaling alterations that occur in different
disease subclasses (Fig. 108.4).

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

CORE MITOCHONDRIAL MEDICINE REGIMEN
Multivitamin
B50 complex vitamin
Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinol)
Antioxidant (vitamin E and/or alpha-lipoic acid + biotin)

mtDNA
depletion
Complex 1
deficiency

Primary lactic
acidosis

Kearns Sayre

Myopathy

White matter

Muscle fatigue

Disease

Exercise
intolerance

Refractory

Liver
involvement
Stroke-like
episodes

Migraine

Arginine

Riboflavin

Neuropsychiatric
symptoms

Pigmentary
retinopathy

Plasma
glutathione
deficiency

Seizures

Nicotinamide

Biotin

Riboflavin

Thiamine

Folinic acid

Elevated
lactate:pyruvate
ratio

Pyruvate

L-creatine

Folinic acid

Lutein

N-acetylcysteine

N-acetylcysteine

N-acetylcysteine

Basal ganglia lesions of
uncertain etiology

Biotin
Thiamine

Refractory stroke-like
episodes

Citrulline
Taurine

Fig. 108.4 Algorithm for the personalized prescribing of mitochondrial supplements. This figure represents the recommended approach to prescrib-

ing mitochondrial medicines. (Elevated lactate:pyruvate ratio indicates elevated NADH/NAD+ ratio.) B50, vitamins B1, B2, B3, B6, B12. (From Barcelos I,
Shadiack E, Ganetzky RD, Falk MJ. Mitochondrial medicine therapies: rationale, evidence, and dosing guidelines. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2020;32[6]:707–718.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

938 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders

Chapter 109

Mucopolysaccharidoses
Christina Lampe

H2COH
O
COOH

H2CO

COOH
O

O
O

S
O

O
O

O

S

N

O

S

O

S

NAc

iduronate sulfatase

Mucopolysaccharidosis II
H2COH

O
COOH

H2CO

COOH
O

O
O

S
O

O
O

Mucopolysaccharidoses are hereditary progressive diseases caused by
pathogenic variants of genes coding for the lysosomal enzymes needed
to degrade glycosaminoglycans (acid mucopolysaccharides). Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are long-­chain complex carbohydrates composed of
uronic acids, amino sugars, and neutral sugars. The major GAGs are
chondroitin-­4-­sulfate, chondroitin-­6-­sulfate, heparan sulfate, dermatan
sulfate, keratan sulfate, and hyaluronan. These substances are synthesized
and, with the exception of hyaluronan, linked to proteins to form proteoglycans, major constituents of the ground substance of connective tissue
and of nuclear and cell membranes. Degradation of proteoglycans starts
with the proteolytic removal of the protein core, followed by the stepwise
degradation of the GAG moiety. Failure of this degradation because of
absent or grossly reduced activity of mutated lysosomal enzymes results
in the intralysosomal accumulation of GAG fragments (Fig. 109.1). Distended lysosomes accumulate in the cell, interfere with cell function, and
lead to characteristic patterns of clinical, radiologic, and biochemical
abnormalities (Table 109.1 and Fig. 109.2). Within these patterns, specific diseases can be recognized that evolve from the intracellular accumulation of different degradation products (Table 109.2). As a general
rule, the impaired degradation of heparan sulfate is more closely associated with intellectual disability and that of dermatan, chondroitin, and
keratan sulfate with mesenchymal abnormalities. Variable expression
within a given entity results from allelic pathogenic variants and varying residual activity of mutated enzymes. For instance, different allelic
variants of the gene encoding l-­iduronidase may result in severe Hurler
disease (Hurler syndrome) with early death or in mild Scheie disease
(Scheie syndrome) manifesting only with limited joint mobility, mild
skeletal abnormalities, and corneal opacities. In addition, the features of
an individual patient will be modified by secondary effects of lysosomal
dysfunction and environmental factors.
Mucopolysaccharidoses are autosomal recessive disorders, with the
exception of Hunter disease (Hunter syndrome), which is X-­linked
recessive. Their birth prevalence varies between 1.2 per 100,000 births
(United States) and 16.9 per 100,000 births (Saudi Arabia). In the
United States the most common subtype is MPS-­III, followed by MPS-­I
and MPS-­II.

CLINICAL ENTITIES
Mucopolysaccharidosis I

Mucopolysaccharidosis I (MPS-­I) is caused by pathogenic variants of
the IUA gene on chromosome 4p16.3 encoding α-­l-­iduronidase. Two
major alleles, W402X and Q70X, account for more than half of the
MPS-­I alleles in the White population. Other pathogenic variants typically occur in only one or a few individuals.
Deficiency of α-­l-­iduronidase results in a wide range of clinical
involvement. Homozygous nonsense pathogenic variants result in the
absence of enzyme and severe forms of MPS-­I (Hurler syndrome).
In contrast, missense pathogenic variants are more likely to preserve
some residual enzyme activity and be associated with a milder form of
the disease, including the milder Scheie syndrome.

Hurler Disease

The Hurler form of MPS-­I (MPS I-­H) is a severe, progressive disorder with involvement of multiple organ and tissue involvement that
results in premature death, usually by 10 years of age. An infant with
Hurler syndrome appears normal at birth, but inguinal hernias may
be present. Diagnosis is usually made at 6-­24 months, with evidence
of hepatosplenomegaly, coarse facial features, corneal clouding, large
tongue, enlarged head circumference, joint stiffness, short stature,
and skeletal dysplasia. Acute cardiomyopathy has been found in some

N

O

S

O

S

NAc

α-L iduronidase

Mucopolysaccharidosis I
H2COH

H2CO

COOH
O

O

S
O

O
O
N

O

S

O

S

NAc

heparan-N-sulfatase

Mucopolysaccharidosis III-A

H2COH

H2CO

COOH
O

O

S
O

O
O

O

NH2

Acetyl-CoA:
α-glucosaminide-Nacetyl-transferase

O

NAc

S

Mucopolysaccharidosis III-C
H2COH

H2CO

COOH
O

O

S
O

O
O

O
NAc

O

α-N-Acetylglucosaminidase

S

NAc

Mucopolysaccharidosis III-B
H2CO

COOH
O

S
O

O
O
O

S

NAc

glucuronate sulfatase
H2CO

COOH
O

S
O

O
O
NAc

β-glucuronidase

Mucopolysaccharidosis VII
CO
O

N-Acetylglucosamine-6sulfatase

O
NAc

Mucopolysaccharidosis III-D
H2COH
O
O
NAc

Fig. 109.1 Degradation of heparan sulfate and mucopolysacchari-

doses resulting from the deficiency of individual enzymes. Some of the
enzymes are also involved in the degradation of other glycosaminoglycans (not shown).

infants <1 year. Most patients have recurrent upper respiratory tract
and ear infections, noisy breathing, and persistent copious nasal discharge. Valvular heart disease, notably with incompetence of the mitral
and aortic valves, regularly develops, and narrowing of the coronary
arteries occurs. Obstructive airway disease, especially during sleep,
may necessitate tracheotomy. Obstructive airway disease, respiratory
infection, and cardiac complications are the common causes of death.
Most children with Hurler syndrome acquire only limited language
skills because of developmental delay, combined conductive and neurosensory hearing loss, and an enlarged tongue. Progressive ventricular
enlargement with increased intracranial pressure caused by communicating hydrocephalus also occurs. Corneal clouding, glaucoma, and
retinal degeneration are common. Radiographs show a characteristic
skeletal dysplasia known as dysostosis multiplex (Figs. 109.3 and 109.4).
The earliest radiographic signs are thick ribs and ovoid vertebral bodies. Skeletal abnormalities (in addition to those shown in the figures)
include enlarged, coarsely trabeculated diaphyses of the long bones
with irregular metaphyses and epiphyses. With progression of disease,
macrocephaly develops with thickened calvarium, premature closure

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 109 u Mucopolysaccharidoses
of lambdoid and sagittal sutures, shallow orbits, enlarged J-­shaped
sella, and abnormal spacing of teeth with dentigerous cysts.

Hurler-­Scheie Disease

The clinical phenotype of the Hurler-­Scheie form of MPS-­I (MPS
I-­H/S) is intermediate between Hurler and Scheie diseases and is
characterized by progressive somatic involvement, including dysostosis multiplex with little or no intellectual dysfunction. The onset of
symptoms is usually observed between 3 and 8 years of age, and survival to adulthood is common. Cardiac involvement and upper airway
obstruction contribute to clinical morbidity. Some patients have spondylolisthesis, which may cause cord compression.

Scheie Syndrome

MPS I-­S is a comparatively mild disorder characterized by joint
stiffness, aortic valve disease, corneal clouding, and mild dysostosis
Table 109.1  Recognition Pattern of
Mucopolysaccharidoses
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS (MPS)
TYPE
I-­H

I-­S

II

III

IV

VI

VII

Intellectual disability

MANIFESTATIONS

+

−

±

+

−

−

±

Coarse facial features

+

(+)

+

+

−

+

±

Corneal clouding

+

+

−

−

(+)

+

±

Visceromegaly

+

(+)

+

(+)

−

+

+

Short stature

+

(+)

+

−

+

+

+

Joint contractures

+

+

+

−

−

+

+

Dysostosis multiplex

+

(+)

+

(+)

+

+

+

Leucocyte inclusions

+

(+)

+

+

−

+

+

Mucopolysacchariduria

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

I-­H, Hurler syndrome; I-­S, Scheie syndrome; II, Hunter syndrome; III, Sanfilippo
syndrome; IV, Morquio syndrome; VI, Maroteaux-­Lamy syndrome; VII, Sly syndrome,
+, presence of manifestation, −, absence of manifestation; ±, possible presence of
manifestation; (+), mild manifestation.

MPS-I

MPS-II

939

multiplex. Onset of significant symptoms is usually after age 5 years,
with diagnosis made between 10 and 20 years. Patients with Scheie
syndrome have normal intelligence and stature but have significant joint and ocular involvement. A carpal tunnel syndrome often
develops. Ophthalmic features include corneal clouding, glaucoma,
and retinal degeneration. Obstructive airway disease, causing sleep
apnea, develops in some patients, necessitating tracheotomy. Aortic
valve disease is common and has required valve replacement in some
patients.

Mucopolysaccharidosis II

Hunter disease (MPS-­II) is an X-­linked disorder caused by the deficiency of iduronate 2-­sulfatase (IDS). The gene encoding IDS is located
on Xq28. Single-­nucleotide variants or small deletions of IDS have
been detected in approximately 50% of patients with MPS-­II. Major
deletions or rearrangements of IDS have been found in the rest, usually
associated with a more severe and complex clinical phenotype. As an
X-­linked recessive disorder, Hunter syndrome manifests almost exclusively in males. However, it has been observed in females because of
unfavorable skewing of inactivation of the normal X chromosome carrying the normal gene.
Marked molecular heterogeneity explains the wide clinical spectrum of Hunter disease. Patients with severe MPS-­II have features
similar to those of Hurler disease, except for the lack of corneal
clouding and the somewhat slower progression of somatic and central nervous system (CNS) deterioration. Coarse facial features, short
stature, dysostosis multiplex, joint stiffness, and intellectual disability manifest between 2 and 4 years of age. Grouped skin papules are
present in some patients. Extensive congenital dermal melanocytosis
(Mongolian spots) present at birth have been observed in African and
Asian patients and may be an early marker of the disease. Gastrointestinal (GI) storage may produce chronic diarrhea. Communicating
hydrocephalus and spastic paraplegia may develop due to thickened
meninges. In severely affected patients, extensive, slowly progressive
neurologic involvement precedes death, which usually occurs at age
10-­15 years.
Patients with the mild form have a near-­normal or normal life span,
minimal CNS involvement, and slow progression of somatic deterioration with preservation of cognitive function in adult life. Survival to
ages 65 and 87 years has been reported, and some patients have had
children. Somatic features are Hurler-­like but milder with a greatly

MPS-III

MPS-IV

MPS-VI

Fig. 109.2 Patients with various types of mucopolysaccharidoses. MPS-­I: Hurler syndrome, age 3 years; MPS-­II: Hunter syndrome, 12 years; MPS-­
III: Sanfilippo syndrome, 4 years; MPS-­IV: Morquio syndrome, 10 years; MPS-­VI: Maroteaux-­Lamy syndrome, 15 years.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

940 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 109.2  Mucopolysaccharidoses: Clinical, Molecular, and Biochemical Aspects
MPS
TYPE

EPONYM

INHERITANCE

I-­H

(Pfaundler-­)
Hurler

AR

I-­S

Scheie

I-­HS

GENE/
CHROMOSOME

ASSAY

MIM
NUMBER

MAIN CLINICAL FEATURES

DEFECTIVE ENZYME

IDUA
4p16.3

Severe Hurler phenotype,
mental deficiency, corneal
clouding, death usually
before age 14 yr

α-­l-­iduronidase

L, F, Ac, Cv

252800
607014

AR

IDUA
4p16.4

Stiff joints, corneal clouding,
aortic valve disease, normal
intelligence, survive to
adulthood

α-­l-­iduronidase

L, F, Ac, Cv

607016

Hurler-­
Scheie

AR

IDUA
4p16.4

Phenotype intermediate
between I-­H and I-­S

α-­l-­iduronidase

L, F, Ac, Cv

607015

II

Hunter

XLR

IDS
Xq27.3-­28

Severe course: similar to I-­H but Iduronate sulfate
clear corneas
sulfatase
Mild course: less pronounced
features, later manifestation,
survival to adulthood with
mild mental deficiency or
without mental deficiency

S, F, Af, Ac, 309900
Cv

IIIA

Sanfilippo A AR

SGSH
17q25.3

Heparan-­S-­sulfamidase

L, F, Ac, Cv

IIIB

Sanfilippo B

AR

NAGLU
17q21

N-­Acetyl-­d-­
glycosaminidase

S, F, Ac, Cv 252920

IIIC

Sanfilippo C AR

HGSNAT
8p11.21

Behavioral problems, sleeping
disorder, aggression,
progressive dementia, mild
dysmorphism, coarse hair,
clear corneas
Survival to adulthood possible

Acetyl-­CoA-­
glucosaminide N-­
acetyltransferase

F, Ac

252930

IIID

Sanfilippo D AR

GNS
12q14

N-­Acetylglucosamine–
6-­sulfate sulfatase

F, Ac

252940
607664

IVA

Morquio A

AR

GALNS
16q24.3

Short-­trunk dwarfism, fine
corneal opacities,
characteristic bone dysplasia;
final height <125 cm

N-­
L, F, Ac
Acetylgalactosamine-­
6-­sulfate sulfatase

253000

IVB

Morquio B

AR

GLB1
3p21.33

Same as IVA, but milder; adult
height >120 cm

β-­Galactosidase

253010
230500

VI

Maroteaux-­
Lamy

AR

ARSB
5q11-­q13

Hurler phenotype with marked
corneal clouding but normal
intelligence; mild, moderate,
and severe expression in
different families

N-­
L, F, Ac
Acetylgalactosamine-­
α-­4-­sulfate sulfatase
(arylsulfatase B)

VII

Sly

AR

GUSB
7q21.11

Varying from fetal hydrops to
mild dysmorphism; dense
inclusions in granulocytes

β-­Glucuronidase

S, F, Ac, Cv 253220

IX

Hyaluron­
idase
deficiency

AR

HYAL1
3p21.3

Periarticular masses, no Hurler
phenotype

Hyaluronidase 1

S

601492

MPSPS MPS plus
syndrome

AR

VPS33A

Mild Hurler phenotype,
No lysosomal enzyme
cognitive deficiency,
deficiency
organomegaly, skeletal
dysplasia, pancytopenia, renal
insufficiency, optic atrophy,
early death

L, F

617303

L, F, Ac, Cv

252900
605270

253200

AR, Autosomal recessive; XLR, X-­linked recessive; L, Leukocytes; S, serum; F, cultured fibroblasts; Ac, cultured amniotic cells; Af, amniotic fluid; Cv, chorionic villus sampling; MIM,
Mendelian Inheritance in Man Catalogue.

reduced rate of progression. Adult height may exceed 150 cm. Airway
involvement, valvular cardiac disease, hearing impairment, carpal tunnel syndrome, and joint stiffness are common and can result in significant loss of function in both the mild and severe forms.

Mucopolysaccharidosis III

Sanfilippo disease makes up a genetically heterogeneous but clinically
similar group of four recognized types. Each type is caused by a different enzyme deficiency involved in the degradation of heparan sulfate

(see Fig. 109.1). Pathogenic variants have been found in all the MPS-­III
disorders for which genes have been isolated.
Phenotypic variation exists in MPS-­III patients, but to a lesser
degree than in other MPS disorders. Patients with Sanfilippo disease
are characterized by slowly progressive, severe CNS involvement with
mild somatic disease. Such disproportionate involvement of the CNS
versus the connective tissue system is unique to MPS-­III. Onset of clinical features usually occurs at age 2-­6 years in a child who previously
appeared normal. Presenting features include delayed development,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 109 u Mucopolysaccharidoses

A

B

941

C

Fig. 109.3 Dysostosis multiplex. A, Sanfilippo syndrome, patient age 4 years; the ribs are wide. B, Sanfilippo syndrome, age 4 years; immature,

ovoid configuration of the vertebral bodies. C, Hurler syndrome, age 18 months; anterosuperior hypoplasia of first lumbar vertebra (L1) resulting in
hook-­shaped appearance.

A

B

C

Fig. 109.4 Dysostosis multiplex. A, Mucopolysaccharidosis I-­H, patient age 10 years. The inferior portions of the ilia are hypoplastic, with result-

ing iliac flare and shallow acetabular fossae. The femoral necks are in the valgus position. B, MPS I-­H, age 4 years. Metacarpals and phalanges are
abnormally short, wide, and deformed with proximal pointing of the metacarpals and bullet-­shaped phalanges. Bone trabeculation is coarse, and
the cortices are thin. C, MPS I-­S, age 13 years. The carpal bones are small, leading to a V-­shaped configuration of the digits. The short, tubular bones
are well modeled. Flexion of the middle and distal phalanges II-­V is caused by joint contractures.

hyperactivity with aggressive behavior, coarse hair, hirsutism, sleep
disorders, and mild hepatosplenomegaly. Subclinical cardiac defects
are common. Delays in the diagnosis of MPS-­III are common because
of mild physical features, hyperactivity, and slowly progressive neurologic disease. Severe neurologic deterioration occurs in most patients
by age 6-­10 years, accompanied by rapid deterioration of social and
adaptive skills. Severe behavior problems, such as sleep disturbance,
uncontrolled hyperactivity, temper tantrums, destructive behavior, and
physical aggression, are common. Profound developmental regression
and behavior problems often occur in patients with normal physical
strength, making management particularly difficult.

Mucopolysaccharidosis IV

Morquio disease (MPS-­
IV) is caused by a deficiency of N-­
acetylgalactosamine-­6-­sulfatase (MPS-­IVA) or of β-­galactosidase
(MPS-­IVB). Both result in the defective degradation of keratan sulfate.
The gene encoding N-­acetylgalactosamine-­6-­sulfatase is GALNS on
chromosome 16q24.3, and the gene encoding β-­galactosidase is GLB1
on chromosome 3p21.33. β-­Galactosidase catalyzes GM1 ganglioside
in addition to endohydrolysis of keratan sulfate, and most pathogenic
variants of GLB1 result in generalized gangliosidosis, a spectrum of
neurodegenerative disorders associated with dysostosis multiplex. A
W273L pathogenic variant of the GLB1 gene, either in the homozygous

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

942 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
state or as part of compound heterozygosity, commonly results in
Morquio B disease.
Both types of Morquio syndrome are characterized by short-­trunk
dwarfism, fine corneal deposits, a skeletal dysplasia that is distinct from
other mucopolysaccharidoses, and preservation of intelligence. MPS-­
IVA is usually more severe than MPS-­IVB, with an adult height of <125
cm in the former and more than 150 cm in the latter. However, there is
considerable variability of expression in both subtypes. The appearance
of genu valgum, kyphosis, growth retardation with short trunk and neck,
and waddling gait with a tendency to fall are early symptoms of MPS-­IV.
Extraskeletal manifestations include mild corneal clouding, small teeth
with abnormally thin enamel, frequent caries formation, and occasionally hepatomegaly and cardiac valvular lesions. Instability of the odontoid process and ligamentous laxity is regularly present and can result in
atlantoaxial instability and life-­threatening dislocation. Surgery to stabilize the upper cervical spine, usually by posterior spinal fusion, before
the development of cervical myelopathy, can be lifesaving.

Mucopolysaccharidosis VI

Maroteaux-­
Lamy disease (MPS-­
VI) is caused by pathogenic variants of the ARSB gene on chromosome 5q11-­
13 encoding N-­
acetylgalactosamine-­4-­sulfatase (arylsulfatase B). It is characterized by
severe to mild somatic involvement, as seen in MPS-­I, but with preservation of intelligence. The somatic involvement of the severe form
of MPS VI is characterized by corneal clouding, coarse facial features,
joint stiffness, valvular heart disease, communicating hydrocephalus,
and dysostosis multiplex. In the severe form, growth can be normal
for the first few years of life but seems to virtually stop after age 6-­8
years. The mild to intermediate forms of Maroteaux-­Lamy syndrome
can be easily confused with Scheie syndrome. Spinal cord compression
from thickening of the dura in the upper cervical canal with resultant
myelopathy is common in patients with MPS-­VI.

Mucopolysaccharidosis VII

Sly disease (MPS-­VII) is caused by pathogenic variants of the GUSB
gene. Pathogenic variants result in a deficiency of β-­glucuronidase,
intracellular storage of glycosaminoglycan fragments, and a very
wide range of clinical involvement. The most severe form presents
as lethal nonimmune fetal hydrops and may be detected in utero by
ultrasound. Some severely affected newborns survive for months and
have, or develop, signs of lysosomal storage, including thick skin, visceromegaly, and dysostosis multiplex. Less severe forms of MPS-­VII
present during the first years of life with features of MPS-­I but slower
progression. Corneal clouding varies. Patients with manifestation after
4 years of life have coarse facial features with depressed nasal roots,
malpositioned teeth with malformed roots, and skeletal abnormalities
of dysostosis multiplex. Intelligence is normal, and corneae are usually
clear. Patients may be found incidentally based on a blood smear that
shows coarse granulocytic inclusions.

Mucopolysaccharidosis IX

MPS-­IX disease is caused by pathogenic variants in HYAL1 encoding one of three hyaluronidases. Clinical findings in the first patient, a
14-­year-­old girl, were bilateral nodular soft tissue periarticular masses,
lysosomal storage of histiocytes, mildly dysmorphic craniofacial features, short stature, normal joint movement, and normal intelligence.
Clinical findings in the only three additional patients known today
were indistinguishable from those in rheumatoid arthritis.

Mucopolysaccharidosis Plus Syndrome

Coarse facial features, organomegaly, joint contractures, dysostosis
multiplex, cognitive deficiency, increased mucopolysacchariduria,
and massive intracellular accumulation of heparan sulfate have been
found in 13 children in northeastern Siberia and two Turkish children.
Additional findings include optic atrophy, intracerebral calcifications,
pancytopenia, and renal insufficiency. Most patients died within the
first 2 years of life from cardiorespiratory failure. Lysosomal enzyme
activities were normal in children with MPS plus syndrome. This autosomal recessive multisystem disorder is caused by biallelic pathogenic

variants of VPS33A encoding a protein involved in lysosomal fusion
processes.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Clinical suspicion of an MPS justifies a skeletal survey. Radiographs of
the chest, spine, pelvis, and hands may show early signs of dysostosis
multiplex. The next diagnostic step is to assay the urinary excretion of
GAGs. Semiquantitative spot tests for increased urinary GAG excretion are quick, inexpensive, and useful for initial evaluation but are
subject to both false-­positive and false-­negative results. Quantitative
analysis of a single GAG in material derived from dried blood spots
is preferable with few false-­negative results. Using tandem mass spectrometry, type-­specific profiles can be obtained. Morquio disease is
often missed in urinary assays but can be reliably diagnosed in serum
using monoclonal antibodies to keratan sulfate.
Newborn screening for MPS (type I, II, VI) is essential for the early
detection of subclinical cases and their therapy. It is available from
dried blood spots using tandem mass spectrometry of glycosaminoglycans or fluorescence-­based enzyme function assays. Any individual with a suspected MPS disorder based on screening tests, clinical
features, and radiographic results should have a definitive diagnosis
established by enzyme assay. Serum, leukocytes, or cultured fibroblasts are used as the tissue source for measuring lysosomal enzymes
(see Table 109.2).
Prenatal diagnosis is available for all MPSs and is carried out on cultured cells from amniotic fluid or chorionic villus biopsy. Molecular
analysis is typically performed using appropriate gene panels. In many
cases the type and location of the pathogenic variant are related to the
future course of the disease and thus have a prognostic value. Carrier
testing in Hunter syndrome, an X-­linked disorder, requires analysis of
IDS once the specific pathogenic variant or chromosome arrangement
in the family is known. Prenatal molecular analysis should be offered
in a male fetus of a proven female carrier of the IDS gene. His risk to
be affected is 50%. In a female fetus, the risk is small, but not zero, as a
result of skewed maternal X chromosome inactivation.
Mucolipidoses and oligosaccharidoses manifest with the same clinical and radiographic features as MPS. In these conditions the urinary
excretion of GAGs is not elevated. Hurler-­like facial features, joint contractures, dysostosis multiplex, and elevated urinary GAG excretion
differentiate the MPSs from congenital disorders of glycosylation and
other neurodegenerative and dwarfing conditions.

TREATMENT

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and enzyme replacement
therapy are performed in specialized institutions.
Bone marrow transplantation from related or unrelated donors
and cord blood transplantation have resulted in significant clinical improvement of somatic disease in MPSs I, II, III, and VII.
Clinical effects include increased life expectancy with resolution or
improvement of growth, hepatosplenomegaly, joint stiffness, facial
appearance, skin changes, obstructive sleep apnea, heart disease,
communicating hydrocephalus, and hearing loss. Enzyme activity in serum and urinary GAG excretion normalize. This is true for
MPS I-­H, II, and III. Some patients with MPS-­I who have undergone
transplantation before 9 months of age have been reported with normal cognitive development. Transplantation before 24 months and
with a baseline mental development index >70 have improved long-­
term outcomes. Transplantation does not significantly improve the
neuropsychologic outcome of MPS patients with impaired cognition
at transplantation. Early transplantation in the MPS-­II patient may
have the same effect. Transplantation in the MPS-­VI patient stabilizes or improves cardiac manifestations, posture, and joint mobility.
Stem cell transplantation does not correct skeletal or ocular anomalies, and they should be treated with appropriate orthopedic and ophthalmologic procedures. Cord blood transplantation is the therapy
of choice in children with MPS-­IH, and possibly MPS-­II, before the
age of 2 years, but transplantation-­related death or primary graft failure, which occurs in approximately one third of the patients, must be
weighed against other therapeutic options.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 109 u Mucopolysaccharidoses
Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) using recombinant α-­l-­
iduronidase has been approved for patients with MPS-­I (Table 109.3).
It reduces organomegaly and airway infections, improves rate of
growth, improves joint mobility, pulmonary function, and endurance,
and reduces the number of episodes of sleep apnea and urinary GAG
excretion. The enzyme does not cross the blood-­brain barrier and does
not prevent deterioration of cognition and other neurologic functions.
Consequently, ERT is reserved for patients with mild CNS involvement. To stabilize extraneural manifestations it is also recommended in
young patients before stem cell transplantation. ERT also ameliorates
somatic complications in patients with more severe CNS involvement.
Recombinant iduronate-­2-­sulfatase ameliorates the nonneural manifestations of Hunter disease, such as respiratory dysfunction, reduced
physical endurance, and daily activity. ERT with recombinant human
GALNS improves physical endurance, respiratory function, and daily
living activity of patients with MPS-­IV. Similar effects produce recombinant N-­acetylgalactosamine-­4-­sulfatase in patients with MPS-­VI and
recombinant β-­glucuronidase in MPS VII.

943

Advanced therapies include enzyme replacement mediated via insulin
receptors in MPS I and II or transferrin receptors in MPS II to assist
in crossing the blood-­brain barrier. A phase I/II and a phase III study
using the transferrin receptor have started for MPS II. In MPS IIIA, an
intravenous ERT phase 1/2 study with a chemically modified variant of
recombinant human sulfamidase and a recombinant human alpha-­N-­
acetylglucosaminidase for MPS IIIB were recently completed. However,
the study results were not convincing. A phase I/II study for MPS III
using the transferrin receptor is in planning. Gene therapies for MPS I,
II, and III are under investigation. Autologous hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells transduced ex vivo with an α-­l-­iduronidase–encoded lentiviral vector has resulted in beneficial metabolic correction in peripheral
and central nervous system tissues. A clinical trial to ameliorate the
intracellular inflammation and, consequently, the CNS involvement in
MPS III with anakinra (Kineret) was completed with results pending.
Symptomatic therapy focuses on respiratory and cardiovascular complications, hearing loss, carpal tunnel syndrome, spinal cord
compression, hydrocephalus, and other problems (Table 109.4). The

Table 109.3  Therapies For Mucopolysaccharidoses
MPS TYPE

HEMATOPOIETIC STEM
CELL TRANSPLANTATION

ENZYME REPLACEMENT
THERAPY

I

Yes

Laronidase (Aldurazyme)

II

Yes

Idursulfase (Elaprase)

III

No

No

Experimental intraventricular chimeric fusion of recombinant
human N-acetyl-D-glucosaminidase and truncated
insulin-like growth factor 2 in MPS IIIB

IV

Yes

Elosulfase (Vimizim)

Improved daily activities. No effect on growth or skeletal
dysplasia.

VI

Yes

Galsulfase (Naglazyme)

Improved daily activities. Improved growth. No effect on
skeletal dysplasia.

VII

Yes

Vestronidase alfa (MEPSEVII)

Improved daily activity. No effect on skeletal dysplasia.

REMARKS
Developmental trajectory dependent on time of
transplantation. Little effect on connective tissue
manifestations. Enzyme replacement immediately after
diagnosis.
Autologous hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells transduced
ex vivo with gene encoding lentiviral vector.

Table 109.4  Symptomatic Management of Mucopolysaccharidoses
PROBLEM

PREDOMINANTLY IN

MANAGEMENT

NEUROLOGIC
Hydrocephalus
Chronic headaches
Behavioral disturbance

MPS I, II, VI, VII
All
MPS-­III

Disturbed sleep–wake cycle
Seizures
Atlantoaxial instability
Spinal cord compression

MPS-­III
MPS I, II, III
MPS IV
All

Fundoscopy, CT scan
Ventriculoperitoneal shunting
Behavioral medication, sometimes
CT scan, ventriculoperitoneal shunting
Melatonin
EEG, anticonvulsants
Cervical MRI, upper cervical fusion
Laminectomy, dural excision

OPHTHALMOLOGIC
Corneal opacity
Glaucoma
Retinal degeneration

MPS I, VI, VII
MPS I, VI, VII
MPS I, II

Corneal transplant
Medication, surgery
Nightlight

EARS, AIRWAYS
Recurrent otitis media
Impaired hearing
Obstruction

MPS I, II, VI, VII
All except MPS-­IV
All except MPS-­III

Ventilating tubes
Audiometry, hearing aids
Adenectomy, tonsillectomy, bronchodilator therapy, CPAP at night,
laser excision of tracheal lesions, tracheotomy

CARDIAC
Cardiac valve disease
Coronary insufficiency
Arrhythmias

MPS I, II, VI, VII
MPS I, II, VI, VII
MPS I, II, VI, VII

Endocarditis prevention, valve replacement
Medical therapy
Antiarrhythmic medication, pacemaker

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

944 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 109.4  Symptomatic Management of Mucopolysaccharidoses—cont’d
PROBLEM

PREDOMINANTLY IN

MANAGEMENT

ORAL, GASTROINTESTINAL
Hypertrophic gums, poor teeth
Chronic diarrhea

MPS I, II, VI, VII
MPS-­II

Dental care
Diet modification, loperamide

MUSCULOSKELETAL
Joint stiffness
Scoliosis
Weakness
Gross long-­bone malalignment
Carpal tunnel syndrome

All except MPS IV
All
All
All
MPS I, II, VI, VII

Physical therapy
Bracing, surgery
Physical therapy, wheelchair
Corrective osteotomies
Electromyography, surgical decompression

ANESTHESIA

All except MPS III

Avoid atlantoaxial dislocation; use angulated video intubation
laryngoscope and small endotracheal tubes

CT, Computed tomography; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; EEG, electroencephalogram; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

multisystem involvement and progressive nature of MPS syndromes
usually require the standardized and complex care provided by medical centers.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 110

Disorders of Purine and
Pyrimidine Metabolism
H. A. Jinnah
The purines and pyrimidines consist of a family of small organic molecules that are found in all cells. They are often considered together
because they provide the fundamental building blocks for nucleic acids,
which include DNA and RNA. The purines and pyrimidines are also
involved in numerous other cellular processes. Although they share
certain biochemical characteristics, the associated clinical disorders
are quite varied. Historically, most were identified by characteristic
abnormalities found with metabolic tests. Currently, they are increasingly being identified after discovery of a pathogenic variant in a relevant gene in tests that involve broad gene panels or exome sequencing.
Most of these disorders are genetic, and most are rare. However, they
are important to recognize because specific treatments are available for
some of them (Table 110.1).

PURINES

The purines are divided into two groups. The first group involves the
base adenine, its corresponding nucleoside (adenosine), and nucleotide (AMP, ADP, ATP) derivatives (Fig. 110.1). ATP serves as one of
four building blocks for RNA, and its deoxy derivative (dATP) serves
as one of four building blocks for DNA. ATP also provides the energy
source for the majority of energy-­requiring activities. ATP derivatives
act as signaling factors as “second messengers” (cAMP) or cofactors
(FAD, NAD, NADP) for a large number of cellular processes. Some
purines such as adenosine and the adenine nucleotides serve as extracellular signaling molecules, including acting as neurotransmitters in
the nervous system.

The second group of purines involves the base guanine, its corresponding nucleoside (guanosine), and nucleotide (GMP, GDP, GTP)
derivatives (see Fig. 110.1). Like the adenine nucleotides, guanine
nucleotide derivatives also serve as building blocks for nucleic acids
(DNA and RNA). GTP also provides an energy source for some
energy-­requiring activities. Guanine nucleotides also play a critical role
in intercellular signaling (cGMP) via membrane-­bound receptors that
require GTP during signal transduction (G-­proteins). They also play
a role in intracellular signaling via a large family of cytosolic GTPases
and guanine nucleotide exchange factors.
Because purines play a critical role for so many fundamental cellular processes, their amounts are tightly regulated. The amounts of
purines reflect a balance between synthesis, catabolism, and recycling
(Fig. 110.2). Purines are synthesized by the de novo purine synthesis
pathway. This pathway has six enzymes that carry out 10 reactions.
When there is a demand for more purines, these six enzymes aggregate
dynamically into giant macromolecular complexes known as purinosomes to accelerate synthesis. After the demand is met, these aggregates
disperse and synthesis abates. In humans, purines are catabolized via
several routes. The major end product of purine catabolism is uric acid,
produced by the enzyme encoded by the XDH gene. The enzyme is
known as xanthine oxidase, xanthine reductase, or xanthine oxidoreductase. Most of this uric acid is eliminated from the body in the urine,
although some is also eliminated by secretion into the gastrointestinal
tract. Because the synthesis of purines is energetically costly, purines
are actively recycled (see Fig. 110.2). The key enzymes of purine salvage
include hypoxanthine-­guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (encoded
by HPRT1) and adenine phosphoribosyl transferase (encoded by
APRT).
The metabolism of purines differs considerably across different cells
and tissues. For example, the synthetic pathway is absent in erythrocytes, because these postmitotic cells do not require large quantities
of new purines to make nucleic acids for cell division. Erythrocytes
rely instead predominantly on purine salvage to maintain purine levels. A similar situation is thought to occur for postmitotic neurons of
the nervous system. Another example of tissue-­specific differences in
purine metabolism involves uric acid. The vast majority of uric acid in
the human body is produced by the liver, because hepatocytes express
high levels of XDH, whereas many other cells and tissues express little
or none. In addition to tissue differences, several enzymes of purine
metabolism have multiple isoforms with different tissue distributions,
leading to tissue-­specific consequences in disorders where one isoform
is affected.

PYRIMIDINES

The pyrimidines are divided into three groups delineated by the bases
cytosine, thymine, and uracil (see Fig. 110.1). Each has a corresponding nucleoside derivative (cytidine, thymidine, uridine) and nucleotide

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 110 u Disorders of Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism

945

Table 110.1  Disorders of Purines and Pyrimidines with Specific Treatments
DISORDER

GENE SYMBOL

TREATMENT

OUTCOME

APRT deficiency

APRT

XOR inhibitor

Prevents renal stones and renal failure

Uridine-­responsive epileptic
encephalopathy

CAD

Uridine

Suppresses seizures, reverses neurobehavioral and
hematologic abnormalities

Familial juvenile hyperuricemic
nephropathy

UMOD, REN, MUC, or
HNF-­1b

XOR inhibitor

Prevents renal stones, renal failure, and gout

Renal hypouricemia

SLC2A9 or SLC22A12

XOR inhibitor

Prevents renal stones and renal failure

Hereditary orotic aciduria

UMPS

Uridine

Reverses neurobehavioral and hematologic deficits

Hereditary xanthinurias
Type 1

XOR

XOR inhibitor

Prevents renal stones and renal failure

Type 2

MOCOS

XOR inhibitor

Prevents renal stones and renal failure

Molybdenum cofactor deficiencies

MOCS1-­3, GPHN

XOR inhibitor

Prevents renal stones and renal failure

MOCS1 deficiency

MOCS1

cPMP

Reverses neurobehavioral deficits

HPRT1-­associated disorders

HPRT1

XOR inhibitor

Prevents renal stones, renal failure, and gout

PRPP synthetase hyperactivity

PRPS1

XOR inhibitor

Prevents renal stones, renal failure, and gout

Nucleotidase-­associated pervasive
developmental delay

Unknown

Uridine

Reverses neurobehavioral deficits

The most common XOR inhibitors include allopurinol, febuxostat, and topiroxostat.
cPMP, Cyclic pyranopterin monophosphate; XOR, xanthine oxidoreductase.
Copyright H.A. Jinnah.

Pyrimidine bases

Purine bases
N

N

Purine & pyrimidine derivatives
phosphate groups

N
base

N
purine

N

O

N
pyrimidine

O

O

pentose
ring
NH2
N

N

NH2

O
N

HN

N

OH

O
O

P
OH

O
O

P

O

OH

O

O

R
CH3

HN

P

HN

OH

base
nucleoside

N
adenine

N
H

H2N

N
guanine

N
H

O

N
H
cytosine

O

N
H
thymine

O

N
H
uracil

monophosphate nucleotide
diphosphate nucleotide
triphosphate nucleotide

A

B

C

Fig. 110.1 The structure of purines and pyrimidines. A, The fundamental purine base and its variants adenine and guanine. B, The fundamental

pyrimidine base and its variants cytosine, thymine, and uracil. C, The major purine and pyrimidine derivatives. Nucleosides are composed of a purine
or pyrimidine base attached to a pentose ring. The R moiety in the pentose ring can be either an OH group (ribose for RNA) or a hydrogen (deoxyribose for DNA). Nucleotides are composed of a nucleoside attached to phosphate groups. (Copyright H.A. Jinnah.)

derivatives (see Fig. 110.1). Like the purines, the pyrimidines are key
ingredients for nucleic acids. Nucleotide derivatives of cytidine are used
to make DNA and RNA. Nucleotide derivatives of thymidine are used in
DNA, but nucleotide derivatives of uridine replace thymidine in RNA.
The pyrimidines also have additional functions; CTP is used to make
CDP-­choline, an important intermediate in the production of membrane phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine. UTP is used to make
UDP-­glucose, an intermediate used in the synthesis of glycogen, as well
as other glycosylation reactions, to make glycolipids or glycoproteins.
UTP is also used to make UDP-­glucuronic acid, an intermediate used
in the generation of glucuronide conjugates. Glucuronide conjugates of
certain drugs and drug metabolites are excreted in the bile, and glucuronide conjugates of other endogenous biomolecules such as steroid
hormones facilitate transport between tissues in the body.

The body’s pyrimidine levels reflect a balance between synthesis,
catabolism, and recycling. Pyrimidines are synthesized in a pathway that involves three enzymes which carry out six steps leading to the central metabolite UMP (Fig. 110.3). UMP can then be
directed toward the synthesis of other pyrimidines. Pyrimidines
are catabolized via several routes. Cytidine and uridine derivatives are both converted to uracil, and ultimately to β-­alanine.
Thymidine is converted to β-­aminoisobutyrate. Both β-­alanine
and β-­aminoisobutyrate serve as intermediates in the citric acid
cycle. Free pyrimidines are also recycled at several steps by kinases
that convert nucleosides to their corresponding nucleotides (see
Fig. 110.3). Pyrimidine disorders are rare and clinically heterogeneous. The heterogeneity likely reflects the different functions of
pyrimidines in different tissues combined with differences in the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

946 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
ATP
R5P

PRPP

PRPS

PPAT
PRA

GAR

GART

FGAR
PFAS
FGAM

AIR

DNA

PAICS

dATP

dGTP

RNA
energy
cofactors
signaling

DNA

CAIR

SAICAR

RNA
energy
cofactors
signaling

ADSL

dGDP

dADP
ZMP

RR

NDK
GTP

RR

GDP

NDK

ADP
ATIC

ATP

FAICAR

GUK

AK

GMP

GMPS

XMP

IMPDH

IMP

ADSS

S-AM P

AMP

AMPD
NT5

NT5

guanosine

inosine

PNP

PNP

guanine

hypoxanthine

ADK
ADA

NT5

adenosine
PNP
adenine

XDH

XDH

xanthine

2,8-DHA

GDA

XDH
uric acid

Fig. 110.2 Purine metabolism. The six enzymes and 10 reactions of de novo purine synthesis are shown in red. The two enzymes and three reac-

tions of the salvage pathways are shown in purple. Enzyme gene names are shown in bold font, and metabolites are shown in regular font. For
enzymes with multiple isoforms, only the core gene name is shown, without isoform numbers or letters. Dashed lines show enzymes with multiple
functions. 2,8-­DHA, Dihydroxyadenine; ADA, adenosine deaminase; ADP, adenosine diphosphate; ADK, adenosine kinase; ADSL, bifunctional adenylosuccinate lyase; ADSS, adenylosuccinate synthase; AICAR, aminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide; AMPD, adenylate deaminase; AMP, adenosine monophosphate or adenylate; APRT, adenine phosphoribosyltransferase; ATIC, bifunctional AICAR transformylase/IMP cyclohydrolase; AK,
adenylate kinase; ATP adenosine triphosphate; CAIR, 5′-­Phosphoribosyl-­4-­carboxy-­5-­aminoimidazole; dADP, deoxy adenosine diphosphate; dGDP,
deoxy guanosine diphosphate; FAICAR, formylaminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide; GART, trifunctional phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase/phosphoribosylglycinamide synthetase/phosphoribosylaminoimidazole synthetase; GDA, guanine deaminase (aka guanase or cypin); GDP,
guanosine diphosphate; GMP, guanosine monophosphate or guanylate; GMPS, GMP-­synthase; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; GUK, guanylate kinase;
HGprt, hypoxanthine-­guanine phosphoribosyltransferase; IMP, inosine monophosphate or inosinate; IMPDH, IMP-­dehydrogenase; NDK, nucleoside
diphosphate kinase; NT5, 5’-­nucleotidase; PNP, purine nucleoside phosphorylase; PAICS, bifunctional phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase;
PFAS, phosphoribosyl formylglycinamide synthase; PPAT, bifunctional phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase; PRA, 5-­phosphoribosylamine;
PRPP, phosphoribosylpyrophosphate; PRPS, PRPP-­synthase; RR, ribonucleotide reductase; S-­AMP, adenylosuccinate; SAICAR, succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide; XDH, xanthine dehydrogenase, xanthine oxidase, or xanthine oxidoreductase; XMP, xanthine monophosphate or
xanthylate; ZMP, 5-­aminoimidazole-­4-­carboxamide ribonucleotide or Z-­nucleotide monophosphate. (Copyright H.A. Jinnah.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 110 u Disorders of Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism
expression levels of different enzymes in different tissues and sometimes tissue-­specific isoforms of the same enzyme.

DISORDERS OF PURINE METABOLISM
Uric Acid

Serum uric acid levels reflect a balance among production, absorption, and excretion. Most uric acid is produced in the body as a by-­
product of purine metabolism (see Fig. 110.2). Some also comes from
the diet, when DNA and RNA of foods are metabolized by the gut and
liver. About two thirds of the body’s uric acid is eliminated by the kidneys, with the remainder eliminated by the gut. Normal serum uric
acid levels are age dependent. Relatively low levels in young children
reach adult values by puberty. After puberty, serum uric acid is lower
in females than in males.
In adults, numerous epidemiologic studies have linked abnormal
serum uric acid levels with a large number of disorders. High levels
of uric acid have been linked with gout, kidney disease, tophi, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obesity, metabolic syndrome, heart disease,
stroke, hemolytic anemia, Down syndrome, asthma, and others. Causal
links between uric acid and disease with well-­defined biologic mechanisms are well established for gout, kidney disease, and tophi. Low
levels of uric acid have been linked with Parkinson disease, Alzheimer
disease, multiple sclerosis, and other autoimmune disorders. For these
disorders, uric acid has been proposed to have antioxidant properties,
so chronically low levels may contribute to cell injury during aging.
In children, low (or even absent) levels of serum uric acid do not
appear to have any detrimental clinical effects, but high levels cause
problems. Uric acid is normally near its limits of solubility in the body,
so even small increases risk precipitation in vulnerable regions. The
joints are one of these vulnerable regions, because of the low pH of
synovial fluid. Such precipitates can cause an inflammatory arthritis
known as gout. These precipitates tend to occur in cool regions of the
body, such as distal joints of the toes. The typical presentation of gout is
acute inflammation of one joint, often the metatarsophalangeal joint of
the large toe, although any joint can be involved. Uric acid crystals also
precipitate in cool regions of the skin, forming tophi at tendon insertion points over joints or the pinna of the ear. These tophi appear as
visible and palpable subcutaneous masses. Excess uric acid is concentrated by the kidneys in the renal collecting system, where high levels
precipitate in two different ways. Microscopic crystals may produce an
inflammatory nephropathy with painless chronic renal failure. Larger
stones may cause urinary obstruction with acute renal colic, dysuria,
hematuria, and recurrent urinary infections. These pathologies may
also overlap in some cases.
Hyperuricemia and its pathologic consequences are common in
adults, especially males. These problems often reflect an inherited predisposition for high uric acid together with lifestyle related to diet and
exercise. Hyperuricemia and its consequences are very uncommon
in children. Their occurrence in children often signifies an underlying disorder of purine metabolism. Uric acid is a component of many
routine clinical chemistry screening panels. As a result, abnormal levels of uric acid often provide an early clue to one of these disorders
(Table 110.2). Kidney stones are common in adults, but they are very
uncommon in children. Nephrolithiasis and renal failure also provide
an important clue to disorders of uric acid and some other disorders
of purine and pyrimidine metabolism (Table 110.3). Some are rare
inherited disorders affecting specific biochemical pathways; others are
acquired or iatrogenic.

Individual Disorders

Individuals with renal hypouricemia have marked reductions in
serum uric acid (<2 μg/dL or <120 μM) from birth. The disorder
is autosomal recessive and caused by pathogenic variants in the
SLC22A12 or SLC2A9 genes, which code for transporters important
for renal retention of uric acid. Many affected individuals remain
asymptomatic for life. Some experience renal impairments after strenuous exercise because physical activity is associated with increased
purine turnover and transient elevations of serum uric acid. When a
sudden bolus of uric acid after exercise is concentrated quickly in the

947

renal collecting system, there is a transient risk for stones or “sludge”
with nephropathy. This sludge reflects a somewhat viscous mixture
of tiny stones and partly solubilized uric acid. Gout is uncommon in
renal hypouricemia.
Familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy is an autosomal
dominant disorder that has been linked to pathogenic variants in
UMOD (uromodulin), REN (renin), MUC (mucin), or HNF-­1b (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1b). All of these genes encode proteins involved in
renal handling of uric acid. Affected individuals present in childhood
or adolescence with hyperuricemia, renal failure, and/or gout. Individuals with pathogenic variants in the ABCG2 gene have reduced intestinal secretion of uric acid, along with chronic hyperuricemia and gout.
Overproduction of uric acid may also occur in inherited disorders
of carbohydrate metabolism. They include disorders associated with
pathogenic variants in ALDOB (aldolase B deficiency, hereditary fructose intolerance, fructosemia), SLC37A4 (glucose-­6-­phosphatase deficiency, glycogen storage disease type I, or von Gierke disease), AGL
(glycogen debranching enzyme deficiency, glycogen storage disease
type III, or Cori disease), PYGM (muscle glycogen phosphorylase
deficiency, glycogen storage disease type V, or McArdle disease), and
PFKM (muscle phosphofructokinase deficiency, or glycogen storage
disease type VII, or Tarui disease). These disorders may be associated
with chronic or episodic hyperuricemia, sometimes with gout or renal
impairments. Hyperuricemia is often triggered by exercise because the
metabolic defect impairs energy metabolism during muscle activity
and leads to catabolism of adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Some disorders of uric acid are acquired rather than inherited.
Because uric acid is eliminated largely by the kidneys, acute or
chronic renal insufficiency may lead to hyperuricemia, which may
be severe. A transient but marked elevation of serum uric acid may
also occur in tumor lysis syndrome, where the treatment of hematologic malignancies is associated with sudden death of many cells in
a short period, leading to generation of large amounts of DNA and
RNA that are degraded into uric acid. The sudden bolus of uric acid
is rapidly concentrated by the kidneys, leading to a risk for kidney
stones, sludge, and renal failure. Relatively more modest increases
in serum uric acid have been associated with other childhood disorders, including obesity, metabolic syndrome, Down syndrome,
asthma, cyanotic congenital heart disease, chronic hemolytic anemia,
and certain medications. Medications causing hyperuricemia include
thiazide diuretics, cyclosporine, and some anticonvulsants (valproate
and phenobarbital).

Treatment and Prognosis

All renal purine stones, including those made of uric acid, are radiolucent. Unless they calcify, they cannot be detected with plain films or
CT, so diagnosis may require ultrasound. Stones passed in the urine
may be collected and chemically analyzed. Treatment of small kidney
stones may require analgesics for renal colic and/or antibiotics for
associated urinary tract infection until the stones are eliminated in the
urine. Larger kidney stones may obstruct the urinary collecting system
and may require lithotripsy or surgical removal. Because uric acid is
more soluble in an alkaline environment, alkalinization of the urine
with potassium-­sodium citrate or sodium bicarbonate may be useful
for individuals at risk for recurrent stones.
The diagnosis of gout can be made finding typical birefringent crystals in an aspirate of joint fluid. Because purine stones are radiolucent,
chronic tophaceous gout may have a punched-­out appearance on plain
films of the joints, where the uric acid crystals have eroded normal
bone. The treatment of acute painful gout usually involves nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. However, for both gout and renal stones,
treatments directed at uric acid levels are essential to prevent recurrences that may lead to permanent joint damage or chronic renal insufficiency. Chronic hyperuricemia can be treated with three different
strategies. One strategy is to increase renal excretion of uric acid with
drugs such as probenecid, sulfinpyrazone, benzbromarone, or lesinurad. Another strategy is to use drugs that inhibit uric acid production
by xanthine oxidoreductase (XOR) such as allopurinol, febuxostat, and
topiroxostat. The third involves administration of recombinant uricase

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

948 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
HCO3 + Gln
carbamoyl-phosphate
CAD
carbamoyl-aspartate

dihydro-orotate
DHODH
orotate
UMPS

orotidine

OMP

UMP
RR2

UDP

dUTP

dUDP

(rasburicase or pegloticase), a nonhuman enzyme that can degrade
uric acid.
The best choices for treatment depend on the biologic mechanisms
causing excess uric acid. The many causes of hyperuricemia may be
divided into two groups. The first group involves renal underexcretion,
where hyperuricemia can be treated with uricosuric drugs or XOR
inhibitors. The second group involves renal overload, which includes
disorders where uric acid is overproduced in the body or underexcreted by the gut. Hyperuricemia associated with renal overload should
be treated with XOR inhibitors, not with uricosuric drugs that further
increase the burden of uric acid handled by the kidneys. Rasburicase is
usually reserved for the transient marked increases in serum uric acid
associated with tumor lysis syndrome. Pegloticase is usually reserved
for the treatment of gout resistant to other medications.
These medications are usually combined with generous hydration
to provide a constant flow of associated purine metabolites from the
body. A low-­purine diet is sometimes recommended as well. Some
foods contain large amounts of purines, such as dried or cured meats
(sardines, anchovies) and organ meats (thymus, kidney, liver). Fructose
and alcohol also should be avoided because they stimulate purine turnover and result in increased uric acid production.

THE HEREDITARY XANTHINURIAS
UTP
CTPS

RNA, CM

CTP

RNA, PM

DNA

CDP
RR2

DNA

dTTP

dCDP

dCTP

dTDP

CMP

NT5
dCMP

dTMP

dUMP

DCK
cytidine

deoxy-cytidine
CDA

uridine

dTMP

TK2

deoxy-uridine

thymidine
TK2

TP
thymine

uracil
DPD
dihydro-uracil

dihydro-thymine
DHP

-ureidopropionate

-ureidoisobutyrate
-UP

-alanine

-aminoisobutyrate

Fig. 110.3 Pyrimidine metabolism. The three enzymes and six reactions of de

novo pyrimidine synthesis are shown in red. The enzymes of the salvage pathways
are shown in purple. Enzyme gene names are shown in bold font, and metabolites are shown in regular font. For enzymes with multiple isoforms, only the core
gene name is shown, without isoform numbers or letters. Dashed lines show enzymes with multiple functions. 5′NT, 5′-­nucleotidase; β-­UP, β-­ureidopropionase;
CAD, carbamoyl phosphate synthase; CDA, cytidine deaminase; CDP, cytidine
diphosphate; CM, carbohydrate metabolism; CMP, cytidine monophosphate;
CTP, cytidine triphosphate; CTPS, CTP synthase; dCDP, deoxy cytidine diphosphate; DCK; deoxycytidine kinase; dCMP, deoxycytidine monophosphate;
dCTP, deoxycytidine triphosphate; DHODH, dihydro-­orotate dehydrogenase;
DHP, dihydropyrimidinase; DPD, dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase; dTDP,
deoxythymidine diphosphate; dTMP, deoxythymidine monophosphate; dTTP,
deoxythymidine triphosphate; dUDP, deoxyuridine diphosphate; dUMP deoxyuridine monophosphate; dUTP, deoxyuridine triphosphate; gln, glutamine;
OMP, orotidine monophosphate or orotic acid; PM, phospholipid metabolism;
RR2, ribonucleotide reductase 2; TK2, thymidine kinase 2; TP, thymidine phosphorylase; UDP, uridine diphosphate; UMP, uridine monophosphate; UMPS,
UMP synthase; UTP, uridine triphosphate. (Copyright H.A. Jinnah.)

The hereditary xanthinurias are a group of autosomal recessive disorders defined by high levels of xanthine in the urine, along with low or
nondetectable serum uric acid. The estimated incidence is 0.5-­1 per
100,000 live births. The metabolic abnormalities result from deficiency
of XOR, the enzyme that converts hypoxanthine and xanthine into
uric acid (see Fig. 110.2). XOR exists in two forms, sometimes called
xanthine oxidase or xanthine reductase, both with a molybdenum-­
containing cofactor at the active site. These two forms are encoded
by the same gene. Xanthine oxidase is derived from posttranslational
modification of xanthine reductase.
Although the hereditary xanthinurias all result from XOR deficiency,
distinct molecular mechanisms define three different groups. Hereditary xanthinuria type I is caused by pathogenic variants in the XOR
gene. Hereditary xanthinuria type II is caused by pathogenic variants
in the MOCOS gene, which encodes molybdenum cofactor sulfurase, an
enzyme that sulfurates the molybdenum cofactor required for XOR as
well as the enzyme aldehyde oxidase. As a result, hereditary xanthinuria
type II is characterized by combined deficiency of XOR and aldehyde
oxidase. The third type of hereditary xanthinuria is caused by defects in
the synthesis of the molybdenum cofactor. Molybdenum cofactor deficiency has been linked with four genes: MOCS1 (molybdenum cofactor synthase 1), MOCS2 (molybdenum cofactor synthase 2), MOCS3
(molybdenum cofactor synthase 3), and GPHN (gephyrin). MOCS1
accounts for two thirds of all cases. All are required for the synthesis
of the molybdenum cofactor, which is used by four enzymes including
XOR, aldehyde oxidase, sulfite oxidase, and mitochondrial amidoxime
reducing component. As a result, the molybdenum cofactor deficiencies
are characterized by the combined defects of all four enzymes.

Clinical Features

The clinical features of hereditary xanthinuria type I caused by isolated
XOR deficiency may be benign. Many individuals are asymptomatic.
The increased excretion of xanthine leads to kidney stones in approximately one third of individuals. These stones may develop any time
from early childhood through later adulthood. Clinical signs may be
acute with dysuria, hematuria, renal colic, or a history of recurrent
urinary tract infections. Alternatively, affected individuals may present
with acute or chronic renal failure. Xanthine stones, like other purine
stones, are radiolucent; they are detectable with ultrasound but may be
missed on abdominal plain films or CT unless they calcify. Some individuals may develop myopathy after strenuous exercise with xanthine
crystals in muscle because of the rapid turnover of purines associated
with exercise.
The clinical features of combined deficiency of XOR and aldehyde
oxidase in hereditary xanthinuria type II are similar to those of type I.
There appears to be no obvious clinical impact of the added deficiency
of aldehyde oxidase.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 110 u Disorders of Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism
Table 110.2  Disorders Influencing Uric Acid
DISORDER

GENE
SYMBOL

SERUM
URIC ACID

URINARY
URIC ACID

Hereditary xanthinurias
Type I
Type II
Molybdenum cofactor
deficiencies

XOR
MOCOS
MOCS1-­3,
GPHN

↓↓

↓↓

HPRT1-­associated
disorders

HPRT1

↑

↑↑

PRPP dysregulation
disorders

PRPS1

↑

↑

SLC22A12,
SLC2A9
ABCG2

↓↓

↑↑

↑

↑

Fructosemia

ALDOB

↑
(chronic or
exercise-­
induced)

↑
(chronic or
exercise-­
induced)

Glucose-­6-­phosphatase
deficiency
Glycogen debranching
deficiency
Glycogen phosphatase
deficiency
Phosphofructokinase
deficiency

SLC37AY

Excretion disorders
Renal hypouricemia
Reduced gut excretion
Carbohydrate disorders

AGL
PYGM
PFKM

Renal insufficiency

NA

↑

↓

Tumor lysis syndrome

NA

↑↑

↑↑

NA, not applicable. Copyright H.A. Jinnah.

the globus pallidus. Eye findings may include ectopic lens, spherophakia, and nystagmus. Most die in early childhood.
Because uric acid is included in many routine blood chemistry
screening panels, the diagnosis of the hereditary xanthinurias often
starts with serendipitous identification of low or absent uric acid.
Instead, urinary xanthine and hypoxanthine are elevated. However,
xanthine is elevated more than hypoxanthine, because the latter can
be recycled by HGprt or cleared by the kidneys. In individuals with
hereditary xanthinuria type II with combined deficiency of XOR and
aldehyde oxidase, urinary methyl-­2-­pyridone-­carboxamide also is low
or absent. The characteristic pattern observed among individuals with
the molybdenum cofactor deficiencies includes low uric acid in serum
and urine along with high urinary xanthine, hypoxanthine, sulfite, and
S-­sulfocysteine. Enzymatic tests for XOR are feasible but not commonly used for clinical diagnosis. They require biopsy of the liver or
small bowel where the amounts of this enzyme reach high enough levels for measurement. A convenient test for aldehyde oxidase involves
assessing its ability to oxidize a test dose of allopurinol to oxypurinol.
Sulfite oxidase and molybdenum cofactor can be measured in liver or
fibroblasts. A molecular diagnosis can be made by finding pathogenic
variants in one of the relevant genes.

Treatment and Prognosis

The treatment of all hereditary xanthinurias involves generous hydration to constantly flush xanthine from the renal collecting system to
avoid stone formation. Hydration is sometimes combined with a low-­
purine diet.
Aside from palliative care, minimal success has been achieved with
numerous approaches to the treatment of the molybdenum cofactor
deficiencies. However, cyclic pyranopterin monophosphate (fosdenopterin) can have a life-­changing impact on the normally serious consequences of molybdenum cofactor deficiency associated with MOCS1.
Treatment has been reported to normalize metabolic measures and
allow near-­normal development among individuals who start it at a
very early age before there is significant brain damage. It is approved
for use in individuals with MOCS1 defects by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA).

HPRT1-­ASSOCIATED DISORDERS

Table 110.3  Renal Stones in Disorders of Purines and
Pyrimidines
DISORDER

GENE SYMBOL

STONES

APRT deficiency

APRT

Dihydroxy-­
adenine

Familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy

UMOD, REN,
MUC, or HNF-­1b

Uric acid

Hereditary orotic aciduria

UMPS

Orotic acid

Hereditary xanthinurias
Type 1
Type 2
Molybdenum cofactor
deficiencies

XOR
MOCOS
MOCS1-­3, GPHN

Xanthine
Xanthine
Xanthine

HPRT1-­associated disorders

HPRT1

Uric acid

PRPP synthetase hyperactivity

PRPS1

Uric acid

Tumor lysis syndrome

Not applicable

Uric acid

Copyright H.A. Jinnah.

The clinical features of the molybdenum cofactor deficiencies are
more severe. Individuals often present with failure to thrive during
infancy, difficulties feeding, intractable seizures, psychomotor delay,
and microcephaly. Brain MRI may show diffuse atrophy or cerebellar
hypoplasia, multicystic encephalomalacia, and signal abnormalities of

949

Disorders associated with the HPRT1 gene are rare, with an overall
prevalence of approximately three cases per million. Inheritance is
X-­linked and recessive, although sporadic cases are not uncommon.
The gene encodes hypoxanthine-­guanine phosphoribosyl transferase
(HGprt), an enzyme responsible for two different reactions (see Fig.
110.2). In one reaction, the cosubstrate phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate
(PRPP) is combined with the purine base hypoxanthine to produce
IMP. In the other reaction, PRPP is combined with guanine to produce GMP. IMP and GMP are then recirculated into the nucleotide
pools. When HGprt activity is impaired, its substrates accumulate.
Accumulation of PRPP leads to excessive drive of purine synthesis,
because PRPP is also used in the first and rate-­limiting reaction of the
de novo synthetic pathway. The substrates hypoxanthine and guanine
also accumulate, and they are ultimately catabolized to uric acid. The
combination of accelerated purine synthesis and increased catabolism
of hypoxanthine and guanine results in a marked overproduction of
uric acid. This overproduction of uric acid is responsible for several
clinical features of HPRT1-­associated disorders, including hyperuricemia, nephrolithiasis, gout, and tophi.
Overproduction of uric acid is not responsible for all the clinical
features of HGprt deficiency. Reduced HGprt activity also leads to
impaired recycling of hypoxanthine and guanine, with purine wasting.
This loss of purines may lead to purine deficiency, especially in tissues
where the synthetic pathway cannot compensate for purines lost due to
the failure of recycling. Erythrocytes lack a fully operational synthetic
pathway, so they are dependent on recycling purines taken up from the
blood to maintain purines. These observations may account for macrocytic anemia, which is common in HPRT1-­associated disorders.
A similar mechanism may occur in the brain, where purine recycling
is important because purine synthesis is relatively low. In individuals

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

950 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
with HGprt deficiency, overt structural malformations are not usually found when performing routine clinical CT or MRI of the brain.
Such studies are usually normal or they show only mild diffuse atrophy.
However, advanced imaging methods have revealed several abnormalities. Quantitative MRI-­based, voxel-­based morphometry has revealed
subjects with HPRT1-­associated disorders to have volume loss in several brain regions. Similar studies, along with diffusion tensor imaging MRI, have revealed diffuse loss of white matter. The basal ganglia
appear to be more affected than most other regions. In fact, PET scans
have revealed a significant reduction in markers associated with basal
ganglia dopamine systems.
Autopsy studies of the brains of individuals with HPRT1-­associated
disorders do not show signs of maldevelopment or neurodegeneration. Dopamine neurons are present, but they do not express normal
levels of dopamine-­related markers. Dysfunction of the basal ganglia
is thought to be responsible for several of the neurologic features of
HPRT1-­
associated disorders, including dystonia and self-­
injurious
behavior. Dysfunction of corticospinal pathways may be responsible
for cognitive impairment, spasticity, and seizures.

Clinical Features

Pathologic genetic variants in HPRT1 are associated with a spectrum
of clinical phenotypes (Fig. 110.4). Most cases are males, although rare
females with defects in both HPRT1 alleles have been described. More
than 600 different gene variants are known. A complete loss of HGprt
function is associated with most of these variants, such as deletions,
insertions, nonsense substitutions, and some single amino acid substitutions. A partial loss of HGprt function is associated with other variants, usually conservative single amino acid substitutions and some
splice variants.
The severity of the clinical phenotypes is related to the degree of
associated enzyme impairment. The spectrum of clinical phenotypes
is usually subdivided into three overlapping groups. HPRT1 variants
associated with a mean value of 12% of normal HGprt activity are associated with the mildest clinical phenotype. This phenotype is known as
HGprt-­related hyperuricemia. These individuals experience overproduction of uric acid, along with associated problems of hyperuricemia,
nephrolithiasis, gout, and tophi. These individuals do not have overt
neurologic or behavioral problems, although mild clumsiness or mild
cognitive impairments may be disclosed with careful testing. The age
at presentation ranges from infancy to adulthood, usually with renal
problems or gout.
HPRT1 variants associated with a mean of 7% of normal HGprt activity are associated with an intermediate phenotype with overproduction
of uric acid along with clinically overt neurologic impairments. This
phenotype is known as HGprt-­related neurologic dysfunction. Motor
impairments vary widely and may range from minor clumsiness to a
phenotype that resembles severe dyskinetic cerebral palsy. Cognitive
deficits may range from attention-­deficit disorder to moderate intellectual disability. These individuals typically present with delayed motor
development, although some present with renal problems or gout.
HPRT1 variants associated with a mean value of 1% normal HGprt
activity are associated with the most severe phenotype, known as
Lesch-­Nyhan disease. These individuals have overproduction of uric
acid, disabling motor impairments, moderate intellectual disability,
and an unusual behavioral syndrome. The motor problems begin with
delayed development in infancy and evolve similar to severe dyskinetic
cerebral palsy. Epilepsy is common. The most characteristic aspect
of the behavioral syndrome is severe recurrent self-­injury, with self-­
biting, self-­hitting, recurrent scratching or poking, and others. Self-­
injury typically begins between 2 and 4 years of age but may be delayed
until the teenage years. Other difficult behaviors are also common,
such as impaired attention and impulsivity. Difficult behaviors may be
also directed toward others. They include use of language that is foul,
sexually inappropriate, or racially charged. Also frequent are hitting,
grabbing, or spitting.
The diagnosis of any HPRT1-­associated disorder should be suspected in a child or young adult with evidence for overproduction
of uric acid such as hyperuricemia, uric acid nephrolithiasis, or gout.

Uric acid (pink) crystals in diapers during infancy are frequently the
first clue. Suspicion for an HPRT1-­associated disorder increases when
there is evidence for overproduction of uric acid along with a history of
delayed motor development. The emergence of self-­injurious behavior
between 2 and 4 years of age often provides a more specific clue for
Lesch-­Nyhan disease. A definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of
a pathogenic variant in the HPRT1 gene and/or enzymatic evidence for
reduced HGprt function.

Treatment and Prognosis

For all HPRT1-­associated disorders, excessive production of uric acid
must be treated to avoid renal complications and gouty arthritis. Treatment requires a lifelong combination of an inhibitor of XOR to reduce
production of uric acid and generous hydration. The commonly used
XOR inhibitor is allopurinol, although others can also be used. Doses
are titrated to maintain serum uric acid within normal limits. Stones
may continue to form despite treatment, and lithotripsy or surgical
removal is sometimes required. High doses of XOR inhibitors that
reduce serum uric acid to very low levels are discouraged, because
this approach increases the risk of stones composed of the precursors
xanthine and hypoxanthine. Some specialists advocate alkalinization
of the urine to promote solubility of uric acid or a low-­purine diet to
reduce intake of purines that are metabolized to uric acid.
The motor disorder is dominated by dystonia, sometimes with spasticity. The increased muscle tone associated with these problems is
most often treated with muscle relaxants such as benzodiazepines or
baclofen. Anticholinergics and dopamine-­related drugs are not generally successful. Several case reports describe great success with deep
brain stimulation surgery, but the rate of surgical complications is
unusually high, and the overall risk-­benefit ratio does not favor universal recommendation of this approach.
The behavioral problems require a combination of physical protective devices, specific behavioral modification techniques, and sometimes
pharmacotherapy. Most individuals with Lesch-­Nyhan disease require
regular restraints of the hands and arms to prevent self-­hitting and biting of the fingers. Approximately half of all individuals require tooth
removal to prevent biting of the lips and tongue. A custom-­designed
wheelchair with dangerous regions shielded is often needed. The most
useful behavioral techniques involve extinction (ignoring) and redirection (distraction). Methods that use positive reinforcement are useful,
but methods that use negative reinforcement amplify negative behaviors.
Individuals with the mildest clinical phenotypes may have a normal
life span, provided uric acid is well-­managed. Those with more severe
phenotypes have a shorter life span, with death occurring in the teens
through the fifth decade. Most frequent causes of death include aspiration pneumonia or complications from renal dysfunction. Cases of
sudden unexplained death have also been reported.

APRT-­ASSOCIATED DISORDERS

Disorders associated with the APRT gene are rare, with fewer than
1,000 individuals reported. More than 200 pathogenic variants have
been described. Inheritance is autosomal recessive. The disorder has
been reported worldwide, but there are clusters of individuals with the
same genetic variants originating in Japan, France, and Iceland.
The APRT gene encodes adenine phosphoribosyl transferase (APRT),
an enzyme that is responsible for catalyzing a reaction in which PRPP
is combined with the purine base adenine to produce AMP (see Fig.
110.2). Deficiency of APRT leads to accumulation of adenine, which
is metabolized by XOR into 2,8-­dihydroxyadenine (DHA). DHA does
not accumulate in serum because it is rapidly cleared by the kidneys.
Because solubility of DHA is poor, it precipitates in the urinary collecting system as either small crystals or larger stones. Small crystals cause
chronic renal insufficiency because they provoke tubulointerstitial
nephritis, inflammation, and fibrosis. Larger stones may cause acute
obstructive renal failure.

Clinical Features

Clinical manifestations are attributable to the kidneys, and they
may develop in a wide age range from infancy through adulthood.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 110 u Disorders of Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism

Self-injurious
behavior

early onset,
frequent,
severe

Lesch-Nyhan
disease

late onset,
less frequent,
or mild
HGprt-related
neurological
dysfunction

Dystonia

Cognition

severe

significantly
impaired

moderate

moderately
impaired

mild, focal

learning
disabled

clumsy

attention
deficit

HGprt-related
hyperuricemia

951

Uric Acid

hyperuricemia,
gout,
nephrolithiasis
and tophi are
similar across
groups

Fig. 110.4 HPRT1-­associated disorders. This schematic provides a graphical representation of the overlapping spectrum of HPRT1-­associated dis-

orders. The three disorders are listed on the left side of the panel. The most common clinical features are shown in the top row. The white triangles
depict the severity of individual clinical features for each of the disorders. For example, problems related to overproduction of uric acid occur in all
phenotypes, but self-­injurious behavior is limited to the most severe phenotype. Dystonia and cognition both show a wide range of severity across
all groups, but severity correlates with overall phenotypic subgroup. This schematic provides only a general guide, as some exceptions may occur.
(Copyright H.A. Jinnah.)

Approximately half of individuals with APRT deficiency have no symptoms, or symptoms may develop only in old age. The initial presentations fall into two groups which may overlap: nephrolithiasis and DHA
nephropathy. Individuals with nephrolithiasis may present acutely with
dysuria, hematuria, renal colic, or recurrent urinary tract infections.
They may describe accompanying crystals, larger stones, or gravel in
the urine. The precipitates are often reddish-­brown in color and easily
crushed. Alternatively, DHA nephropathy may result in a more slowly
evolving renal insufficiency, with approximately 15% first presenting
with end-­stage renal failure.
The diagnosis should be suspected when there is evidence for
crystalluria or nephrolithiasis, especially in a child. DHA stones, like
other purine stones, are radiolucent. Unless they calcify, they may be
detected via ultrasound but not with abdominal plain films or CT. The
diagnosis may also be suspected in individuals with unexplained renal
failure who undergo renal biopsy revealing a crystallopathy with tubulointerstitial nephritis, inflammation, and/or fibrosis. APRT deficiency
must be distinguished from other disorders that involve nephrolithiasis
and/or renal failure.
Commonly used clinical biochemical methods may not be able to
distinguish DHA stones from other purine stones, but more specific
methods have been developed at some specialized centers. DHA crystals in the urine can also be identified by light and polarizing microscopy, along with infrared spectrophotometry. Crystals in renal biopsy
specimens can be identified by polarizing microscopy with infrared
microscopy. Definitive diagnosis can also be achieved by measuring
APRT enzyme activity in erythrocytes or by documenting pathogenic
variants in the APRT gene.

Treatment and Prognosis

Treatment requires an inhibitor of XOR to reduce production of DHA.
The commonly used XOR inhibitors include allopurinol or febuxostat,
and they must be continued lifelong. Generous hydration is useful to
flush purine metabolites through the renal collecting system. A low-­
purine diet is sometimes recommended. Large stones may require
lithotripsy or surgical removal. Individuals who are diagnosed early in

life and adhere to therapy may have a normal life span. Individuals who
are diagnosed late may have chronic renal insufficiency or even renal
failure that requires dialysis or kidney transplantation.

DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH AMP-­DEAMINASE

The enzyme AMP-­deaminase catalyzes the deamination of AMP to
IMP with simultaneous production of NH3. The IMP can then be recirculated either to AMP or GMP (see Fig. 110.2). The enzyme is encoded
by three homologous genes. AMPD1 is expressed predominantly in
muscle, AMPD2 is broadly expressed with high levels in the brain, and
AMPD3 is broadly expressed at high levels in bone marrow cells. Each
gene has been associated with genetic variants producing null enzyme
activity.

Clinical Features

For AMPD1, approximately 20% of White and Black individuals have
a c.34C>T variant producing an early termination codon (p.Q12>X) in
exon 2. In these populations, 1–2% are homozygotes with null enzyme
activity in muscle. Most homozygotes have no symptoms, but myopathic features have been reported for some. These features include
exercise intolerance with fatigue or myalgia, sometimes with muscle
cramping or increased serum creatine kinase. Symptoms may begin
at any age from early childhood to later adulthood. Histochemical
stains for AMP-­deaminase are negative in muscle biopsy specimens,
but frank myopathic features are usually lacking. Because of the large
numbers of nonsymptomatic individuals, the role of the genetic variant
in causing symptoms is not clear. The variant may be benign, or it may
combine with other genes or factors to cause symptoms. A diagnosis
can be made via the forearm exercise test with measures of lactate and
NH3 production, histochemical staining of the enzyme in a muscle
biopsy, or finding a variant in the AMPD1 gene.
For AMPD2, pathogenic variants have been linked with pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH9). This neurologic disorder is rare, with
fewer than 50 cases reported worldwide. Pontocerebellar hypoplasia is
a group of disorders described by dysgenesis of the pons and cerebellum. Individuals with the PCH9 subtype also have dysgenesis of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

952 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
corpus callosum and microcephaly. Clinical symptoms include severe
psychomotor delay, central visual impairment, and seizures.

ADSL-­ASSOCIATED DISORDERS

Disorders associated with the ADSL gene are rare, with fewer than
100 individuals reported. The disorder is autosomal recessive. Pathogenic gene variants with complete loss of enzyme activity are likely
incompatible with life. The pathogenic variants associated with disease produce a partial loss of enzyme function. The enzyme is bifunctional, and it mediates two distinct reactions in purine synthesis (see
Fig. 110.2). Reduced enzyme function leads to accumulation of succinylpurines (succinyl-­
aminoimidazole carboxamide riboside and
succinyl-­adenosine), which are eliminated in the urine. Historically,
this disorder was therefore called succinyl-­purinuria. The clinical manifestations are thought to result predominantly from pathologic effects
of succinyl purines in the brain. Brain MRI reveals varied findings from
nearly normal to global or regional atrophy with delayed myelination.

Clinical Features

The clinical manifestations are often described in three distinct groups,
but the groups overlap with a graded spectrum of severity. The most
severely affected group is described as a fatal neonatal encephalopathy. These individuals have a severe paucity of spontaneous movement
from birth, intractable seizures, and respiratory failure. They die within
the first weeks of birth. Individuals in the intermediate group (type I)
present with hypotonia and motor delay. They survive for longer periods, with moderate to severe psychomotor delay and seizures. Abnormal behaviors have been described as autistic with poor eye contact,
repetitive stereotyped movements or sounds, and frequent agitation.
The least severely affected group is referred to as type II. They present
within the first years of life with evidence for psychomotor delay, sometimes with seizures and behavioral problems. The diagnosis is made by
finding elevated succinyl purines in urine or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
or by finding pathogenic variants in the ADSL gene.

Treatment and Prognosis

Treatment is palliative. Seizures may be refractory to conventional
anticonvulsants, but some success has been reported with the ketogenic diet.

OTHER INHERITED PURINE DISORDERS
Adenosine Deaminase

Deficiency of adenosine deaminase results in severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome (SCID), with defects in both humoral (B
cells) and cellular (T cells) immunity. Individuals with severe SCID
present shortly after birth with life-­threatening infections. Individuals with milder disease may present at 2-­4 years of age, or even older
(see Chapter 165.1). In contrast with adenosine deaminase deficiency,
superactivity of the same enzyme causes hemolytic anemia.
Adenosine kinase. Adenosine kinase is sometimes considered
among the purine salvage enzymes because it recycles adenosine into
adenosine monophosphate (AMP). Pathogenic variants of the associated ADK gene in multiple cases from independent families have been
linked with hypermethioninemia, psychomotor delay, seizures, and
multiple dysmorphic features. The disorder is autosomal recessive.
Adenylate kinase. There are four isoforms of adenylate kinase
encoded by genes AK1-­4. The enzyme phosphorylates AMP to ADP
(see Fig. 110.2). The AK1 gene is highly expressed in erythrocytes.
Pathogenic variants in AK1 in multiple cases from independent families have been linked with nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia, sometimes with cognitive disability.
The AK2 gene is more broadly expressed but localizes to mitochondria. Pathogenic variants in AK2 in multiple cases from independent
families have been linked with reticular dysgenesis, a type of SCID,
often with sensorineural hearing loss. Disorders associated with AK1
and AK2 are autosomal recessive.
Adenylosuccinate synthase. The ADSS gene encodes adenylosuccinate synthase, an enzyme involved in the conversion of IMP to AMP
(see Fig. 110.2). There are multiple isoforms, and pathogenic variants

in ADSSL1 have been linked with a form of myopathy, MPD5. The
disorder is autosomal recessive, usually begins in adolescence, and is
slowly progressive. One study of affected individuals indicated that distal leg weakness was the most common feature, often with weakness
of the hands. Approximately one third had weakness of the face or jaw
muscles leading to difficulty with mastication. Some had left ventricular hypertrophy. Involvement of the diaphragm may lead to respiratory
insufficiency in later stages of the illness.
ATIC-­associated disorders. Disorders associated with the ATIC
gene are very rare. Only four cases from three families have been
reported. The disorder is autosomal recessive. The enzyme is bifunctional and mediates two distinct reactions (see Fig. 110.2). Complete
loss of the enzyme is probably incompatible with life. Reduced enzyme
function leads to accumulation of ZMP along with its phosphorylated
derivatives. ZMP and its derivatives can be detected with the Bratton-­
Marshall test, a routinely used neonatal screen in some countries. All
reported cases had prenatal and postnatal growth restriction, severe to
profound psychomotor delay, chorioretinal atrophy with severe visual
impairment, and dysmorphic facial features. Some had epilepsy. Treatment is palliative.
Deoxyguanosine kinase. The DGK gene encodes deoxyguanosine
kinase, an enzyme that phosphorylates deoxypurine nucleosides into
their respective deoxynucleotides for DNA synthesis (see Fig. 110.2).
The gene is encoded by the nucleus, but the enzyme functions in
mitochondria. Gene defects lead to an impairment of mitochondrial
DNA synthesis, so the disorder is classified among the mitochondrial
DNA depletion disorders. The disorder is rare and inherited in an
autosomal recessive fashion. The clinical features reflect an early-­
onset multiorgan disorder, most notably liver failure, and psychomotor delay.
IMPDH-­associated disorders. IMP-­dehydrogenase is an enzyme
that stands at a branchpoint in purine metabolism, directing the
synthesis of purines toward guanine-­based nucleotides rather than
adenine-­based nucleotides (see Fig. 110.2). This enzyme has two isoforms encoded by distinct but homologous genes. The IMPDH1 gene
is expressed primarily in the retina, whereas the IMPDH2 gene is
expressed in most other tissues. Disorders associated with these genes
are rare, with only a handful of families reported.
Pathogenic variants in IMPDH1 have been linked with autosomal
dominant retinopathy. Affected individuals may have severe congenital retinal dysfunction with vision loss and pendular nystagmus (Leber
congenital amaurosis, LCA11). Others have childhood-­onset retinitis
pigmentosa with progressive visual impairment (retinitis pigmentosa,
RP10). There are no known treatments for either IMPDH-­associated
disorder.
Pathogenic variants in IMPDH2 have been linked with an autosomal
dominant neurologic disorder. Affected individuals may present with
developmental delay, infantile dystonia, and seizures. Others present
with a milder phenotype of dystonia that emerges in childhood or adolescence. There are no known treatments.
Phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase. The PAICS gene
encodes a bifunctional enzyme that mediates two steps in the synthesis
of purines (see Fig. 110.2). Pathogenic variants associated with PAICS
are very rare, with only two individuals from a single family identified
by exome sequencing. Both had multiple craniocervical malformations, and one had additional limb malformations. Both died within a
few days of birth from respiratory failure.
Purine nucleoside phosphorylase. Deficiency of purine nucleoside
phosphorylase results in selective dysfunction of T cells with susceptibility to viral illnesses. Two thirds have neurologic abnormalities, and
one third have anemia. This disorder is covered in more detail in Chapter 165.2.

DISORDERS OF PYRIMIDINE METABOLISM
CAD Deficiency

The CAD gene encodes a trifunctional enzyme that mediates three of
the initial six steps in pyrimidine synthesis (see Fig. 110.3). The disorder takes its name from the three relevant enzymatic activities, which
include carbamoyl-­phosphate synthetase, aspartate transcarbamylase,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 110 u Disorders of Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism
and dihydroorotase. The associated clinical disorder is autosomal
recessive.

Clinical Features

Fewer than 10 cases have been reported. Most presented in infancy
with developmental delay, anisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. Most had
medication-­refractory seizures by 2 years of age, although epilepsy may
start later. Many cases had global or cerebellar brain atrophy on MRI.
The disorder cannot be identified by any of the metabolic tests routinely used for clinical diagnosis, but the activity of the enzyme can be
measured. The disorder can also be identified by finding pathogenic
variants in the CAD gene.

Treatment and Prognosis

Although it is quite rare, early diagnosis is important because treatment with uridine produces remarkably positive outcomes. Most of
the subjects who were treated experienced a significant reduction in
seizures, correction of hematologic abnormalities, and partial reversal
of neurodevelopmental impairments. The disorder is therefore sometimes called uridine-­responsive epileptic encephalopathy. It is likely
that the degree of improvement depends on instituting treatments
before significant brain damage occurs.

Dihydroorotate Dehydrogenase Deficiency

The DHODH gene encodes an enzyme that mediates the fourth of six
steps in pyrimidine synthesis. The enzyme is localized in mitochondria, where electrons from the dehydrogenase are transferred to ubiquinone in the electron transport chain. A complete loss of the enzyme
is not compatible with life, so all affected cases have had some residual
enzyme function. The disorder is autosomal recessive.

Clinical Features

Fewer than 100 cases have been reported. Affected individuals have
Miller syndrome, one of the acrofacial dysostosis syndromes where
dysmorphic facial features are combined with abnormalities of the
distal limbs. The facial anomalies include malar hypoplasia (underdeveloped cheekbones), micrognathia (small jaw), orofacial clefts
(incomplete fusion of the roof of the mouth or lips), hypoplastic lower
eyelids, and cup-­shaped ears. The limb anomalies include abnormalities of the fifth and/or fourth fingers and toes (webbing, fusion, or
hypoplasia), short forearms (ulnar hypoplasia sometimes with fusions
to the radius), and hypoplasia of the fibula. Some cases also have other
structural abnormalities such as pectus excavatum, rib defects, accessory nipples, or involvement of internal organs.

Treatment and Prognosis

There are no specific treatments for this disorder.

Hereditary Orotic Aciduria

The UMPS gene encodes a bifunctional enzyme that mediates two of
the last six steps in pyrimidine synthesis (see Fig. 110.3). The relevant
enzymatic activities are carried out by a single protein and include
orotate phosphoribosyltransferase and orotidine 5′-­monophosphate
decarboxylase. These activities are sometimes combined under the
term UMP synthase, and the disorder is sometimes known as UMP synthase deficiency. Affected individuals cannot convert orotic acid into
UMP, so they excrete large amounts of orotic acid in the urine. Levels
may be so high that orotic acid crystals may precipitate in the renal collecting system. Inheritance is autosomal recessive.

Clinical Features

The disorder is rare, with fewer than 50 reported cases. Most present in
the first few weeks or months of age with failure to thrive and developmental delay. The majority have megaloblastic anemia, hypochromia,
anisocytosis, and poikilocytosis. A few have had strabismus, congenital malformations, or seizures. Heterozygous carriers may excrete high
levels of orotic acid without any additional symptoms.
The diagnosis is often first suspected by finding high levels of orotic
acid in the urine. UMP synthase deficiency is not the only condition

953

associated with high urinary orotic acid. Other disorders include urea
cycle defects (e.g., ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency), some mitochondrial disorders, Reye syndrome, or treatment with medications
(allopurinol and 6-­azauridine). A definitive diagnosis of hereditary
orotic aciduria comes from genetic testing that reveals pathogenic variants in the UMPS gene, and the enzyme can be measured in blood cells
or fibroblasts.

Treatment and Prognosis

Although rare, early diagnosis is important because it is treatable with
uridine. In general, supplements with uridine can reverse hematologic
abnormalities and stimulate normal growth and development. Long-­
term treatments are associated with good results. Uridine triacetate is
approved for treatment by the FDA.

Thymidine Phosphorylase Deficiency

The TYMP gene encodes thymidine phosphorylase, an enzyme responsible for converting thymidine to thymine (see Fig. 110.3). Deficiency of
the enzyme results in marked elevations in blood thymidine. The disorder is autosomal recessive. Accumulation of phosphorylated derivatives
of thymidine and deoxyuridine result in abnormal DNA replication in
mitochondria and depletion of mitochondrial DNA. The enzyme has
had two additional names used in the literature prior to its isolation and
molecular identification. It is known as platelet-­derived endothelial cell
growth factor because of its angiogenic properties. It also is known as
gliostatin because of a suppressive effect on the growth of glia.

Clinical Features

The disorder is rare and responsible for mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE). Symptoms begin in adolescents or young adults. Initial symptoms are often attributable to the
gastrointestinal system and include diarrhea, vomiting, malabsorption,
weight loss, and episodes of pseudoobstruction. Neurologic features
include progressive external ophthalmoparesis, ptosis, myopathy, neuropathy, and hearing loss.

Treatment and Prognosis

There is no specific treatment for the early-­onset severe phenotype.
Treatment with 5-­fluorouracil and related drugs is contraindicated.

DIHYDROPYRIMIDINE DEHYDROGENASE
DEFICIENCY

The DPD gene encodes dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, the first
enzyme involved in the catabolism of thymine and uracil (see Fig.
110.3). Genetic variants are common. Screening studies have suggested a prevalence of 3–5% for partial deficiency and 0.1–0.5% for
severe deficiency. Severe enzyme deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, and it is associated with marked elevations of
thymine and uracil in urine, blood, and CSF. The associated disorder is
therefore sometimes called thiamine-­uraciluria.

Clinical Features

The clinical manifestations are quite varied, even among individuals who
carry the same genetic variant. Some individuals with severe enzyme
deficiency have no symptoms, and they are identified in adulthood
because of severe toxicity after treatment with 5-­flurouracil or related
drugs. Others are identified in childhood, although fewer than 50 cases
have been reported. Approximately half of these cases have had psychomotor delay, often with seizures. A few have presented with growth
restriction, microcephaly, ocular abnormalities, or autistic behaviors.

Treatment and Prognosis

There is no specific treatment for the early-­onset severe phenotype. For
individuals with partial deficiency, treatment with 5-­fluorouracil and
related drugs is contraindicated.

Dihydropyrimidinase Deficiency

The DPYS gene encodes dihydropyrimidinase, the second enzyme
involved in the catabolism of thymine and uracil (see Fig. 110.3).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

954 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Approximately 9% of individuals of European ancestry have genetic
variants that substantially reduce enzyme activity, and 0.5% have
almost no activity. Associated disorders are autosomal recessive. Severe
enzyme deficiency is associated with marked elevations of dihydrothymine and dihydrouracil and in urine, blood, and CSF. The associated
disorder is therefore sometimes called dihydropyrimidinuria.

Clinical Features

Genetic variants in DPYS are associated with very different clinical
manifestations, even among individuals who carry the same genetic
variant. The severe form of the disorder is rare, with fewer than 50
reported individuals. Some individuals with severe enzyme deficiency
have no symptoms. Others are identified in childhood, with approximately half having psychomotor delay and a third having seizures.
Gastrointestinal problems are common and include feeding difficulties
with recurrent vomiting, malabsorption, and gastroesophageal reflux.
A few have presented with growth restriction, microcephaly, or autistic
behaviors.

Treatment and Prognosis

There is no specific treatment for the early-­onset severe phenotype.
Testing for common genetic variants before the use of 5-­fluorouracil
and related drugs has been recommended.

β-­Ureidopropionase Deficiency

The UPB1 gene encodes β-­ureidopropionase, also known as β-­alanine
synthase. It is responsible for the last step of pyrimidine catabolism
(see Fig. 110.3). Deficiency of the enzyme leads to accumulation of
N-­carbamoyl-­β-­alanine and N-­carbamyl-­β-­
aminoisobutyric acid in
urine, blood, and CSF. As a result, the disorder is sometimes called N-­
carbamoyl-­β-­amino aciduria. The mechanism by which the enzyme
defect leads to clinical disease is not well known.

Clinical Features

The disorder is autosomal recessive and rare, with fewer than 50
reported individuals. Affected individuals have psychomotor delay,
seizures, microcephaly, and autistic behaviors. However, enzyme
screening has revealed some individuals with no apparent symptoms.
Diagnosis can be made by measuring accumulation of the associated
metabolites, enzyme testing from liver biopsy, or finding pathogenic
variants in the gene.

Treatment and Prognosis

There is no specific treatment for this disorder.

DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH THYMIDINE
KINASE

Dividing cells rely on de novo synthesis of pyrimidines to make
most of their nucleotides, but these pathways are downregulated in
postmitotic cells, which primarily maintain pyrimidine nucleotides
instead via salvage (see Fig. 110.3). Salvage enzymes include cytosolic thymidine kinase (TK1 gene) and mitochondrial thymidine
kinase (TK2 gene). The TK1 gene is often overexpressed in rapidly
dividing cells and used as a marker for early detection or recurrence
of cancer.
Pathogenic variants in the TK2 gene impair the phosphorylation
of thymidine and deoxycytosine, leading to reductions in associated
nucleotides needed for DNA synthesis. The result is abnormalities in
the rate and/or accuracy of mitochondrial DNA synthesis, with mitochondrial DNA depletion. Disorders associated with TK2 are autosomal recessive, with three overlapping groups delineated by age at onset.
Individuals with infantile onset (<1 year) have severe myopathy with
proximal muscle weakness, facial diplegia, dysphagia, and respiratory
compromise. Some may also have encephalopathy and seizures. Death
usually occurs within 1-­4 years. Individuals with the childhood-­onset
form (up to 12 years of age) have a more slowly progressive myopathy
with weakness and longer survival periods. Those with late onset (>12
years of age) may have limited areas of weakness such as chronic progressive ophthalmoplegia, facial diplegia, or oropharyngeal weakness.

There is no known treatment, but trials with relevant pyrimidine derivatives have been initiated.

COMBINED DISORDERS OF BOTH PURINES AND
PYRIMIDINES
PRPS1-­Associated Disorders

The PRPS1 gene encodes the enzyme PRPP synthase type 1. Two additional isoforms of this enzyme are encoded by separate genes: PRPS1L1
and PRPS2. PRPS1 and PRPS2 reside on opposite arms of the X chromosome, and PRPS1L1 is on chromosome 7. PRPS1 is ubiquitously
expressed. PRPS1L1 is expressed only in testis, and PRPS2 is expressed in
the gastrointestinal system, endocrine tissues, and reproductive organs.
Only PRPS1 has been linked with human disease. PRPS1-­associated disorders are rare, with fewer than 1,000 individuals reported.
All three isoforms of PRPP-­synthase transfer high-­energy phosphate bonds from ATP to ribose-­5-­phosphate to generate PRPP. The
PRPP can then use the high-­energy phosphate bonds to drive certain
energy-­requiring reactions. PRPP is a cosubstrate for the first and rate-­
limiting reaction in purine synthesis (see Fig. 110.2). PRPP also serves
as a cosubstrate for the main purine salvage enzymes HGprt and APRT.
PRPP affects pyrimidine synthesis as well, because it is a cosubstrate
for the first step in pyrimidine synthesis (see Fig. 110.3). PRPP is also a
cosubstrate for two additional enzymes involved in the synthesis of the
pyridine nucleotides: NAD and NADP (Table 110.4). PRPP-­synthase
plays a key role in regulating the synthesis of both purines and pyrimidines, and overexpression of PRPS1 is common in certain cancer cells,
which need large quantities of purines and pyrimidines for DNA replication during cell division.
Because of its integral involvement in many vital biochemical pathways, complete loss of PRPP-­synthase is not compatible with life.
Instead, clinical disease results from abnormally high enzyme activity
or partial loss of enzyme activity. High levels of the enzyme produce
excessive quantities of PRPP, and elevations in PRPP accelerate purine
production, with resultant overproduction of uric acid. It is likely that
increases in PRPP accelerate pyrimidine metabolism, but measures
of this pathway are not widely used in clinical medicine. Conversely,
impaired enzyme activity results in reduced metabolism of both
purines and pyrimidines.

Clinical Features

The clinical phenotypes of PRPS1-­associated disorders are remarkably
diverse. Phenotypic variation is caused by varied changes in enzyme
function. The phenotypes associated with reduced enzyme activity
historically have been described as distinct entities, although clinical
features overlap, and the reality is a continuous spectrum of severity (Fig. 110.5). The mildest phenotype is X-­linked nonsyndromic
hearing loss (DFN2). Hearing impairments in males may range from
a slowly progressive postlingual hearing loss to profound congenital
deafness. A more severe phenotype associated with impaired enzyme
activity has been called Rosenberg-­Chutorian syndrome or X-­linked
Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease (CMTX5). This phenotype in males
combines prelingual hearing loss, progressive optic neuropathy, and
peripheral neuropathy beginning at 5-­10 years of age and sometimes
gait impairments. An even more severe phenotype has been called Arts
syndrome. It also is X-­linked, and males have profound congenital
deafness, early-­onset optic neuropathy, peripheral neuropathy, psychomotor delay, and recurrent respiratory infections that may cause early
death. In addition to these three phenotypes classically associated with
reduced enzyme activity, there are reports that suggest a fourth and
even more severe phenotype. Males have intrauterine growth restriction and failure to thrive after birth, congenital retinopathy and deafness, diabetes insipidus, and a more severe neurologic condition that
includes severe psychomotor delay, spastic tetraparesis, seizures, and
evidence for delayed white matter development on brain MRI.
The PRPS1 gene is X-­linked, so variants associated with reduced
PRPP-­synthase affect males, often from an early age. However, female
carriers may express milder or adult-­onset phenotypes. In families
where males are affected only with early-­onset hearing loss, female
carriers may develop progressive hearing loss as young adults. In

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 110 u Disorders of Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism
families where males have a more severe early childhood phenotype
that includes additional neurologic signs, female carriers may have
progressive hearing loss, retinopathy, optic neuropathy, peripheral
neuropathy, and sometimes additional signs attributable to the central
nervous system. For the most severe phenotype, female carriers may
also have short stature. In some families, only females are clinically
affected, with evidence for embryonic lethality of males. These families suggest the existence of a fifth phenotype of embryonic lethality
in males. Because hearing loss is the most consistent feature associated with reduced PRPP-­synthase, the diagnosis of a PRPS1-­associated
disorder should be considered in males or females with sensorineural
hearing loss, especially when combined with other neurologic signs.
There are also two different phenotypes associated with abnormally
high levels of PRPP-­synthase activity. The milder phenotype is associated with overexpression of a normal PRPS1 mRNA transcript. Males
present with signs of uric acid overproduction, including hyperuricemia and gout. Female carriers may also be affected. A more severe
phenotype is associated with a point pathogenic variant in PRPS1,
which renders the protein less durable but insensitive to feedback
inhibition. The lack of feedback inhibition results in excessive PRPP
production, with acceleration of purine synthesis and overproduction
of uric acid. However, tissues with normally low levels of PRPS1 may
experience PRPP shortage because the enzyme is unstable. Erythrocytes lack a nucleus, so there is no ongoing mRNA transcription to provide a constant supply of new enzyme. In individuals with an unstable
enzyme, erythrocyte PRPP-­synthase is absent. A similar mechanism
may explain the neurologic consequences, which overlap with those of
PRPP-­synthase deficiency syndromes. Affected individuals show signs
of overproduction of uric acid combined with sensorineural hearing
impairments, neuropathy, and/or psychomotor delay. The diagnosis of
a disorder associated with excessive activity of PRPP-­synthase should
be suspected in any individual with evidence for overproduction of
uric acid, especially when combined with the typical neurologic signs.

Treatment and Prognosis

The overproduction of uric acid in disorders associated with increased
activity of PRPP-­synthase is treated with inhibitors of XOR (allopurinol or febuxostat) combined with generous hydration. No treatments
have proven effective in the treatment of disorders associated with
reduced activity of the enzyme.

Disorders Associated with Nucleotidases

There are numerous enzymes that function as nucleotidases to remove
phosphate groups from nucleotides (see Figs. 110.1 and 110.3). Many
act nonselectively on multiple nucleotides and other small molecules,
but they are often described according to their most prominent (or first
discovered) enzymatic activity. At least five of these nucleotidases are

Table 110.4  Enzymes Dependent on
Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate
ENZYME

GENE

PATHWAY

Amido phosphoribosyl transferase

PPAT

Purine synthesis

Hypoxanthine-­guanine
phosphoribosyl transferase

HPRT1

Purine recycling

Adenine phosphoribosyl transferase

APRT

Purine recycling

Orotate phosphoribosyl transferase
Uridine monophosphate synthetase

UMPS

Pyrimidine
synthesis

Nicotinate phosphoribosyl
transferase

NAPRT

NAD synthesis

Nicotinamide phosphoribosyl
transferase

NAMPT

NADP synthesis

NAD, Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADP, nicotinamide-­adenine dinucleotide
phosphate.
Copyright H.A. Jinnah.

955

cytosolic, one is bound to the plasma membrane, and another is localized to mitochondria. Early studies based on enzymatic activity did
not always identify the exact isoform involved, but more recent studies
have more precisely delineated the precise enzyme involved.
Nucleotidase-­associated pervasive developmental delay. A marked
increase in nucleotidase activity was found in cells of nine individuals
with motor and cognitive delay, hyperactivity and impulsivity, delayed
or absent language, seizures, awkward movements, and other abnormal behaviors. Some had immunologic impairments too. Although the
exact enzyme and gene were not delineated, individuals had chronic
hypouricemia, indicating reduced purine metabolism. Biochemical
studies suggested the disorder was associated with depletion of pyrimidine nucleotides, and the behavioral abnormalities responded to uridine supplements.
Pyrimidine 5′-­nucleotidase deficiency. The NT5C3A gene encodes
an erythrocyte-­specific 5′-­nucleotidase isoform (P5N-­1) with preferential activity toward the pyrimidines CMP and UMP (see Fig. 110. 3).
Enzyme deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and
associated with accumulation of pyrimidine nucleotides in erythrocytes.
The clinical manifestations include chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia; marked basophilic stippling and reticulocytosis; and
accompanying splenomegaly, hemoglobinuria, and jaundice resulting
from overproduction of bilirubin. The diagnosis is suspected when
there is prominent basophilic stippling of erythrocytes, a phenomenon
also associated with lead intoxication. Erythrocytes have an overabundance of pyrimidines, and the enzyme can be measured in red cells. The
anemia is generally moderate and does not usually require transfusion.
Spastic paraplegia (SPG45). The NT5C2 gene encodes a cytosolic 5′-­
nucleotidase with preferential activity toward IMP and
other purine nucleotides. Pathogenic variants in this gene leading to
reduced enzyme function have been linked with spastic paraplegia
(SPG45). The disorder is rare and described for fewer than 20 individuals in a few different families. Affected individuals have early-­onset
gait impairment with leg weakness, spasticity, hyperreflexia, clonus,
and extensor plantar reflexes. Many also have cognitive impairments.
MRI may show white matter brain changes with dysgenesis of the
corpus callosum.
Desbuqois dysplasia type 1 (DBQB1). The CANT1 gene encodes a
secreted calcium-­dependent enzyme that functions as a triphosphatase or diphosphatase with activity toward ATP, ADP, UTP, and UDP.
Pathogenic variants in this gene have been linked with a rare form of
osteochondrodysplasia. Affected individuals have short stature with
short limbs, joint laxity with frequent joint dislocations, pectus carinatum, osteopenia, dysmorphic facies, and intellectual disability.

DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH RIBONUCLEOTIDE
REDUCTASE

Ribonucleotide reductase is the enzyme responsible for generating the
deoxynucleotides dADP, dCDP, dGDP, and dUDP (see Figs. 110.1 and
110.3). These deoxynucleotides are used to synthesize DNA, so the
enzyme plays a key role in regulating DNA replication for cell division.
The enzyme is the target for hydroxyurea used for sickle cell anemia
and certain malignancies. The human enzyme has three subunits, but
only the subunit encoded by the RRM2B gene has been linked with
human disease.

Clinical Features

Pathogenic variants in RRM2B are responsible for a mitochondrial
DNA depletion syndrome with severe encephalomyopathy. The disorder is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Only a handful
of cases from a few families have been reported. Pathogenic variants
in the same gene have also been linked with an autosomal dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEOA5). Only a few
cases have been reported. There is no specific treatment for either
disorder.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

956 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Growth
restriction

Diabetes
insipidus

Psychomotor
delay

Visual
impairment

Neuropathy

severe

early
retinopathy

severe

IUGR
most
severe

early-onset
deaf

post-natal
moderate

Arts
syndrome

mild

CMTX5

Hearing
impairment

optic
neuropathy
visually
impaired

moderate

disc
pallor

mild

late
childhood
onset
slow
progression

DFN2

Fig. 110.5 PRPS1-­associated disorders. This schematic provides a graphical representation of the overlapping spectrum of PRPS1-­associated dis-

orders. The four disorders are listed on the left side of the panel. The most common clinical features are shown in the top row. The white triangles
depict the severity of individual clinical features for each of the disorders. For example, hearing loss may begin in adulthood with slow progression
in the milder phenotypes (DFN2), whereas it may be reflected as earlier or more complete deafness in the more severe phenotypes. Conversely,
growth retardation and diabetes insipidus have been reported only for the most severe phenotype. This schematic provides only a general guide,
as some exceptions may occur. (Copyright H.A. Jinnah.)

Chapter 111

Hutchinson-­Gilford Progeria
Syndrome (Progeria)
Timothy R. O’Toole and Leslie B. Gordon
Hutchinson-­Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS, or progeria) is a rare,
fatal, autosomal dominant segmental premature aging disease. With
an estimated incidence of 1 in 4 million live births and prevalence of
1 in 20 million living individuals, there are an estimated total of 400
children living with progeria in 2023 worldwide. There is no gender,
ethnic, or regional bias.
Progeria is caused by a single-­base pathogenic variant in the LMNA
gene, which results in the production of an abnormal lamin A protein
called progerin. Lamin A is an intermediate-­filament inner nuclear
membrane protein found in most differentiated cells of the body.
Without progerin-­directed treatment, children with progeria develop
premature progressive atherosclerosis and die of heart failure, usually
between ages 5 and 20 years. Progerin is found in increased concentration in the skin and vascular wall of normal older individuals compared with younger individuals, suggesting a role in normal aging.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Children are born looking normal and begin to develop clinical signs of
disease during year one. Physical appearance and clinical findings change

dramatically each year that they age (Figs. 111.1 and 111.2). Both clinical and biologic overlaps with aging are segmental, or partial. The disease features discussed next are roughly in order of clinical appearance.

Dermatologic Changes in Skin, Hair, and Nails

Skin findings are often apparent as initial signs of progeria—at birth
in about 25% of cases and by age 2 months in 80% of cases. These
are variable in severity and include areas of discoloration, stippled
dyspigmentation, tightened areas that can restrict movement, and
areas of the trunk or legs where small (1-­2 cm), soft, bulging skin
is present.
Although usually born with normal appearance, cranial hair is lost
within the first few years. Initial hair loss occurs in the temporal and
occipital areas, with preservation of hair on the mid-­scalp and vertex
for the longest period. Eventually total alopecia occurs, leaving soft,
downy, sparse, immature hair on the scalp, no eyebrows, and scant
eyelashes.
Nails on hands and feet are usually normal at birth but become
dystrophic later in life.

Failure to Thrive

Children with progeria experience apparently normal fetal and early
postnatal development. Between several months and 1 year of age,
abnormalities in growth and body composition are readily apparent. Severe failure to thrive ensues, heralding generalized lipoatrophy, with apparent wasting of limbs, circumoral cyanosis, and
prominent veins around the scalp, neck, and trunk resulting from a
paucity of subcutaneous fat. The weight percentile is usually normal
at birth but decreases to below the third percentile despite adequate
caloric intake for normal growth and normal resting energy expenditure. A review of 35 children showed an average weight increase

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 111 u Hutchinson-­Gilford Progeria Syndrome (Progeria)

A

957

C

B

H
E

F

D

G

I

J

Fig. 111.1 Distinguishing clinical features in Hutchinson-­Gilford progeria syndrome. A, Alopecia, prominent scalp veins, narrowed nasal bridge,

retrognathia. B, Generalized lipoatrophy leaves muscular prominence. C, Skin tightening and mottling. D, Skin bulging. E, Digital joint contractures.
F, Nail dystrophy with spooning. G, Knee joint contractures, lipodystrophy. H, Corneal scarring secondary to exposure keratopathy. I, Flat umbilicus
with scarred-­over appearance; J, Calcinosis cutis in a digit. (Photos courtesy The Progeria Research Foundation and Boston Children’s Hospital.)

of only 0.44 kg/year, beginning at 24 months of age and persisting
through life. Weight gain over time is linear, which contrasts with
the pulsatile acceleration in growth velocity for normal age-­and
gender-­matched children. Children reach an average final height of
approximately 1 meter and weight of approximately 15-­20 kg. Head
circumference is normal. The weight deficit is more pronounced
than the height deficit and, associated with the loss of subcutaneous
fat, results in the emaciated appearance with muscular prominence.
Clinical problems caused by the lack of subcutaneous fat include
sensitivity to cold temperatures and foot discomfort caused by lack
of fat cushioning. Overt diabetes is unusual in progeria, but at least
75% of children eventually develop insulin resistance, usually starting at around age 8 years.

Musculoskeletal Impairments

Both upper and lower extremity range-­of-­motion impairments (e.g.,
fingers, elbows, hips, knees, ankles) may be present at birth and may
progress with age. Joint contractures are caused by both bony and cartilaginous disease, along with tightened skin. Along with irregularities
in the congruency of articulating joint surfaces, these changes serve
to limit joint motion and affect both upper and lower extremity gross
and fine motor function. Physical therapy is recommended routinely and
throughout life to maximize joint function.

Ocular Abnormalities

Ophthalmic signs and symptoms are caused in part by shallow
orbits, tight skin, and a paucity of subcutaneous fat around the eyes.
Eyes are prominent and often experience ocular surface disease

secondary to nocturnal lagophthalmos and exposure keratopathy,
which produce photophobia, tearing, ocular irritation, corneal
scarring, and corneal ulceration that can lead to vison loss. Most
patients have relatively good acuity; however, advanced ophthalmic
disease can be associated with reduced acuity. Children with progeria should have an ophthalmic evaluation at diagnosis and at least
yearly thereafter. Aggressive ocular surface lubrication is recommended, including the use of tape tarsorrhaphy at night.

Craniofacial and Dental Phenotypes

Children develop craniofacial disproportion, with micrognathia
and retrognathia caused by mandibular hypoplasia. Typical oral and
dental manifestations include hypodontia, delayed tooth eruption,
severe dental crowding caused by hypoplastic maxilla and mandible, ogival palatal arch, ankyloglossia, presence of median sagittal
palatal fissure, and generalized gingival recession. Eruption may be
delayed for many months, and primary teeth may persist for the
duration of life. Secondary teeth are present but may or may not
erupt. They sometimes erupt on the lingual and palatal surfaces of
the mandibular and maxillary alveolar ridges, rather than in place
of the primary incisors. In some, but not all cases, extracting primary teeth promotes movement of secondary teeth into place.

Skeletal Abnormalities

Development of bone structure and bone density represents a
unique skeletal dysplasia that is not based in malnutrition. Acroosteolysis of the distal phalanges, distal clavicular resorption, and
thin, tapered ribs are early signs of progeria (as early as 3 months

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

958 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders

ad

B

C

A

E

F

D

G

Fig. 111.2 Pathologic skeletal and cardiovascular findings in Hutchinson-­Gilford progeria. A, Coxa valga of the hip. B, Clavicular osteolysis. C,

Acroosteolysis in a thumb. D, H&E staining of mid-­right coronary artery characterized by an enlarged and highly fibrotic adventitia (arrow). The media
is markedly thinned in the area with adventitial fibrosis and plaque showing clinically significant stenosis (90%) and a necrotic core with calcification
(staining not shown). E, Near-­complete loss of the distal vertebral artery (circle) and prominent anterior spinal artery collateral (arrow). F, Acute gyral
infarcts (black arrow). Bright signal in the sulci indicates slow cortical collateral flow (white arrows). G, M1 (single black arrow) and A1 stenoses (double
black arrows), internal maxillary artery collaterals (wavy black arrows), subfrontal collaterals (single white arrow), and enlarged anterior and posterior
spinal arteries (double white arrows).

of age). Facial disproportion, a narrowed nasal bridge, and retrognathia make intubation extremely difficult, and fiberoptic intubation is
recommended. A pyriform chest structure and small clavicles can
lead to reducible glenohumeral joint instability. Growth of the spine
and bony pelvis is normal. Hip disease is pervasive and results in
repeated dislocations in about 20% of cases that are not amenable
to splinting. Dysplastic growth of the femoral head and neck axis
results in coxa valgus (straightening of the femoral head-­neck axis
>125 degrees) and coxa magna, where the diameter of the femoral head is disproportionately large for the acetabulum, resulting in
hip instability. The resulting hip dysplasia can be progressive and
may result in osteoarthritis, avascular necrosis, hip dislocation, and
inability to bear weight.
In response to repeated hip dislocations, five instances of either
unilateral or bilateral surgical correction of hip dysplasia using periacetabular and femoral osteotomy have been conducted, each at different hospitals. Follow-­up after 4-8 years has yielded mixed results.

Other than in a single instance, hip dislocations have not recurred. In
two cases, postsurgical healing occurred normally, resulting in ability
to bear weight and walk short-­to-­long distances. In two cases, hardware failure with nonunion of femoral bone necessitated hardware
removal and new hardware insertion; skin breakdown and need for
additional bone grafting complicated one of these cases. These two
cases yielded limited weight-­bearing with no assistance when walking short distances, but the patients required wheelchair use for longer distances. Finally, one case healed well with no adverse events, but
mobility was not restored because of postsurgery progression of joint
contractures, resulting in inability to bear weight or walk and subsequent wheelchair use. Adequate vitamin D levels are likely important
for bone healing in all cases.
Other changes to the appendicular skeleton include flaring of
the humeral and femoral metaphyses and constriction of the radial
neck. Growth plate morphology is generally normal but can be
variable within a single radiograph. The appearance of ossification

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 111 u Hutchinson-­Gilford Progeria Syndrome (Progeria)
centers used to define bone age is normal. Bone structure assessed
by peripheral quantitative computed tomography (pQCT) of the
radius demonstrates distinct and severe abnormalities in bone
structural geometry, consistent with progeria representing a skeletal
dysplasia. Areal bone mineral density (aBMD) z scores measured by
dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry (DXA) adjusted for height and
age and true (volumetric) BMD assessed by pQCT are normal to
mildly reduced, refuting the assumption that patients with progeria are osteoporotic. Fracture rates in progeria are normal and not
associated with fragility fractures observed in other pediatric metabolic bone diseases, such as osteogenesis imperfecta.

Hearing

Low-­tone conductive hearing loss is pervasive in progeria and
likely indicative of a stiff tympanic membrane and/or deficits in
the middle ear bony and ligamentous structures. Overall, this does
not affect the ability to hear the usual spoken tones, but preferential classroom seating is recommended, along with annual hearing
examinations.

Cardiovascular Disease

Approximately 80% of deaths in progeria are caused by cardiovascular failure, with end-­stage events sometimes precipitated by
superimposed respiratory infection or stressors surrounding surgical intervention. Progeria is a primary vasculopathy characterized
by pervasive accelerated vascular stiffening, followed by large-­and
medium-­vessel occlusive disease from atherosclerotic plaque formation, with valvular and cardiac calcification and insufficiency
at advanced stages of disease. Some evidence of vascular dysfunction is apparent in all ages tested. ECG abnormalities are generally nonspecific, but indications of left ventricular hypertrophy
and nonspecific ST-­T wave abnormalities can occur later in disease
progression. Hypertension, angina, cardiomegaly, metabolic syndrome, and congestive heart failure are common end-­stage events.
Transthoracic echocardiography reveals early-­onset diastolic left
ventricular dysfunction associated with age-­related decline in lateral and septal early (E′) diastolic tissue Doppler velocity z scores
and an increase in the ratio of mitral inflow (E) to lateral and septal E′ velocity z scores. Other echocardiographic findings include
left ventricular hypertrophy, left ventricular systolic dysfunction,
and mitral or aortic valve disease with calcification, which tend to
appear later in life.
Vascular stiffening assessed using carotid and femoral ultrasound
reveals elevated carotid-­femoral pulse wave velocity (PWVcf ) and
wall echodensity with medial and adventitial thickening. These
are considered early and important indicators of cardiovascular
decline. In the general population, increased PWVcf is associated
with increased risk of cardiac death. Intima-­media thickness is
normal. In addition, elevated carotid artery mean flow velocities
appear early in life, and underscore the presence of arterial occlusive disease.
Routine blood pressure (BP) monitoring with special attention to
proper cuff size is recommended. When normalized for patient size
using height and age correction, both systolic and diastolic BP are
increased in about half of patients with HGPS. These elevated BP
trends would be expected in the setting of significant vascular stiffness. Antihypertensive medications have been used in the setting of
elevated BP, with special attention to maintaining adequate BP to
avoid strokes.
BP monitoring, ECG, echocardiography, carotid ultrasound for plaque
evaluation, and PWVcf measures for vascular stiffening are recommended.
End-­stage cardiovascular disease (CVD) in progeria is often characterized by atherosclerotic plaques in large and medium-­sized arteries, severe aortic stenosis, and cardiac failure. Critical aortic stenosis
with heart failure is amenable to transapical transcatheter aortic valve
implantation and apico-aortic conduit surgeries to alleviate severe aortic stenosis. These carry high risk of death but have yielded significant

959

symptomatic improvement and prolongation of life in several cases
(see treatment section).

Cerebrovascular Arteriopathy and Stroke

The earliest incidence of stroke occurred at age 0.4 years. More
often, strokes occur in the later years. Over the life span, MRI evidence of infarction can be found in as many as 60% of patients with
progeria, with half of these clinically silent. Both extracranial and
intracranial occlusive disease is present in the neurovascular axis,
with resulting extensive collateral vessel formation that pseudo-­
normalizes intracranial flow. Carotid artery blockages are well
documented, but infarction can occur even in their absence. Both
large-­and small-­vessel disease is found; collateral vessel formation
is extensive. A propensity for strokes and an underlying stiff vasculature make maintaining adequate blood pressure through oral
hydration a priority in patients with progeria; special care should be
taken when considering maintenance of consistent BP during general anesthesia, airplane trips, and hot weather. In addition, 15% of
deaths in children with progeria occur from head injury or trauma,
including subdural hematoma. This implies an underlying susceptibility to subdural hematoma, though known risk of stroke is much
higher and frequently warrants low-­dose aspirin therapy.

Sexual Development

Females with progeria can develop Tanner stage II secondary
sexual characteristics, including signs of early breast development
and sparse pubic hair. Progression to Tanner stage III has not been
observed. Despite minimal to absent physical signs of pubertal
development and markedly reduced body fat, over half of females
experience spontaneous menarche at a median age of 14 years.
Menarche is not preceded by gain in body mass or increase in body
fat. Timing of menarche is variable; some adolescents start menstruation at Tanner stage I without progression to Tanner II, while
others start at Tanner stage II. Those experiencing menarche vs
nonmenstruating females have similar body mass indices, percentage body fat, and serum leptin levels, all of which are vastly below
the healthy adolescent population. Menorrhagia has been observed
and can result in symptomatic anemia. In addition to iron supplementation, oral contraceptives may be indicated to regulate menses.
Progestin-­only or minimal estrogen-­content products are preferred
because of elevated cardiovascular risks associated with estrogen-­
based medication in the face of HGPS-­associated atherosclerosis.
There are no documented cases of reproductive capacity in females
or males with progeria; however, the data suggest there is potential for further sexual development and the possibility of fertility in
these females. Secondary sexual characteristics in males have not
been reported.

Normally Functioning Systems

Liver, kidney, thyroid, immune, gastrointestinal, and neurologic function (other than stroke related) remain intact. Intellect is normal for
age, possibly in part from downregulation of progerin expression in the
brain by a brain-­specific micro-­RNA, miR-­9.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The most consistent laboratory findings are low serum leptin below
detectable levels (>90%) and insulin resistance (75%, usually starting over age 8 years). Platelet count is often moderately high. High-­
density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and adiponectin concentrations
decrease with increasing age to values significantly below normal. Otherwise, lipid panels, high-­sensitivity C-­reactive protein, blood chemistries, liver and kidney function tests, endocrine test, and coagulation
tests are generally normal.

MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS

Pathogenic variants in the LMNA gene cause progeria. The normal
LMNA/C gene encodes the proteins lamins A and C, of which only lamin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

960 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
A. Lamin A generation

B. Progerin generation
50 amino acids deleted
CAAX

1

CAAX

Farnesyltransferase

Farnesyltransferase

X

Lonafarnib

CAAX
2

CAAX

Zmpste24 or RCE1

Zmpste24 or RCE1
C-AAX

C-AAX
ICMT

ICMT

3

C-OCH3
Progerin

Zmpste24

4

Lamin A

C-OCH3
no cleavage site

C-O

CH

3

Fig. 111.3 Posttranslational processing pathways producing lamin A and progerin, including the target site for lonafarnib. A, Prelamin A poly-

peptide chain, showing its central α-­helical rod domain and C-­terminal−CAAX box, representing cysteine (C), aliphatic amino acids (AA), and any
amino acid (X). The α-­helical rod domain is divided into segments that assist in displaying the progerin defect. Posttranslational processing consists
of four steps: (1) a farnesyl group is attached to the cysteine residue of the −CAAX box by farnesyltransferase; (2) the last three residues are proteolytically cleaved by the zinc metalloprotease Zmpste24 or Ras-­converting enzyme (RCE1); (3) carboxy-­methylation by isoprenyl-­cysteine carboxyl
methyltransferase (ICMT); and (4) the terminal 15 C-­terminal residues, including the farnesylated and carboxymethylated cysteine, are cleaved off
by Zmpste24. B, A 50–amino acid deletion in prelamin A (represented by the black segment of the lamin A rod) is the result of a pathogenic variant
that activates a cryptic splice site within exon 11 of the LMNA gene. This deletion leaves progerin without an attachment site for the last processing
step—cleavage of the farnesylation and carboxymethylated terminal 15 amino acid residues. Thus progerin remains farnesylated and intercalated
within the inner nuclear membrane, where it causes much of its cellular damage.

A is associated with human diseases. The lamin proteins are the principal
proteins of the nuclear lamina, a complex molecular interface located
between the inner membrane of the nuclear envelope and chromatin.
The integrity of the lamina is central to many cellular functions, creating and maintaining structural integrity of the nuclear scaffold, DNA
replication, RNA transcription, organization of the nucleus, nuclear pore
assembly, chromatin function, cell cycling, senescence, and apoptosis.
Progeria is a sporadic autosomal dominant disease in about 98% of
cases. Two percent of cases presumably arise from parental mosaicism;
The Progeria Research Foundation reports five identified sibling occurrences of genetically confirmed HGPS. HGPS is caused by the accelerated use of an alternative, internal splice site that results in the deletion
of 150 base pairs in the 3′ portion of exon 11 of the LMNA gene. In
about 90% of cases, this results from a single C to T transition at nucleotide 1824 that is silent (Gly608Gly) but optimizes an internal splice
site within exon 11. The remaining 10% of cases possess one of several
single-­base pathogenic variants within the intron 11 splice donor site,
thus reducing specificity for this site and altering the splicing balance
in favor of the internal splice. Subsequent to all these pathogenic variants, translation followed by posttranslational processing of the altered
mRNA produces progerin, a shortened abnormal lamin A protein with
a 50–amino acid deletion near its C-­terminal end. An understanding
of the posttranslational processing pathway and how it is altered to create progerin has led to a number of treatment prospects for the disease
(Fig. 111.3).

Both prelamin A and preprogerin possess a methylated farnesyl
side group attached during posttranslational processing. This is a
lipophilic moiety that facilitates intercalation of proteins into the
inner nuclear membrane, where most of the lamin and progerin
functions are performed. During posttranslational processing of
normal lamin A, loss of the methylated farnesyl anchor releases
prelamin from the nuclear membrane, rendering it soluble for
autophagic degradation. However, preprogerin and, subsequently,
progerin retain the farnesyl moiety. Progerin remains anchored
to the membrane, binding other proteins, causing blebbing of the
nucleus, disrupting mitosis, and altering gene expression. Progerin
also retains a methyl moiety.
Disease in progeria is produced by a dominant negative mechanism; the action of progerin, not the diminution of lamin A, causes
the disease phenotype. The severity of disease is determined in part
by progerin levels, which are regulated by the particular pathogenic
variant, tissue type, or other factors influencing use of the internal
splice site.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Overall, the constellation of small body habitus, bone, hair, subcutaneous fat, and skin changes results in the marked physical resemblance among patients with progeria (Fig. 111.4). For this reason, if
disease signs are present, clinical diagnosis can often be achieved or
excluded with relative confidence even at young ages. There are rare

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 111 u Hutchinson-­Gilford Progeria Syndrome (Progeria)

Fig. 111.4 Unrelated 7-­yr-­old female and 10-­yr-­old male with progeria. The appearance is remarkably similar between patients. (Photograph courtesy The Progeria Research Foundation.)

cases of mosaicism or relatively low-­progerin-­expressing patients
with extremely mild clinical signs of disease. Thus lack of early disease manifestation should not be considered exclusionary. Clinical
suspicion should be followed by LMNA genetic sequence testing. In
addition, a number of premature aging disorders have features that
overlap with HGPS but are not progerin-­producing (Table 111.1).
Patients may fall under none of these diagnoses and represent ultra-­
rare, unnamed progeroid diseases that carry either non–progerin-­
producing pathogenic variants in LMNA or the lamin-­associated
enzyme (ZMPSTE24), or progeroid syndromes without lamin-­
associated pathogenic variants.

TREATMENT

Lonafarnib (Zokinvy) is a farnesyltransferase inhibitor that blocks
the addition of a farnesyl lipid moiety onto preprogerin, thus preventing progerin from associating with the inner nuclear membrane
where it effects much of its damage (see Fig. 111.3). Lonafarnib is
approved by the US FDA and European Medicines Agency for use
in patients with HGPS and processing-deficient progeroid laminopathies ages 12 months and older. It is the first and only approved
indication for either disease. It is initiated at a dose of 115 mg/m2
orally twice daily. After four months, the dose is increased to 150
mg/m2 twice daily. The most common side effects are diarrhea, nausea, and loss of appetite, which can be mitigated with loperamide,
ondansetron HCl, and cyproheptadine, respectively.
Overall, children with HGPS treated with long-term lonafarnib
therapy demonstrated an increase in mean estimated survival of 4.3
years (30%) over untreated children. Treatment decreased plasma
progerin levels by an average of 38% starting at 4-6 months and
persisting for up to 10 years on therapy. In a single-arm clinical trial
with lonafarnib (NCT00425607), subgroups of patients experienced
increased rate of weight gain, decreased vascular stiffness measured
by decreased PWVcf and carotid artery echodensity, improved left
ventricular diastolic function, increased radial bone structural
rigidity, improved sensorineural hearing, and early evidence of
decreased headache, TIA, and stroke rates. Dermatologic, dental,
joint contracture, insulin resistance, lipodystrophy, BMD, and joint
contractures were unaffected by drug treatment.
Dosing: In general, medications should be dosed according to
weight or body surface area instead of age because of the small size and
decreased weight for height.

961

Hydration is important for maintaining adequate blood flow in the face
of generalized vascular stiffness and collateral vascular formation in the
brain.
Low-­dose aspirin therapy is recommended at 2 mg/kg/day, as an
extension of what is known about decreasing cardiovascular risk in
the general at-­risk adult population. It is not known whether low-­
dose aspirin therapy has any effect on morbidity or mortality in
HGPS.
Antihypertensive medications have been used with elevated BP,
with special attention to maintaining adequate BP to avoid strokes.
Due to small, thin body habitus, appropriately sized blood pressure
cuff and height-age adjustments when evaluating hypertension (>95th
percentile) should be employed.
Extraskeletal calcifications have been observed in patients
with progeria radiographically and cutaneously, both at a baseline off therapy (around 30% of patients) and with increasing frequency during a clinical trial when the patients were treated with
oral calcium carbonate supplementation, and/or zoledronic acid,
pravastatin, and lonafarnib (around 45% of patients). Oral calcium
carbonate supplementation may therefore aggravate calcium dysfunction in children with progeria. Given this potential concern,
calcium intake via dietary means, along with vitamin D supplementation, is likely the safest intake strategy.
Physical and occupational therapy initiation are recommended as
young as possible to preserve joint mobility and optimize capacity for
activities of daily living.
Cardiac intervention. A primary cause of mortality in HGPS is
critical aortic stenosis caused by premature atherosclerosis. At end
stage, high-risk intervention has been performed using transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) for patients large enough to
receive the smallest valve available, using a transapical approach
because the femoral artery is small and calcified, precluding a transfemoral approach. The majority of patients’ aortic valves are too
small to implement TAVI. In these cases, apico-aortic conduit (aortic valve bypass) surgery has been achieved. Both procedures have
resulted in postoperative symptomatic relief and lifespan extension
when successful. The procedures carry high risk for perisurgical
morbidity and mortality.
Clinical trials. One currently ongoing clinical trial adding everolimus (an FDA-­approved mTOR inhibitor) to a lonafarnib regimen is
aimed at accelerating autophagy of progerin, thus theoretically reducing its accumulation and cellular damage (NCT02579044). Patient
treatment phase is complete and results are pending.

PROGNOSIS

Children with progeria develop a severe premature form of atherosclerosis. Before death, cardiac decline with left-­sided hypertrophy, valvular insufficiency, and pulmonary edema develop; neurovascular decline
with TIAs, strokes, and occasionally seizures can result in significant
morbidity.
Without lonafarnib drug treatment, death occurs generally
between ages 5 and 20 years, with a median life span of 14.5 years,
resulting from heart failure, sometimes with superimposed respiratory infection (approximately 80%); from head injury or trauma,
including subdural hematoma (approximately 15%); and, rarely,
from stroke (1–3%) or complications from anesthesia during surgery (1–3%). With lonafarnib therapy, long-term use has been
associated with up to 4.3 years’ (30%) lifespan extension. Surgical
intervention for critical aortic stenosis can decrease cardiovascular
morbidity and extend lifespan by an indeterminate duration.

PATIENT RESOURCES

The Progeria Research Foundation (www.progeriaresearch.org)
maintains an international progeria patient registry, provides a
diagnostics program and complete patient care manual, and coordinates clinical treatment trials. It funds preclinical and clinical
research to define the underpinnings of the disorder and to discover

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

962 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 111.1  Features of Hutchinson-­Gilford Progeria Syndrome and Other Premature Aging Disorders with Overlapping
Features
DISEASE

CAUSATIVE GENE

ONSET

MAIN CLINICAL FEATURES

Hutchinson-­Gilford
progeria syndrome
(HGPS)

LMNA: de novo dominant point
pathogenic variant (c.1824C>T;
p.G608G or pathogenic variants
in first five intronic bases of intron
11)

Early childhood

Severe failure to thrive in infancy, progressive alopecia leading
to total alopecia, skin lesions, characteristic facies, loss of
subcutaneous fat, bone changes, skeletal anomalies,
musculoskeletal degeneration, hearing loss, high-­pitched
voice, delayed and crowded dentition, atherosclerosis,
cerebrovascular disease, average death in mid-­teens from
myocardial infarction or stroke (from cardiovascular disease).

Restrictive dermopathy
(RD)

ZMPSTE24: recessive null
pathogenic variants

Neonatal

Intrauterine growth restriction, reduced fetal movements,
and preterm delivery, tight and translucent skin with erosions,
facial dysmorphism, skeletal malformations, generalized
arthrogryposis; lethal within the first weeks of life

Mandibuloacral dysplasia
type B (MADB)

ZMPSTE24: recessive pathogenic
variants: often compound
heterozygous pathogenic variants
with a null allele and one maintaining
some residual activity

Early childhood

Generalized lipodystrophy, altered skin pigmentation, alopecia,
severe bone and growth defects

Mandibuloacral dysplasia
type A (MADA)

LMNA: recessive missense
pathogenic variants

Early childhood

Partial lipodystrophy at torso and limbs, bone abnormalities,
altered skin pigmentation, lipodystrophic signs and mildly
accelerated aging

Nestor-­Guillermo
progeria syndrome
(NGPS)

BANF1: recessive pathogenic
variant (c.34G>A; p.Ala12Thr)

Early childhood

Failure to thrive, aged appearance, growth restriction,
decreased subcutaneous fat, thin limbs, stiff joints, severe
osteolysis, absence of early cardiovascular impairment

Mandibular hypoplasia,
deafness, progeroid
features, and
lipodystrophy
syndrome (MDPL)

POLD1: dominant pathogenic
variants, including the common
de novo pathogenic variant
(c.1812_1814delCTC. P.Ser605del)
observed in 80% of the patients

Early childhood

Mandibular hypoplasia, prominent loss of subcutaneous
fat, progeroid appearance, skin abnormalities, metabolic
abnormalities including insulin resistance and diabetes
mellitus, sensorineural deafness, hypogonadism in males

Mandibuloacral
dysplasia associated
with MTX2 (MADaM)

MTX2: recessive pathogenic
variants

Early childhood

Small viscerocranium with mandibular underdevelopment,
growth restriction, lipodystrophy, altered skin pigmentation,
distal acroosteolyses, renal focal glomerulosclerosis, severe
cardiovascular disease

Atypical progeroid
laminopathies

LMNA and ZMPSTE24

Variable from
early life to
adulthood

Several LMNA pathogenic variants, including dominant and
recessive ones, result in a spectrum of progeroid laminopathies
ranging in severity from severe RD-­like forms to adult-­onset
atypical WS; atypical (severe) MADB forms can result from
recessive ZMPSTE24 pathogenic variants

Werner syndrome (WS)

WRN: recessive pathogenic variants

Adulthood

Lack of the pubertal growth spurt during early teen years,
graying or loss of hair, scleroderma-­like skin lesions,
characteristic facies, bilateral cataracts, type 2 diabetes
mellitus, hypogonadism, skin ulcers, osteoporosis,
arteriosclerosis, increased risk of cancer

Wiedemann-­
Rautenstrauch
syndrome

POLR3A

Neonatal

Severe prenatal and postnatal growth restriction, facial
dysmorphism, generalized lipodystrophy with local fatty
tissue accumulations

Cockayne syndrome

CSA (ERCC8)
CSB (ERCC6)

Neonatal/
infancy

Skin and dental abnormalities, subcutaneous fat loss, short
stature, vasculopathy, hypogonadism, hearing loss, cataracts,
intellectual disability, neurologic disorders

Rothmund-­Thompson
syndrome

RECQL4

Infancy

Diffuse hair loss, skin and dental abnormalities, short stature,
osteopenia, hypogonadism, hyperkeratosis, cataracts,
tumor predisposition

Adapted from Coppedè F. Mutations involved in premature-­ageing syndromes. Appl Clin Genet. 2021;14:279–295.

treatments and a cure. Additional resources include the National
Human Genome Research Institute (www.genome.gov/11007255/),
National Center for Biotechnology Information Genereviews (www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1121/), National Center for Advancing

Translational Sciences (www.rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/7467
/progeria) and NORD (rarediseases.org).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 112 u The Porphyrias 963

Chapter 112

The Porphyrias
Manisha Balwani, Robert J. Desnick, and
Karl E. Anderson
Porphyrias are metabolic diseases resulting from altered activities of
specific enzymes of the heme biosynthetic pathway. These enzymes are
most active in bone marrow and liver. Erythropoietic porphyrias, in
which overproduction of heme pathway intermediates occurs primarily in bone marrow erythroid cells, usually present at birth or in early
childhood with cutaneous photosensitivity, or in the case of congenital
erythropoietic porphyria, even in utero as nonimmune hydrops. Erythropoietic protoporphyria is the most common porphyria in children.
Most porphyrias are hepatic, with overproduction and initial accumulation of porphyrin precursors or porphyrins in the liver. Activation of hepatic porphyrias is very rare during childhood, reflecting the
distinct hepatic regulatory mechanisms for heme biosynthesis that are
influenced by pubertal development. Homozygous forms of the hepatic
porphyrias may manifest clinically before puberty. Children who are
heterozygous for inherited hepatic porphyrias may present with nonspecific and unrelated symptoms, and parents often request advice
about long-­term prognosis and express concerns about drugs that may
exacerbate these conditions.

THE HEME BIOSYNTHETIC PATHWAY

Heme is required for a variety of hemoproteins, such as hemoglobin,
myoglobin, respiratory cytochromes, and cytochrome P450 enzymes
(CYPs). It is believed that the eight enzymes in the pathway for heme

biosynthesis are active in all tissues. Hemoglobin synthesis in erythroid
precursor cells accounts for approximately 85% of daily heme synthesis
in humans. Hepatocytes account for most of the rest, primarily for synthesis of CYPs, which are especially abundant in the liver endoplasmic
reticulum and turn over more rapidly than many other hemoproteins,
such as the mitochondrial respiratory cytochromes. Pathway intermediates are the porphyrin precursors δ-­aminolevulinic acid (ALA, also
known as 5-­aminolevulinic acid) and porphobilinogen (PBG), as well
as porphyrins (mostly in their reduced forms, known as porphyrinogens) (Fig. 112.1). These intermediates do not accumulate in significant amounts or have important physiologic functions under normal
conditions.
Altered activity of each enzyme in the pathway has been associated
with a specific type of porphyria (Table 112.1). The first enzyme, ALA
synthase (ALAS), occurs in two forms. An erythroid-­specific form,
ALAS2, is deficient in X-­linked sideroblastic anemia as a result of
pathogenic variants of the ALAS2 gene on chromosome Xp11.2. Gain-­
of-­function pathogenic variants of ALAS2 caused by deletions in the
last exon cause X-­linked protoporphyria (XLP), which is phenotypically identical to erythropoietic protoporphyria.
Regulation of heme synthesis differs in the two major heme-­forming
tissues. Liver heme biosynthesis is primary controlled by the ubiquitous
form of ALAS (ALAS1). Synthesis of ALAS1 in liver is regulated by a
“free” heme pool (see Fig. 112.1), which can be augmented by newly
synthesized heme or by existing heme released from hemoproteins and
destined for breakdown to biliverdin by heme oxygenase.
In comparison, in the hematopoietic system, novel regulatory
mechanisms allow the production of the very large amounts of heme
needed for hemoglobin synthesis. The response to stimuli for hemoglobin synthesis occurs during cell differentiation, leading to an increase
in cell number. Also, unlike the liver, heme has a stimulatory role in
hemoglobin formation, and the stimulation of heme synthesis in erythroid cells is accompanied not only by increases in ALAS2 but also
by sequential induction of other heme biosynthetic enzymes. Separate

Fig. 112.1 Enzymes and intermediates of the heme biosynthetic pathway. The pathway is regulated in the liver by the end product, heme, mainly
by feedback repression (dashed red arrow).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

964 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 112.1  The Human Porphyrias: Pathogenic Variants, Time of Presentation, and Tissue-­and Symptom-­Based
Classifications
CLASSIFICATION*
DISEASE

ENZYME

INHERITANCE

PRESENTATION

H

X-­linked protoporphyria
(XLP)

δ-­Aminolevulinate synthase
2 (ALAS2)

X-­linked

Childhood

δ-­Aminolevulinic acid
dehydratase porphyria (ADP)

δ-­Aminolevulinic acid
dehydratase (ALAD)

Autosomal recessive

Mostly postpuberty

X

Acute intermittent
porphyria (AIP)

Hydroxymethylbilane
synthase (HMBS)

Autosomal dominant

Postpuberty

X

Homozygous dominant

Childhood

X

Homozygous AIP

E

A/N

X
X‡

C
X

X
X

X

X

Congenital erythropoietic
porphyria (CEP)

Uroporphyrinogen III
synthase (UROS)

Autosomal recessive

In utero or infancy

Porphyria cutanea tarda
(PCT) type 1

Uroporphyrinogen
decarboxylase (UROD)

Sporadic

Adults

X

X

PCT type 2†

Autosomal dominant

Adults

X

X

PCT type 3

Unknown

Adults

X

Hepatoerythropoietic
porphyria (HEP)

X

Homozygous dominant

Childhood

X

Autosomal dominant

Postpuberty

X

Homozygous dominant

Childhood

X

Autosomal dominant

Postpuberty

X

Homozygous VP

Homozygous dominant

Childhood

X

Erythropoietic protoporphyria Ferrochelatase (FECH)
(EPP)

Autosomal recessive (most
commonly heteroallelic
with hypomorphic allele)

Childhood

Hereditary coproporphyria
(HCP)

Coproporphyrinogen
oxidase (CPOX)

Homozygous HCP
Variegate porphyria (VP)

Protoporphyrinogen
oxidase (PPOX)

X

X
X‡

X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

*Classification abbreviations: H, Hepatic; E, Erythropoietic; A/N, Acute/Neurologic; C, Cutaneous.
†PCT is a result of inhibition of hepatic UROD. Autosomal dominant inheritance of a partial deficiency of UROD is a predisposing factor in cases defined as familial (type 2) PCT. Other
genetic factors, such as HFE pathogenic variants, are sometimes found in all types of PCT.
‡ADP and HEP are considered primarily hepatic porphyrias, but substantial increases in erythrocyte zinc protoporphyrin suggest an erythropoietic component.

erythroid-­specific and nonerythroid, or “housekeeping,” transcripts are
known for the first four enzymes in the pathway. The separate forms of
ALAS are encoded by genes on different chromosomes, but for each of
the other three, erythroid and nonerythroid transcripts are transcribed
by alternative promoters in the same gene. Heme also regulates the rate
of its synthesis in erythroid cells by controlling the transport of iron
into reticulocytes.
Intermediates of the heme biosynthetic pathway are efficiently converted to heme and, normally, only small amounts of the intermediates are excreted. Some may undergo chemical modifications before
excretion. Whereas the porphyrin precursors ALA and PBG are colorless, nonfluorescent, and largely excreted unchanged in urine, PBG
may degrade to colored products such as the brownish pigment called
porphobilin or spontaneously polymerize to uroporphyrins. Porphyrins are red in color and display bright-­red fluorescence when exposed
to long-­wavelength ultraviolet (UV) light. Porphyrinogens are the
reduced form of porphyrins and are colorless and nonfluorescent, but
are readily autoxidized to the corresponding porphyrins when they
accumulate or are outside the cell. Only the type III isomers of uroporphyrinogen and coproporphyrinogen are converted to heme (see
Fig. 112.1).
ALA and PBG are excreted in urine. Excretion of porphyrins and
porphyrinogens in urine or bile is determined by the number of carboxyl groups. Those with many carboxyl groups, such as uroporphyrin
(octacarboxyl porphyrin) and heptacarboxyl porphyrin, are water soluble and readily excreted in urine. Those with fewer carboxyl groups,
such as protoporphyrin (dicarboxyl porphyrin), are not water soluble
and are excreted in bile and feces. Coproporphyrin (tetracarboxyl

porphyrin) is excreted partly in urine and partly in bile. Because coproporphyrin I is more readily excreted in bile than coproporphyrin III,
impaired hepatobiliary function may increase total urinary coproporphyrin excretion and the ratio of these isomers.

CLASSIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF PORPHYRIAS

Two useful classification schemes reflect either the underlying pathophysiology or the clinical features of porphyrias (see Table 112.1).
In hepatic porphyrias and erythropoietic porphyrias the source of
excess production of porphyrin precursors and porphyrins is the liver
and bone marrow, respectively. Acute porphyrias cause neurologic
symptoms that are associated with increases of one or both of the porphyrin precursors, ALA and PBG. In the cutaneous porphyrias, photosensitivity results from transport of porphyrins in blood from the
liver or bone marrow to the skin. Dual porphyria refers to the very
rare cases of porphyria with deficiencies of two different heme pathway
enzymes.
Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), acute intermittent porphyria
(AIP), and erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) are the three most
common porphyrias, in that order, considering all age-­groups, and are
very different in clinical presentation, precipitating factors, methods
of diagnosis, and effective therapy (Table 112.2). Two less common
acute porphyrias, hereditary coproporphyria (HCP) and variegate
porphyria (VP), can also cause blistering photosensitivity (see Table
112.1). Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) causes more
severe blistering lesions, often with secondary infection and mutilation. EPP and X-­linked protoporphyria (XLP) have the same phenotype and are distinct from the other cutaneous porphyrias in causing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 112 u The Porphyrias 965
Table 112.2  The Three Most Common Human Porphyrias and Major Features
PRESENTING SYMPTOMS

EXACERBATING FACTORS

MOST IMPORTANT
SCREENING TESTS

TREATMENT

Acute intermittent
porphyria

Neurologic, adult onset

Drugs (mostly P450 inducers),
Urinary porphobilinogen
progesterone, dietary restriction

Hemin, glucose,
givosiran

Porphyria cutanea
tarda

Skin blistering and fragility
(chronic), adult onset

Iron, alcohol, smoking, estrogens,
hepatitis C, HIV, halogenated
hydrocarbons

Plasma or urine porphyrins

Phlebotomy, low-­dose
hydroxychloroquine,
direct acting antivirals
(if hepatitis C is present)

Erythropoietic
protoporphyria

Phototoxic pain and swelling
(mostly acute), childhood
onset

Sunlight exposure

Total erythrocyte
Sun protection
protoporphyrin with metal-­
free and zinc protoporphyrin

nonblistering photosensitivity that occurs acutely after sun exposure.
EPP is also the most common porphyria to become manifest before
puberty.

First-­Line Laboratory Diagnostic Testing

A few sensitive and specific first-­
line laboratory tests should be
obtained whenever symptoms or signs suggest the diagnosis of porphyria. If a first-­line or screening test is significantly abnormal, more
comprehensive testing should follow to establish the type of porphyria.
Overuse of laboratory tests for screening can lead to unnecessary
expense and even delay in diagnosis. In patients who present with a
past diagnosis of porphyria, laboratory reports that were the basis for
the original diagnosis must be reviewed, and if these were inadequate,
further testing considered.
Acute porphyria should be suspected in patients with neurovisceral
symptoms such as abdominal pain after puberty, when initial clinical evaluation does not suggest another cause. Urinary PBG should
be measured. Urinary PBG is virtually always increased during acute
attacks of AIP, HCP, and VP and is not substantially increased in any
other medical conditions. Therefore this measurement is both sensitive and specific. Results from spot (single-­void) urine specimens are
highly informative because very substantial increases are expected during acute attacks of porphyria. A 24-­hour collection can unnecessarily delay diagnosis. The same spot urine specimen should be saved for
quantitative determination of PBG (expressed relative to creatinine) to
confirm the qualitative PBG result. ALA is often measured as well, but
is usually less elevated than PBG in AIP, HCP, and VP. In ALA dehydratase porphyria (ADP), urinary ALA and porphyrins, but not PBG,
are greatly elevated. Measurement of urinary porphyrins in addition to
PBG is recommended to screen for acute porphyrias because PBG is often
less elevated and returns to normal more rapidly in HCP and VP than in
AIP. Porphyrin measurement alone should be avoided for screening, however, because it is often increased in many disorders other than porphyrias, such as liver diseases, and misdiagnoses of porphyria can result from
increases in urinary porphyrins that have no diagnostic significance.

Blistering Cutaneous Porphyrias

Blistering skin lesions caused by porphyria are virtually always accompanied by increases in total plasma and urinary porphyrins. Porphyrins in plasma in VP are mostly covalently linked to plasma proteins
and readily detected by a diagnostic peak in a fluorescence scanning method. The normal range for plasma porphyrins is somewhat
increased in patients with end-­stage renal disease.

Nonblistering Cutaneous Porphyria

Measurement of total erythrocyte protoporphyrin and, if the total
amount is elevated, fractionation of protoporphyrin into its metal-­free
and zinc-­chelated forms, is essential for diagnosis of EPP and XLP.
Unfortunately, this is not offered by some major commercial laboratories. Results of zinc protoporphyrin measurements are often recorded
(even in the same report) as both protoporphyrin and free erythrocyte protoporphyrin, with each calculated differently, based on past
practices for screening for lead poisoning (which only increases zinc

protoporphyrin). Thus the obsolete term free protoporphyrin does not
mean metal-­free protoporphyrin, because it was defined as iron-­free
protoporphyrin and dates from before it was known that (except in
protoporphyrias) protoporphyrin in erythrocytes is mostly zinc chelated. This unnecessary confusion makes diagnosis and reliable exclusion of protoporphyrias difficult. Total plasma porphyrins are elevated
in most, but not all, cases of protoporphyria, so a normal level should
not be relied on to exclude protoporphyria when total erythrocyte protoporphyrin is elevated.
Increases in erythrocyte total and zinc-­chelated protoporphyrin
occur in many other conditions, including iron deficiency, lead poisoning, hemolysis, anemia of chronic disease, and other erythrocyte
disorders. Therefore the diagnosis of EPP must be confirmed by showing a predominant increase in free and metal-­free protoporphyrin. In
XLP, both free and zinc protoporphyrin are elevated.

Second-­Line Testing

More extensive testing is well justified when a first-­line test is positive.
A substantial increase in PBG may be caused by AIP, HCP, or VP, and
these can be distinguished by measuring urinary porphyrins (using the
same spot urine sample), fecal porphyrins, and plasma porphyrins. The
various porphyrias that cause blistering skin lesions are differentiated
by measuring porphyrins in urine, feces, erythrocytes, and plasma.
Confirmation by genetic testing is important once the diagnosis is established by biochemical testing.

Testing for Subclinical Porphyria

It is often difficult to diagnose or rule out porphyria in patients who
had suggestive symptoms months or years in the past and in asymptomatic relatives of patients with acute porphyrias because porphyrin
precursors and porphyrins may be normal. More extensive testing and
consultation with a specialist laboratory and physician may be needed.
Before evaluating relatives, the diagnosis of porphyria should be firmly
established in an index case and the laboratory results reviewed to
guide the choice of tests for the family members. Identification of a
disease-­causing pathogenic variant in an index case greatly facilitates
detection of additional gene carriers because biochemical tests in latent
carriers may be normal.

δ-­AMINOLEVULINIC ACID DEHYDRATASE–
DEFICIENT PORPHYRIA

ALA dehydratase–deficient porphyria (ADP) is sometimes termed
Doss porphyria after the investigator who described the first cases.
The term plumboporphyria emphasizes the similarity of this condition to lead poisoning, but incorrectly implies that it is caused by lead
exposure.

Etiology

This porphyria results from a deficiency of ALA dehydratase (ALAD),
which is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Only eight cases have
been confirmed by pathogenic variant analysis. The prevalence of heterozygous ALAD deficiency was estimated to be <1% in Germany and
approximately 2% in Sweden.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

966 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Pathology and Pathogenesis

ALAD catalyzes the condensation of two molecules of ALA to form
the pyrrole PBG (see Fig. 112.1). The enzyme is subject to inhibition
by a number of exogenous and endogenous chemicals. ALAD is the
principal lead-­binding protein in erythrocytes, and lead can displace
the zinc atoms of the enzyme. Inhibition of erythrocyte ALAD activity
is a sensitive index of lead exposure.
Eleven abnormal ALAD alleles, most with point pathogenic variants, have been identified, some expressing partial activity, such that
heme synthesis is partially preserved. The amount of residual enzyme
activity may predict the phenotypic severity of this disease.
ADP is often classified as a hepatic porphyria, although the site of
overproduction of ALA is not established. A patient with severe, early-­
onset disease underwent liver transplantation without significant clinical or biochemical improvement, which might suggest that the excess
intermediates did not originate in the liver. Evidence suggests this
disease may have an erythropoietic component. Excess urinary coproporphyrin III in ADP might originate from metabolism of ALA to
porphyrinogens in a tissue other than the site of ALA overproduction.
Administration of large doses of ALA to normal individuals also leads
to substantial coproporphyrinuria. Increased erythrocyte zinc protoporphyrin, as in all other homozygous porphyrias, may be explained
by accumulation of earlier pathway intermediates in bone marrow
erythroid cells during hemoglobin synthesis, followed by their transformation to protoporphyrin after hemoglobin synthesis is complete.
Neurologic symptoms are attributed to neurotoxic effects of ALA, but
this is unproven.

Clinical Manifestations

In most cases, symptoms resemble other acute porphyrias, including
acute attacks of abdominal pain and peripheral neuropathy. Precipitating factors, such as exposure to harmful drugs, have not been evident
in most cases. Six of the reported cases were adolescent males. A Swedish infant had more severe disease, with neurologic impairment and
failure to thrive. A 63-­year-­old man in Belgium developed an acute
motor polyneuropathy concurrently with a myeloproliferative disorder. A Dutch patient with symptom onset in infancy presented in
adulthood with acute symptoms and progressive asymmetric weakness
of both extremities.

Laboratory Findings

Urinary ALA, coproporphyrin III, and erythrocyte zinc protoporphyrin are substantially increased. Urinary PBG is normal or slightly
increased. Erythrocyte ALAD activity is markedly reduced, and both
parents have approximately half-­normal activity of this enzyme and
normal urinary ALA.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

The other three acute porphyrias are characterized by substantial
increases in both ALA and PBG. In contrast, ALA, but not PBG, is
substantially increased in ADP. A marked deficiency of erythrocyte
ALAD and half-­normal activity in the parents support the diagnosis. Other causes of ALAD deficiency, such as lead poisoning, must
be excluded. Succinylacetone accumulates in hereditary tyrosinemia
type 1 and is structurally similar to ALA, inhibits ALAD, and can cause
increased urinary excretion of ALA and clinical manifestations that
resemble acute porphyria. Idiopathic acquired ALAD deficiency has
been reported. Unlike lead poisoning, the deficient ALAD activity in
ADP is not restored by the in vitro addition of sulfhydryl reagents such
as dithiothreitol. Even if no other cause of ALAD deficiency is found,
it is essential to confirm the diagnosis of ADP by molecular studies.

Treatment

Treatment experience with ADP is limited but is similar to other acute
porphyrias. Glucose seems to have minimal effectiveness but may be
tried for mild symptoms. Hemin therapy was apparently effective
for acute attacks in male adolescents, and weekly infusions prevented
attacks in two of these patients. Hemin was not effective either biochemically or clinically in the Swedish child with severe disease, and it

produced a biochemical response but no clinical improvement in the
Belgian man with a late-­onset form, who had a peripheral neuropathy
but no acute attacks. Hemin is also effective in treating porphyria-­like
symptoms associated with hereditary tyrosinemia and can significantly
reduce urinary ALA and coproporphyrin in lead poisoning. Avoidance of drugs that are harmful in other acute porphyrias is advisable.
Liver transplantation was not effective in the child with severe disease.
In a recent report, weekly blood transfusions and hydroxycarbamide
were used in addition to heme-­arginate to suppress erythroid heme
synthesis.

Prognosis

Recurrent attacks may occur and require repeated treatment with
hemin. The course was unfavorable in the Swedish child with more
severe disease and was uncertain in adults with late-­onset disease associated with myeloproliferative disorders.

Prevention and Genetic Counseling

Heterozygous parents should be aware that subsequent children are at
risk for ADP, as in any autosomal recessive disorder. Prenatal diagnosis
is possible but has not been reported.

ACUTE INTERMITTENT PORPHYRIA

AIP is also termed pyrroloporphyria, Swedish porphyria, and intermittent acute porphyria and is the most common type of acute porphyria
in most countries.

Etiology

AIP results from the deficient activity of the housekeeping form of
porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD). This enzyme is also known as
hydroxymethylbilane (HMB) synthase (the prior term, uroporphyrinogen I synthase, is obsolete). HMB synthase catalyzes the deamination and head-­to-­tail condensation of four PBG molecules to form
the linear tetrapyrrole, HMB (also known as preuroporphyrinogen; see
Fig. 112.1). A unique dipyrromethane cofactor binds the pyrrole intermediates at the catalytic site until six pyrroles (including the dipyrrole
cofactor) are assembled in a linear fashion, after which the tetrapyrrole
HMB is released. The apo-­deaminase generates the dipyrrole cofactor
to form the holodeaminase, and this occurs more readily from HMB
than from PBG. Indeed, high concentrations of PBG may inhibit formation of the holodeaminase. The product HMB can cyclize nonenzymatically to form nonphysiologic uroporphyrinogen I, but in the
presence of the next enzyme in the pathway is more rapidly cyclized to
form uroporphyrinogen III.
Erythroid and housekeeping forms of the enzyme are encoded by a
single gene. The two isoenzymes are both monomeric proteins, differ
only slightly in molecular weight (approximately 40 and 42 kDa), and
result from alternative splicing of two distinct messenger RNA (mRNA)
transcripts that arise from two different promoters. The housekeeping
promoter functions in all cell types, including erythroid cells.
The pattern of inheritance of AIP is autosomal dominant, with
very rare homozygous cases that present in childhood. More than 400
HMBS pathogenic variants, including missense, nonsense, and splicing
pathogenic variants, and insertions and deletions have been identified
in AIP and in many population groups. Most pathogenic variants are
found in only one or a few families. Because of founder effects, some
are more common in certain geographic areas, such as northern Sweden (W198X), Holland (R116W), Argentina (G116R), Nova Scotia
(R173W), and Switzerland (W283X). De novo pathogenic variants
may be found in approximately 3% of cases. The nature of the HMBS
pathogenic variant does not account for the severity of the clinical presentation, which varies greatly within families. Chester porphyria was
initially described as a variant form of acute porphyria in a large English family but was found to be caused by an HMBS pathogenic variant.
Most pathogenic variants lead to approximately half-­normal activity
of the housekeeping and erythroid isozymes and half-­normal amounts
of their respective enzyme proteins in all tissues of heterozygotes. In
approximately 5% of unrelated AIP patients, the housekeeping isozyme
is deficient, but the erythroid-­specific isozyme is normal. Pathogenic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 112 u The Porphyrias 967
variants causing this are usually found within exon 1 or its 5′ splice
donor site or initiation of translation codon.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

Induction of the rate-­limiting hepatic enzyme ALAS1 is thought to
underlie acute exacerbations of this and the other acute porphyrias.
AIP remains latent (or asymptomatic) in the great majority of those
who are heterozygous carriers of HMBS pathogenic variants, and this is
almost always the case before puberty. In those with no history of acute
symptoms, porphyrin precursor excretion is usually normal, suggesting that half-­normal hepatic HMBS activity is sufficient unless hepatic
ALAS1 activity is increased. Patients can also be asymptomatic with
elevated levels of porphyrin precursors and are classified as asymptomatic high excretors. These patients may have a remote history of
symptoms. Many factors that lead to clinical expression of AIP, including certain drugs and steroid hormones, have the capacity to induce
hepatic ALAS1 and CYPs. When hepatic heme synthesis is increased,
half-­normal HMBS activity may become limiting, and ALA, PBG, and
other heme pathway intermediates may accumulate. In addition, heme
synthesis becomes impaired, and heme-­mediated repression of hepatic
ALAS1 is less effective.
It is not proved, however, that hepatic HMBS remains constant at
approximately 50% of normal activity during exacerbations and remission of AIP, as in erythrocytes. An early report suggested that the
enzyme activity is considerably less than half-­normal in the liver during an acute attack. Hepatic HMBS activity might be reduced further
once AIP becomes activated if, as suggested, excess PBG interferes
with assembly of the dipyrromethane cofactor for this enzyme. It also
seems likely that currently unknown genetic factors play a contributing
role in, for example, patients who continue to have attacks even when
known precipitants are avoided.
AIP is almost always latent before puberty and becomes active
mostly in adult females, which suggests that endocrine factors, and
especially adult levels of female steroid hormones, may be important
for clinical expression. Premenstrual attacks are probably the result of
endogenous progesterone. Acute porphyrias are sometimes exacerbated by exogenous steroids, including oral contraceptive preparations
containing progestins. Surprisingly, pregnancy is usually well tolerated,
suggesting that beneficial metabolic changes may ameliorate the effects
of high levels of progesterone.
Drugs that are unsafe in acute porphyrias (Table 112.3) include
those with the capacity to induce hepatic ALAS1, which is closely associated with induction of CYPs. Some chemicals (e.g., griseofulvin) can
increase heme turnover by promoting the destruction of specific CYPs
to form an inhibitor (e.g., N-­methyl protoporphyrin) of ferrochelatase
(FECH, the final enzyme in the pathway). Sulfonamide antibiotics are
harmful but apparently not inducers of hepatic heme synthesis. Ethanol and other alcohols are inducers of ALAS1 and some CYPs.
Nutritional factors, in particular reduced intake of calories and
carbohydrates, as may occur with illness or attempts to lose weight,
can increase porphyrin precursor excretion and induce attacks of
porphyria. Increased carbohydrate intake may ameliorate attacks.
Hepatic ALAS1 is modulated by the peroxisome proliferator-­activated
receptor-­γ coactivator-­1α, which is an important link between nutritional status and exacerbations of acute porphyria.
Other factors have been implicated. Chemicals in cigarette smoke,
such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, can induce hepatic CYPs
and heme synthesis. A survey of AIP patients found an association
between smoking and repeated porphyric attacks. Attacks may result
from metabolic stress and impaired nutrition associated with major
illness, infection, or surgery. Clinical observations suggest an additive
effect of multiple predisposing factors, including drugs, endogenous
hormones, nutritional factors, and smoking.

Neurologic Mechanisms

The mechanism of neural damage in acute porphyrias is poorly understood. The most favored hypothesis at present is that one or more heme
precursors, or perhaps a derivative, are neurotoxic. Increased ALA
in AIP, HCP, VP, ADP, plumbism, and hereditary tyrosinemia type 1,

which have similar neurologic manifestations, suggests that this substance or a derivative may be neuropathic. Porphyrins derived from
ALA after its uptake into cells may have toxic potential. ALA can also
interact with γ-­
aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors. Severe AIP
greatly improves after allogeneic liver transplantation. This experience
and the demonstration that recipients of AIP livers develop porphyria
support the hypothesis that heme precursors from the liver cause the
neurologic manifestations.

Epidemiology

AIP occurs in all ethnic groups and is the most common acute porphyria, with an estimated prevalence in most countries of 5 in 100,000.
In Sweden, prevalence was estimated to be 7.7 in 100,000, including latent cases with normal porphyrin precursors. A much higher
prevalence of 60-­100 in 100,000 in northern Sweden is the result of
a founder effect. The combined prevalence of AIP and VP in Finland
is approximately 3.4 in 100,000. Population screening by erythrocyte
HMBS activity or DNA analysis revealed a prevalence of 200 heterozygotes per 100,000 people in Finland and 1 in approximately 1,675 (60
in 100,000) in France. Studies using exomic/genomic databases show
that the estimated frequency of pathogenic variants in the HMBS gene
is 0.00056 (56 in 100,000), suggesting that the penetrance of this disorder may be as low as 1% and that carriers of HMBS pathogenic variants
that can cause AIP are much more common than previously believed.
Higher penetrance in some families with AIP suggests a strong role of
environmental factors and genetic modifiers.

Clinical Manifestations

Neurovisceral manifestations of acute porphyrias may appear any time
after puberty, but rarely before it (Table 112.4). Porphyria attacks are
exceedingly rare before the onset of puberty. Affected children are
more often males as opposed to affected adolescents and adults, who
are predominantly females. Reported symptomatic childhood cases
often lacked adequate biochemical and molecular confirmation. The
prepubertal attacks in males may be explained in part by coexisting
medical conditions with the potential to upregulate ALAS1. Abdominal pain was the most common presenting symptom in such cases,
but seizures, often preceding the diagnosis, were also common. Other
manifestations reported in children include tachycardia, peripheral
neuropathy, myalgias, hypertension, irritability, lethargy, and behavioral abnormalities. A population-­based study in Sweden indicated
that symptoms suggestive of porphyria may occur in heterozygotes
during childhood, even, in contrast to adults, when urinary porphyria
precursors are not elevated. This study did not compare the frequency
of such nonspecific symptoms in a control group of children. Very rare
cases of homozygous AIP present differently, with severe neurologic
manifestations early in childhood.
Acute attacks in adults are characterized by a constellation of nonspecific symptoms, which may become severe and life threatening.
Abdominal pain occurs in 85–95% of AIP patients and is usually
severe, steady, and poorly localized, but is sometimes cramping, and
accompanied by signs of ileus, including abdominal distention and
decreased bowel sounds. Nausea, vomiting, and constipation are common, but increased bowel sounds and diarrhea may occur. Bladder
dysfunction may cause hesitancy and dysuria. Tachycardia, the most
common physical sign, occurs in up to 80% of attacks. This is often
accompanied by hypertension, restlessness, coarse or fine tremors,
and excess sweating, which are attributed to sympathetic overactivity
and increased catecholamines. Other common manifestations include
mental symptoms; pain in the extremities, head, neck, or chest; muscle
weakness; and sensory loss. Because all these manifestations are neurologic rather than inflammatory, there is little or no abdominal tenderness, fever, or leukocytosis.
Porphyric neuropathy is primarily motor and appears to result
from axonal degeneration rather than demyelinization. Sensory
involvement is indicated by neuropathic pain in the extremities,
which may be described as muscle or bone pain, and by numbness,
paresthesias, and dysesthesias. Paresis may occur early in an attack but
is more often a late manifestation in an attack that is not recognized

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

968 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 112.3  Drugs Regarded as Unsafe and Safe in
Acute Porphyrias
UNSAFE

SAFE

Barbiturates (all)
Sulfonamide antibiotics*
Meprobamate* (also mebutamate,*
tybutamate*)
Carisoprodol*
Glutethimide*
Methyprylon
Ethchlorvynol*
Mephenytoin
Phenytoin*
Succinimides
Carbamazepine*
Clonazepam‡
Primidone*
Valproic acid*
Pyrazolones (aminopyrine, antipyrine)
Griseofulvin*
Ergots
Metoclopramide* ‡
Rifampin*
Pyrazinamide* ‡
Diclofenac* ‡
Fluconazole*
Oral contraceptives
Progesterone and synthetic progestins*
Danazol*
Alcohol
ACEIs (especially enalapril) ‡
Spironolactone
CCBs (especially nifedipine) ‡
Ketoconazole
Ketamine*

Narcotic analgesics
Aspirin
Acetaminophen
(paracetamol)
Phenothiazines
Penicillin and derivatives
Streptomycin
Glucocorticoids
Bromides
Insulin
Atropine
Cimetidine
Ranitidine†
Acetazolamide
Allopurinol
Amiloride
Bethanidine
Bumetanide
Coumarins
Fluoxetine
Gabapentin
Gentamicin
Guanethidine
Ofloxacin
Propranolol
Succinylcholine
Tetracycline

*Porphyria has been listed as a contraindication, warning, precaution, or adverse
effect in U.S. labeling for these drugs. Estrogens are also listed as harmful in
porphyria but have been implicated as harmful in acute porphyrias, mostly based
only on experience with estrogen-­progestin combinations. Although estrogens can
exacerbate porphyria cutanea tarda, there is little evidence they are harmful in the
acute porphyrias.
†Porphyria has been listed as a precaution in U.S. labeling for this drug. However, this
drug is regarded as safe by other sources.
‡These drugs have been classified as probably safe by some sources, but this is controversial, and they should be avoided.
This partial listing does not include all available information about drug safety in acute
porphyrias. Other sources should be consulted for drugs not listed here.
ACEIs, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors; CCBs, calcium channel blockers.

and adequately treated. Rarely, severe neuropathy develops when
there is little or no abdominal pain. Motor weakness most commonly
begins in the proximal muscles of the upper extremities and then progresses to the lower extremities and the periphery. It is usually symmetric, but occasionally asymmetric or focal. Initially, tendon reflexes
may be little affected or hyperactive and become decreased or absent.
Cranial nerves, most often X and VII, may be affected, and blindness from involvement of the optic nerves or occipital lobes has been
reported. More common central nervous system (CNS) manifestations include seizures, anxiety, insomnia, depression, disorientation,
hallucinations, and paranoia. Seizures may result from hyponatremia,
porphyria itself, or an unrelated cause. Chronic depression and other
mental symptoms occur in some patients, but attribution to porphyria
is often difficult.
Hyponatremia is common during acute attacks. Inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion is often the most likely

mechanism, but salt depletion from excess renal sodium loss, gastrointestinal (GI) loss, and poor intake have been suggested as causes
of hyponatremia in some patients. Unexplained reductions in total
blood and red blood cell volumes are sometimes found, and increased
ADH secretion might then be an appropriate physiologic response.
Other electrolyte abnormalities may include hypomagnesemia and
hypercalcemia.
The attack usually resolves within several days unless treatment is
delayed. Abdominal pain may resolve within a few hours and paresis within a few days. Even severe motor neuropathy can improve
over months or several years but may leave some residual weakness.
Progression of neuropathy to respiratory paralysis and death seldom
occurs with appropriate treatment and removal of harmful drugs. Sudden death may result from cardiac arrhythmia.

Laboratory Findings

Levels of ALA and PBG are substantially increased during acute
attacks. These levels may decrease after an attack but usually remain
increased unless the disease becomes asymptomatic for a prolonged
period.
Porphyrins are also markedly increased, which accounts for reddish urine in AIP. These are predominantly uroporphyrins, which can
form nonenzymatically from PBG. The increased urinary porphyrins
in AIP are predominantly isomer III; however, their formation is
likely to be largely enzymatic, which might occur if excess ALA produced in the liver enters cells in other tissues and is then converted to
porphyrins by the heme biosynthetic pathway. Porphobilin, a degradation product of PBG, and dipyrrolomethanes appear to account for
brownish urinary discoloration. Total fecal porphyrins and plasma
porphyrins are normal or slightly increased in AIP. Erythrocyte protoporphyrin may be somewhat increased in patients with manifest
AIP.
Erythrocyte HMBS activity is approximately half-­normal in most
patients with AIP. The normal range is wide and overlaps with the
range for AIP heterozygotes. Some HMBS pathogenic variants cause
the enzyme to be deficient only in nonerythroid tissues. HMBS activity
is also highly dependent on erythrocyte age, and an increase in erythropoiesis from concurrent illness in an AIP patient may raise the activity into the normal range. Thus measurement of erythrocyte HMBS
activity alone is insufficient in testing for AIP.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

An increased urinary PBG level establishes that a patient has one of
the three most common acute porphyrias (see Table 112.2). Measuring PBG in serum is preferred when there is coexistent severe
renal disease but is less sensitive when renal function is normal.
Measurement of urinary ALA is less sensitive than PBG and also
less specific, but will detect ADP, the fourth type of acute porphyria. Measurement of urinary porphyrins is also useful, because
they may remain elevated after ALA and PBG return to normal
and are also elevated in ADP. Decreased erythrocyte PBGD activity helps confirm the diagnosis of AIP, but is not found in all AIP
patients.
Knowledge of the HMBS pathogenic variant in a family enables reliable identification of other pathogenic variant carriers. Prenatal diagnosis can be performed by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling
(CVS) in a fetus with a known HMBS pathogenic variant in the family.
Prenatal diagnosis is typically not performed because of the low penetrance of the disorder and favorable prognosis with treatment.

Complications

AIP and other acute porphyrias are typically associated with mild
abnormalities in liver function tests; some patients develop chronic
liver disease. The risk of hepatocellular carcinoma is also increased,
perhaps 60-­to 70-­fold after age 50, even in asymptomatic individuals. Few patients who developed this neoplasm had increases in serum
α-­fetoprotein. Patients with acute porphyrias, especially >50 years old,
should be screened by ultrasound or an alternative imaging method at
6-­month intervals.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 112 u The Porphyrias 969
Table 112.4  Common Presenting Symptoms and Signs of Acute Porphyria
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS

FREQUENCY (%)

GASTROINTESTINAL
Abdominal pain

COMMENT

85–95

Usually unremitting (for hours or longer) and poorly localized but can be cramping.

Vomiting

43–88

Neurologic in origin and rarely accompanied by peritoneal signs, fever, or leukocytosis.

Constipation

48–84

Nausea and vomiting often accompany abdominal pain. May be accompanied by
bladder paresis.

Diarrhea

5–12

NEUROLOGIC
Pain in extremities, back

50–70

Pain may begin in the chest or back and move to the abdomen. Extremity pain from
the chest, neck, or head indicates involvement of sensory nerves; objective sensory
loss reported in 10–40% of cases.

Paresis

42–68

May occur early or late during a severe attack. Muscle weakness usually begins proximally
rather than distally and more often in the upper than lower extremities.

Respiratory paralysis

9–20

Preceded by progressive peripheral motor neuropathy and paresis.

Mental symptoms

40–58

May range from minor behavioral changes to agitation, confusion, hallucinations, and
depression.

Convulsions

10–20

A central neurologic manifestation of porphyria or caused by hyponatremia, which
often results from syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion or
sodium depletion.

CARDIOVASCULAR
Tachycardia

64–85

May warrant treatment to control rate, if symptomatic.

Systemic arterial hypertension

36–55

May require treatment during acute attacks, and sometimes becomes chronic.

From Anderson KE, Bloomer JR, Bonkovsky HL, et al. Desnick recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of the acute porphyrias, Ann Intern Med. 2005;142(6):439–450.

The risk of chronic hypertension and impaired renal function is
increased in these patients, most often with evidence of interstitial
nephritis. A nephrotoxic effect of ALA may contribute. This may progress to severe renal failure and require renal transplantation.
Patients with recurrent attacks may develop chronic neuropathic
pain, although this has not been well characterized. Referral to a neurologist is recommended for any patient with ongoing or residual neurologic symptoms. In addition, depression and anxiety are common in
these patients.

Treatment
Hemin

Intravenous (IV) hemin is the treatment of choice for most acute
attacks of porphyria. There is a favorable biochemical and clinical response to early treatment with hemin, but less rapid clinical
improvement if treatment is delayed. It is no longer recommended
that therapy with hemin for a severe attack be started only after
an unsuccessful trial of IV glucose for several days. Mild attacks
without severe manifestations, such as paresis, seizures, hyponatremia, or pain requiring opioids, may be treated with IV glucose.
After IV administration, hemin binds to hemopexin and albumin in
plasma and is taken up primarily in hepatocytes, where it augments
the regulatory heme pool in hepatocytes, represses the synthesis
of hepatic ALAS1, and dramatically reduces porphyrin precursor
overproduction.
Hemin* is available for IV administration in the United States as
lyophilized hematin (Panhematin, Recordati). Degradation products
begin to form as soon as the lyophilized product is reconstituted with
sterile water, and these can cause infusion site phlebitis and a transient
anticoagulant effect. Repeated treatment can lead to loss of venous
access and iron overload. Reconstitution with 30% human albumin can
enhance stability and prevent these adverse effects and is recommended
* Hemin is the generic name for all heme preparations used for IV administration. Hemin is
also a chemical term that refers to the oxidized (ferric) form of heme (iron protoporphyrin
IX) and is usually isolated as hemin chloride. In alkaline solution, the chloride is replaced
by the hydroxyl ion, forming hydroxyheme, or hematin.

especially if a peripheral vein is used for the infusion. Uncommon side
effects of hemin include fever, aching, malaise, hemolysis, anaphylaxis,
and circulatory collapse. Heme arginate, a more stable hemin preparation, is available in Europe and South Africa.
Hemin treatment should be instituted only after a diagnosis of
acute porphyria has been initially confirmed by a marked increase
in urinary PBG. When prior documentation of the diagnosis is
available for review, it is not essential to confirm an increase in PBG
with every recurrent attack if other causes of the symptoms are
excluded clinically. The standard regimen of hemin for treatment
of acute porphyric attacks is 3-­4 mg/kg/day for 4 days. Lower doses
have less effect on porphyrin precursor excretion and probably less
clinical benefit.
Givosiran, an ALAS1-­directed interfering RNA therapeutic, is effective for preventing frequent attacks in adults with acute hepatic porphyrias. Clinical trials have demonstrated rapid lowering of ALA and
PBG, resulting in a reduction in attacks, chronic symptoms, and hemin
utilization.

General and Supportive Measures

Drugs that may exacerbate porphyrias (see Table 112.3) should be discontinued whenever possible, and other precipitating factors identified.
Hospitalization is warranted, except for mild attacks; for treatment of
severe pain, nausea, and vomiting; for administration of hemin and
fluids; and for monitoring vital capacity, nutritional status, neurologic
function, and electrolytes. Pain usually requires an opioid; there is low
risk for addiction after recovery from the acute attack. Ondansetron
or promethazine is needed for nausea and vomiting and short-­acting
benzodiazepines for anxiety and restlessness. β-­Adrenergic blocking agents may be useful to control tachycardia and hypertension but
may be hazardous in patients with hypovolemia and incipient cardiac
failure.

Carbohydrate Loading

The effects of carbohydrates on repressing hepatic ALAS1 and reducing porphyrin precursor excretion are weak compared with those
of hemin. Therefore carbohydrate loading is recommended only for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

970 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
mild attacks (e.g., without severe nausea or vomiting, hyponatremia,
seizures, paresis, or pain requiring opioids). Glucose polymer solutions by mouth are sometimes tolerated. At least 300 g of IV glucose,
usually given as a 10% solution, has been recommended for adults
hospitalized with attacks of porphyria. Amounts up to 500 g daily
may be more effective, but large volumes may favor the development
of hyponatremia.

Other Therapies

Liver transplantation is effective in patients with severe AIP who are
refractory to pharmacologic therapy. Patients can generally expect a
complete biochemical and symptomatic resolution after transplantation. However, liver transplantation is a high-­risk procedure and
should be considered only as a last resort.

Seizures and Other Complications

Patients who experience seizures during an acute attack, especially
if caused by hyponatremia or other electrolyte imbalances, may not
require prolonged treatment with anticonvulsant drugs, most of which
have at least some potential for exacerbating acute porphyrias. Gabapentin, pregabalin, levetiracetam, and vigabatrin are considered safe
or probably safe, and clonazepam is probably less harmful than phenytoin, barbiturates, or valproic acid.
Control of hypertension is important and may help prevent
chronic renal impairment, which can progress and require renal
transplantation.

Safe and Unsafe Drugs

Patients often do well with avoidance of harmful drugs. Listings are
available from the European Porphyria Network (www.porphyria-­
europe.com) and American Porphyria Foundation (https://porphyr
iafoundation.org/drugdatabase/), but some listings are controversial.
Information regarding safety is lacking for many drugs, especially for
those recently introduced.
Exogenous progestins can induce attacks of porphyria. Estrogens are
seldom reported to be harmful when given alone. Synthetic steroids
with an ethynyl substituent can cause a mechanism-­based destruction
of hepatic CYPs and should probably be avoided in patients with acute
porphyria. Danazol is especially contraindicated.

Other Situations

Major surgery can be carried out safely in patients with acute porphyria, especially if barbiturates are avoided. Halothane has been recommended as an inhalation agent and propofol and midazolam as IV
induction agents.
Pregnancy is usually well tolerated, which is surprising, because
levels of progesterone, a potent inducer of hepatic ALAS1, are considerably increased during pregnancy. Some females do experience continuing attacks during pregnancy. This has sometimes been attributed
to reduced caloric intake or metoclopramide, a drug sometimes used to
treat hyperemesis gravidarum and considered by some to be harmful
in acute porphyrias.
Diabetes mellitus and other endocrine conditions are not known
to precipitate attacks of porphyria. In fact, the onset of diabetes
mellitus and resulting high circulating glucose levels may decrease
the frequency of attacks and lower porphyrin precursor levels in
AIP.

Prognosis

In Finland, 74% of patients with AIP or VP reported that they led
normal lives, and <30% had recurrent attacks during several years of
follow-­up. In those presenting with acute symptoms, recurrent attacks
were most likely within the next 1-­3 years. Moreover, only 6% of gene
carriers who had never had attacks developed symptoms. The positive
outlook may result from earlier detection, better treatment of acute
attacks, and replacement of harmful drugs such as barbiturates and
sulfonamides with safer drugs. However, some patients continue to
have recurrent attacks, chronic pain, and other symptoms, even after
avoiding known exacerbating factors.

Prevention

For prevention of attacks, it is important to identify multiple inciting
factors and remove as many as possible. Drugs for concurrent medical
conditions should be reviewed. Because dietary factors are often unapparent, consultation with a dietitian may be useful. A well-­balanced
diet that is somewhat high in carbohydrate (60–70% of total calories)
and sufficient to maintain weight is recommended. There is little evidence that additional dietary carbohydrate helps further in preventing attacks, and it may lead to weight gain. Patients who wish to lose
excess weight should do so gradually and when they are clinically
stable. Rapid weight loss after bariatric surgery may exacerbate acute
porphyrias. Iron deficiency, which can be detected by a low serum ferritin level, should be corrected.
Gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH) analogs, which reversibly suppress ovulation, can be dramatically effective for preventing
frequently recurring luteal-­phase attacks, but baseline and continuing
gynecologic evaluation and bone mineral density measurements are
important; transdermal estrogen or a bisphosphonate may be added
to prevent bone loss. Hemin administered once or twice weekly can
prevent frequent attacks of porphyria in some patients. Alternatively,
single-­dose hemin can be administered “on demand” at an outpatient
infusion center to abort an attack and prevent hospitalization, if a
patient can recognize early “prodromal” symptoms.
Givosiran (Givlaari, Alnylam) an interfering RNA therapeutic that
is administered subcutaneously every month, has been approved by
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines
Agency (EMA) for prevention of acute attacks of an AHP.

Genetic Counseling

A pathogenic variant identified in the index case can be sought in
offspring at any age. Counseling should emphasize that the great
majority of those who inherit an HMBS pathogenic variant never
develop symptoms, and the prognosis of those who do is favorable.
Therefore a normal, healthy life is expected, especially with avoidance of harmful drugs and other factors and prompt recognition and
treatment of symptoms should they occur. Given this favorable outlook, even during pregnancy, having children is not precluded for
those who have inherited a pathogenic variant, and prenatal diagnosis of acute porphyrias is less important than it is for many other
inherited diseases.

CONGENITAL ERYTHROPOIETIC PORPHYRIA

Also termed Günther disease, this rare disease usually presents with
photosensitivity shortly after birth or in utero as nonimmune hydrops.

Etiology

CEP is an autosomal recessive disease caused by a marked deficiency of
uroporphyrinogen III synthase (UROS). Many UROS pathogenic variants have been identified among CEP families. Later-­onset disease in
adults is often less severe and likely to be associated with myeloproliferative disorders and expansion of a clone of erythroblasts that carry a
UROS pathogenic variant.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

UROS, which is extremely deficient in CEP, catalyzes inversion of pyrrole ring D of HMB and rapid cyclization of the linear tetrapyrrole to
form uroporphyrinogen III. This enzyme is also termed uroporphyrinogen III cosynthase. The human enzyme is a monomer. The gene for
the enzyme is found on chromosome 10q25.3→q26.3 and contains 10
exons. Erythroid and housekeeping transcripts are generated by alternative promoters but encode the same enzyme.
In CEP, HMB accumulates in erythroid cells during hemoglobin
synthesis and cyclizes nonenzymatically to form uroporphyrinogen
I, which is auto-­oxidized to uroporphyrin I. Some of the uroporphyrinogen I that accumulates is metabolized to coproporphyrinogen I,
which accumulates because it is not a substrate for coproporphyrinogen oxidase. Thus both uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I accumulate in the bone marrow and are then found in circulating erythrocytes,
plasma, urine, and feces.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 112 u The Porphyrias 971
A variety of UROS pathogenic variants have been identified in CEP,
including missense and nonsense pathogenic variants, large and small
deletions and insertions, splicing defects, and intronic branch-­point
pathogenic variants. At least four pathogenic variants have been identified in the erythroid-­specific promoter. Many patients inherited a
different pathogenic variant from each parent, and most pathogenic
variants have been detected in only one or a few families. An exception is a common pathogenic variant, C73R, which is at a pathogenic
variant hot spot and was found in approximately 33% of alleles. One
child with CEP had a GATA1 pathogenic variant, with no UROS
pathogenic variant. The CEP phenotype may be modulated by gain-­
of-­function ALAS2 pathogenic variants, which were first identified as
causing XLP.
Genotype-­phenotype correlations have been based on the in vitro
expression of various CEP pathogenic variants and the severity of associated phenotypic manifestations. The C73R allele, which is associated
with a severe phenotype in homozygotes or in patients heteroallelic for
C73R and another pathogenic variant expressing little residual activity, resulted in <1% of normal enzyme activity. Patients with the C73R
allele and heteroallelic for other pathogenic variants expressing more
residual activity have milder disease.
Hemolysis is a common feature of CEP. Excess porphyrins in circulating erythrocytes cause cell damage, perhaps by a phototoxic mechanism, leading to both intravascular hemolysis and increased splenic
clearance of erythrocytes. Also important is ineffective erythropoiesis,
with intramedullary destruction of porphyrin-­laden erythroid cells
and breakdown of heme. Expansion of the bone marrow as a result
of erythroid hyperplasia may contribute, along with vitamin D deficiency, to bone loss. Nutrient deficiencies sometimes cause erythroid
hypoplasia. Despite the marked deficiency of UROS, heme production
in the bone marrow is increased because of hemolysis and a compensatory increase in hemoglobin production. This occurs, however, at the
expense of marked accumulation of HMB, which is converted to porphyrinogens and porphyrins.

Clinical Manifestations

In severe cases, CEP can cause fetal loss or may be recognized in utero
as causing intrauterine hemolytic anemia and nonimmune hydrops
fetalis. CEP may be associated with neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, and
phototherapy may unintentionally induce severe cutaneous photosensitivity and scarring.
The most characteristic presentation is reddish urine or pink
staining of diapers by urine or meconium shortly after birth (Fig.
112.2). With sun exposure, severe blistering lesions appear on
exposed areas of skin on the face and hands and have been termed
hydroa estivale because they are more severe with greater sunlight
exposure during summer (Fig. 112.3). Vesicles and bullae, as well as
friability, hypertrichosis, scarring, thickening, and areas of hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation, are very similar to those seen in
PCT but usually much more severe. Infection and scarring sometimes cause loss of facial features and fingers and damage to the cornea, ears, and nails. Porphyrins are deposited in dentin and bone in
utero. Reddish-­brown teeth in normal light, an appearance termed
erythrodontia, display reddish fluorescence under long-­wave UV
light (Fig. 112.4). Unaffected children born to a mother with CEP
may have erythrodontia. Hemolysis and splenomegaly are common
in CEP. Bone marrow compensation may be adequate, especially in
milder cases. Patients with severe phenotypes, however, are often
transfusion dependent. Splenomegaly may contribute to the anemia
and cause leukopenia and thrombocytopenia, which may be complicated by significant bleeding. Neuropathic symptoms are absent, and
there is no sensitivity to drugs, hormones, or carbohydrate restriction. The liver may be damaged by iron overload, viral hepatitis, or
other causes.
Milder cases of CEP with onset of symptoms in adult life and without erythrodontia may be misdiagnosed initially as PCT. Late-­onset
cases are likely to be associated with myeloproliferative disorders and
expansion of a clone of erythroid cells carrying a UROS pathogenic
variant.

Fig. 112.2 Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP). The diaper of

a baby with CEP demonstrates the red color of urine. (From Paller AS,
Macini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2006: p. 517.)

Fig. 112.3 Congenital erythropoietic porphyria. Vesicles, bullae,
and crusts on sun-­exposed areas. (From Paller AS, Macini AJ. Hurwitz
Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006:
p. 517.)

Fig. 112.4 Congenital erythropoietic porphyria. Brownish teeth that
fluoresce under Wood’s lamp examination. (From Paller AS, Macini AJ.
Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders;
2006: p. 517.)

Laboratory Findings

Urinary porphyrin excretion and circulating porphyrin levels in CEP
are much higher than in almost all other porphyrias. Urinary porphyrin excretion can be as high as 50-­100 mg daily and consists mostly of
uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I. ALA and PBG are normal. Fecal
porphyrins are greatly increased, with a predominance of coproporphyrin I.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

972 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Marked increases in erythrocyte porphyrins in CEP also consist
mostly of uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I. These porphyrins are
also increased in bone marrow, spleen, plasma, and to a lesser extent,
liver. The porphyrin pattern in erythrocytes is influenced by rates of
erythropoiesis and erythroid maturation. A predominance of protoporphyrin has been noted in some CEP patients, and in one such
patient, uroporphyrin and coproporphyrin increased when erythropoiesis was stimulated by blood removal.

Glycine 1 Succinyl CoA
ALAS
d-Aminolevulinic acid

Uroporphyrinogen

Treatment

Advising patients to avoid sunlight exposure is essential, because sunlight exposure does not cause immediate severe pain in CEP, in contrast to the protoporphyrias. Minimizing skin trauma and prompt
treatment of any cutaneous infections are also essential. Sunscreen
lotions and beta-­carotene are of little benefit. Transfusions to achieve
a level of hemoglobin sufficient to significantly suppress erythropoiesis
can be quite effective in reducing porphyrin levels and photosensitivity. Concurrent deferoxamine to reduce iron overload and hydroxyurea to suppress erythropoiesis further may provide additional benefit.
Splenectomy reduces hemolysis and transfusion requirements in some
patients. Iron restriction by phlebotomy or iron chelators may improve
photosensitivity in CEP patients by decreasing ALAS2 activity and
porphyrin production.
The most effective treatment is marrow stem cell transplantation in
early childhood, which has greatly reduced porphyrin levels and photosensitivity and increased long-­term survival.

Prognosis

The outlook is favorable in milder cases and in patients with more
severe disease, especially after successful bone marrow or stem cell
transplantation. Otherwise, prognosis relates to adherence to sunlight
avoidance.

Prevention and Genetic Counseling

Genetic counseling is important for affected families because CEP can
be recognized before birth, and a severe phenotype can often be predicted by identifying the nature of the UROS pathogenic variants.

PORPHYRIA CUTANEA TARDA

Porphyria cutanea tarda is the most common and readily treated
human porphyria (see Table 112.2). It occurs in mid or late adult
life and is rare in children. Previous terms include symptomatic porphyria, PCT symptomatica, and idiosyncratic porphyria. The underlying cause is a liver-­specific acquired deficiency of uroporphyrinogen
decarboxylase (UROD) with contributions by genetic and acquired

Uroporphyrin

Specific inhibitor

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

The diagnosis of CEP should be documented by full characterization
of porphyrin patterns and identification of the underlying pathogenic
variants. In later-­onset cases, an underlying myeloproliferative disorder and a UROS somatic pathogenic variant should be suspected and
studied in detail.
The clinical picture in hepatoerythropoietic porphyria (HEP) may
be similar, but the porphyrin patterns in urine and feces in HEP resemble PCT. A predominant increase in erythrocyte protoporphyrin is not
expected in CEP, except in mild cases, but is characteristic of HEP and
rare homozygous cases of AIP, HCP, and VP. EPP and XLP are also distinguished by normal urinary porphyrins and by increases in erythrocyte metal-­free protoporphyrin, whereas the increased protoporphyrin
in other conditions is mostly complexed with zinc.
CEP should be suspected as a cause of nonimmune hydrops or
hemolytic anemia in utero. With recognition of the disease at this
stage, intrauterine transfusion can be considered, and phototherapy
for hyperbilirubinemia after birth, which can cause severe blistering
and scarring, can be avoided. Prenatal diagnosis is feasible by finding
red-­brown discoloration and increased porphyrins in amniotic fluid
and measuring porphyrins in fetal erythrocytes and plasma. UROS
pathogenic variants can be identified in chorionic villi or cultured
amniotic cells.

CYP1A2
Fe

UROD
Coproporphyrinogen

Fe21
Heme

Fig. 112.5 Formation of a specific inhibitor of uroporphyrino-

gen decarboxylase in the liver in porphyria cutanea tarda. ALAS, δ-­
Aminolevulinic acid synthase; CYP1A2, cytochrome P450 1A2; UROD,
uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase.

susceptibility factors, including heterozygous UROD pathogenic variants in familial PCT. HEP, the homozygous form of familial PCT,
usually has a more severe presentation in childhood, resembling CEP
clinically.

Etiology

PCT is caused by a reduction of hepatic UROD activity to ≤20% of
normal activity. An inhibitor of hepatic UROD has been characterized as a uroporphomethene, which is derived from partial oxidation
of the enzyme substrate uroporphyrinogen. CYPs, such as CYP1A2,
as well as iron, are involved in its formation (Fig. 112.5). Although
enzyme activity is inhibited, the amount of hepatic enzyme protein
measured immunochemically remains at its genetically determined
level.
UROD catalyzes the decarboxylation of the four acetic acid side
chains of uroporphyrinogen (an octacarboxyl porphyrinogen) to form
coproporphyrinogen (a tetracarboxyl porphyrinogen). The enzyme
reaction occurs in a sequential, clockwise fashion, with the intermediate formation of hepta-­, hexa-­, and pentacarboxyl porphyrinogens.
Uroporphyrinogen III, as compared with other uroporphyrinogen isomers, is the preferred substrate. Human UROD is a dimer with the two
active site clefts juxtaposed. The UROD gene contains 10 exons, with
only one promoter. Therefore the gene is transcribed as a single mRNA
in all tissues.
The majority of PCT patients (80%) have no UROD pathogenic variants and have sporadic (type 1) disease. Some are heterozygous for
UROD pathogenic variants and have familial (type 2) PCT. Described
pathogenic variants include missense, nonsense, and splice-­site pathogenic variants; several small and large deletions; and small insertions,
with only a few identified in more than one family. A few of these
pathogenic variants may be located near the active site cleft, but most
appear to involve regions with important structural roles. Being heterozygous for a UROD pathogenic variant is insufficient to cause PCT.
Individuals with type 2 PCT are born with 50% of normal UROD activity, and later in life other susceptibility factors (as in type 1) lead to
production of the uroporphomethene inhibitor and further reduction
on hepatic UROD activity to <20% of normal. Because penetrance of
the genetic trait is low, many patients with familial PCT have no family
history of the disease.
Induction of hepatic ALAS1 is not a prominent feature in PCT,
although alcohol may increase this enzyme slightly. Iron and estrogens
are not potent inducers of ALAS1, and drugs that are potent inducers
of ALAS1 and CYPs are much less frequently implicated in PCT than
in acute porphyrias.
Blistering skin lesions result from porphyrins that circulate from the
liver. Sunlight exposure leads to generation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) in the skin, complement activation, and lysosomal damage.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 112 u The Porphyrias 973
Epidemiology

Differences in prevalence probably relate to geographic variations in
susceptibility factors such as hepatitis C and ethanol use. The yearly
incidence in the United Kingdom was estimated at 2-­5 in 1 million in
the general population, and the prevalence in the United States and
Czechoslovakia was estimated at 1 in 25,000 and 1 in 5,000 in the general population, respectively. The disease was reported to be prevalent
in the Bantus of South Africa in association with iron overload. PCT is
more common in males, possibly because of greater alcohol intake, and
in women it is usually associated with estrogen use.
A massive outbreak of PCT occurred in eastern Turkey in the 1950s.
Wheat intended for planting and treated with hexachlorobenzene as a
fungicide was consumed by many during a food shortage. Cases and
small outbreaks of PCT after exposure to other chemicals, including
di-­and trichlorophenols and 2,3,7,8-­
tetrachlorodibenzo-­
p-­dioxin
(TCDD, dioxin), have been reported. The manifestations improved in
most cases when the exposure was stopped. There are reported cases of
delayed onset many years after chemical exposure.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

Generation of a UROD inhibitor in the liver plays an important role
in all three types of PCT. Eighty percent of patients with type 1 (sporadic) PCT have no UROD pathogenic variants, and UROD activity is
normal in nonhepatic tissues such as erythrocytes. In type 2 (familial) PCT, a heterozygous UROD pathogenic variant results in a partial
(approximately 50%) deficiency of UROD in all tissues from birth, and
the disease becomes active in some heterozygotes after further reduction of hepatic UROD activity to ≤20% of normal. Type 3 is rare and
describes PCT without a UROD pathogenic variant occurring in more
than one family member. Another genetic basis, such as HFE pathogenic variants, may be identified. HEP results from inheritance of a
UROD pathogenic variant from each parent and typically causes severe
photosensitivity resembling CEP starting in early childhood. Some
developed symptoms in childhood more typical of PCT.
CYPs, especially CYP1A2, can catalyze the oxidation of uroporphyrinogen to uroporphyrin. This uroporphyrinogen oxidase activity
is enhanced by iron and leads to formation of a UROD inhibitor (see
Fig. 112.5). CYP1a2 seems essential for development of uroporphyria
in rodents, because experimental uroporphyria does not develop in
CYP1a2 knockout mice.

Susceptibility Factors

The following factors are implicated in the development of PCT, and
these occur in various combinations in individual patients.

Iron

PCT is an iron-­related disorder, and a normal or increased amount of
iron in the liver is essential for its development. Moreover, treatment
by phlebotomy to reduce hepatic iron leads to remission. Serum ferritin levels are usually in the upper part of the normal range or moderately increased, and liver histology commonly shows increased iron
staining. Prevalence of the C282Y pathogenic variant of the HFE gene,
which is the major cause of hemochromatosis in people of Northern
European ancestry, is increased in both type 1 and type 2 PCT, and
approximately 10% of patients are C282Y homozygotes. In Southern
Europe the H63D pathogenic variant is more prevalent. PCT may
develop in patients with secondary iron overload. Reduced hepatic
expression of the hormone hepcidin occurs in hemochromatosis and
also in PCT, regardless of HFE genotype, which may explain hepatic
siderosis in this condition.

Hepatitis C

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is highly prevalent in PCT in most
geographic locations; in the United States, for example, HCV is present
in 56–74% of cases, which is similar to rates in Southern Europe. Prevalence of hepatitis C in PCT is lower in Northern Europe (<20%). Steatosis and oxidative stress in HCV infection may favor iron-­mediated
generation of ROS and a UROD inhibitor. Dysregulation of hepcidin
occurs in hepatitis C and may lead to increased iron absorption.

Human Immunodeficiency Virus

Many reports suggest that HIV infection can contribute to the development of PCT, although less frequently than HCV.

Ethanol

The long-­recognized association between alcohol and PCT may be
explained by the generation of ROS, which may cause oxidative damage, mitochondrial injury, depletion of reduced glutathione and other
antioxidant defenses, increased production of endotoxin, and activation of Kupffer cells. Also, alcohol may contribute to iron overload by
impairing hepcidin production.

Smoking and Cytochrome P450 Enzymes

Although not extensively studied as a susceptibility factor, smoking is
often associated with alcohol use in PCT. It may act to induce hepatic
CYPs and oxidative stress. Hepatic CYPs are thought to be important
in oxidizing uroporphyrinogen and generating a UROD inhibitor (see
Fig. 112.5). Genetic polymorphisms of CYP1A2 and CYP1A1 have
been implicated in human PCT. The frequency of an inducible CYP1A2
genotype was more common in PCT patients than in controls in several studies.

Antioxidant Status

Ascorbic acid deficiency contributes to uroporphyria in laboratory
models and perhaps in human PCT. In one series, plasma ascorbate
levels were substantially reduced in 84% of patients with PCT. Low levels of serum carotenoids were also described, further suggesting that
oxidant stress in hepatocytes is important in PCT.

Estrogens

Use of estrogen-­containing oral contraceptives (OCs) or postmenopausal estrogen replacement therapy is frequently associated with PCT
(type 1 or 2) in women. PCT sometimes occurs during pregnancy,
although it is not clear whether the risk is increased.

Cancer Chemotherapy

Cancer chemotherapeutic agents are commonly associated with rare
childhood cases of PCT, although specific agents have not been implicated. Susceptibility factors found in adults are rare in children with
PCT.

Clinical Manifestations
Cutaneous Manifestations

PCT is readily recognized by blistering and crusted skin lesions on
the backs of the hands, which are the most sun-­exposed areas of the
body, and less often on the forearms, face, ears, neck, legs, and feet (Fig.
112.6). The fluid-­filled vesicles usually rupture and become crusted or
denuded areas, heal slowly, and are subject to infection. The skin is friable, and minor trauma may cause blisters or denudation of skin. Small
white plaques, termed milia, may precede or follow vesicle formation.
Facial hypertrichosis and hyperpigmentation are also common. Severe
scarring and thickening of sun-­exposed skin may resemble scleroderma. Skin biopsy findings include subepidermal blistering and deposition of periodic acid–Schiff-­(PAS)–positive material around blood
vessels and fine fibrillar material at the dermoepithelial junction, which
may be related to excessive skin fragility. IgG, other immunoglobulins,
and complement are also deposited at the dermoepithelial junction and
around dermal blood vessels. The skin lesions and histologic changes
are not specific for PCT. The same findings occur in VP and HCP and
resemble those of CEP and HEP but are usually less severe. PCT usually develops in mid or late adult life. Earlier onset may be seen in those
with UROD or HFE pathogenic variants and childhood onset with cancer chemotherapy and UROD pathogenic variants.

Liver Abnormalities

PCT is almost always associated with nonspecific liver abnormalities, especially increased serum transaminases and γ-­
glutamyltranspeptidase, even in the absence of heavy alcohol intake or
hepatitis C. Most histologic findings, such as necrosis, inflammation,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

974 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
to a greater extent than fecal porphyrins. However, the total amount
of porphyrins excreted in feces in PCT exceeds that in urine, and total
excretion of type III isomers (including isocoproporphyrins, which are
mostly derived from the type III series) exceeds that of type I isomers.
Perhaps because uroporphyrinogen III is the preferred substrate for
UROD, more uroporphyrinogen I than III accumulates and is excreted
as uroporphyrin I in PCT. Hepta-­and hexacarboxyl porphyrin are
mostly isomer III, and pentacarboxyl porphyrin and coproporphyrin
are approximately equal mixtures of isomers I and III.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

A

B

Fig. 112.6 Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT). A, Right hand of a patient

with PCT, revealing numerous erosions and erythematous patches. B,
Close-­up of right hand. (From Horner ME, Alikhan A, Tintle S, et al. Cutaneous porphyrias. Part 1. Epidemiology, pathogenesis, presentation, diagnosis, and histopathology. Int J Dermatol. 2013;52:1464–1480, Fig. 2.)

increased iron, and increased fat, are nonspecific. Specific findings
include red fluorescence of liver tissue and fluorescent, birefringent,
needle-­like inclusions presumably consisting of porphyrins. Electron
microscopy shows these inclusions are in lysosomes, and paracrystalline inclusions are found in mitochondria. Distorted lobular architecture and cirrhosis are more common with long-­standing disease.
The risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma is increased, with
reported incidences ranging from 4% to 47% in PCT. These tumors
seldom contain large amounts of porphyrins.

Other Features and Associations

Mild or moderate erythrocytosis in some adult patients is not well
understood, but chronic lung disease from smoking may contribute.
An earlier onset of symptoms may be noted in patients with genetic
predisposing factors, such as an inherited partial deficiency of UROD
or the C282Y/C282Y HFE genotype. Iron overload secondary to conditions such as myelofibrosis and end-­stage renal disease (ESRD) may
be associated with PCT. The disease can be especially severe in patients
with ESRD because the lack of urinary excretion leads to much higher
concentrations of porphyrins in plasma, and the excess porphyrins are
poorly dialyzable. PCT occurs more frequently in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and other immunologic disorders than
would be expected by chance.

Laboratory Findings

Porphyrins accumulate in the liver mostly as the oxidized porphyrins
rather than porphyrinogens in PCT, as indicated by the immediate
red fluorescence observed in liver tissue. This develops over weeks or
months before porphyrins appear in plasma and are transported to the
skin, causing photosensitivity. In contrast to the acute hepatic porphyrias, only a very small increase in synthesis of heme pathway intermediates and little or no increase in hepatic ALAS1 are required to account
for the excess porphyrins excreted in PCT.
Hepatic UROD deficiency leads to a complex pattern of excess
porphyrins, which initially accumulate as porphyrinogens and then
undergo nonenzymatic oxidation to the corresponding porphyrins
(uro-­, hepta-­, hexa-­, and pentacarboxyl porphyrins, and isocoproporphyrins). Uroporphyrin and heptacarboxyl porphyrin predominate in
urine, with lesser amounts of coproporphyrin and penta-­and hexacarboxyl porphyrin. A normally minor pathway is accentuated by UROD
deficiency, whereby pentacarboxyl porphyrinogen is oxidized by coproporphyrinogen oxidase (CPOX; the next enzyme in the pathway),
forming isocoproporphyrinogen, an atypical tetracarboxyl porphyrinogen. Relative to normal values, urinary porphyrins are increased

Plasma and urine porphyrins are always increased in clinically manifest PCT, and their measurement is useful for screening. A normal
value rules out PCT and other porphyrias that produce blistering skin
lesions. It is useful to determine the plasma fluorescence emission
maximum at neutral pH, because a maximum near 619 nm is characteristic of PCT (as with CEP and HCP) and, importantly, excludes
VP, which has a distinctly different fluorescence maximum. Increased
urinary or plasma porphyrins, with a predominance of uroporphyrin and heptacarboxyl porphyrin, is characteristic, although not
absolutely specific, for PCT and may occasionally be seen in other
porphyrias. Nonspecific increases in urine porphyrins, especially of
coproporphyrin, occur in liver disease and other medical conditions.
Urinary ALA may be increased slightly in PCT, and PBG is normal.
Mild cases of CEP can mimic PCT clinically, and this possibility is
ruled out by finding normal or only mildly increased levels of erythrocyte porphyrins.
Familial (type 2) can be distinguished from sporadic (type 1) PCT
by finding decreased erythrocyte UROD activity (in type 2) or, more
reliably, by finding a disease-­related UROD pathogenic variant. Type 3
is distinguished from type 1 only by occurrence of PCT in a relative.
Biochemical findings in HEP are similar to those in PCT, but with an
additional marked increase in erythrocyte zinc protoporphyrin.
Pseudoporphyria (also known as pseudo-­PCT) presents with skin
lesions that closely resemble PCT, but without significant increases in
plasma or urine porphyrins. A photosensitizing agent such as a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) is sometimes implicated. Both
PCT and pseudoporphyria may occur in patients with ESRD.

Complications

Cutaneous blisters may rupture and become infected, sometimes leading to cellulitis. In more severe disease in patients with ESRD, repeated
infections can be mutilating, as in CEP. Pseudoscleroderma, with
scarring, contraction, and calcification of skin and subcutaneous tissue, is a rare complication. Other complications include advanced liver
disease and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Treatment

Two specific and effective forms of treatment, phlebotomy and low-­
dose hydroxychloroquine, are available. Susceptibility factors should
be removed when possible. The diagnosis of PCT must be firmly
established because conditions, including other porphyrias, that produce identical cutaneous lesions do not respond to these treatments.
Treatment can usually be started after demonstrating an increase in
plasma total porphyrins and excluding VP by analysis of the fluorescence spectrum at neutral pH, while urine and fecal studies are
still pending. Use of alcohol, estrogens (in women), and smoking
should be stopped, and patients tested for HCV, HIV, and HFE pathogenic variants. Susceptibility factors and degree of iron overload, as
assessed by the serum ferritin concentration, can influence the choice
of treatment.
Phlebotomy is considered standard therapy and is effective in both
children and adults with PCT because it reduces hepatic iron content.
Treatment is guided by plasma (or serum) ferritin and porphyrin levels. Hemoglobin or hematocrit levels should be followed to prevent
symptomatic anemia. For adults, a unit of blood (450 mL) is removed
at about 2-­week intervals until a target serum ferritin near the lower
limit of normal (15 ng/mL) is achieved. A total of six to eight phlebotomies is often sufficient in adults. After this, plasma porphyrin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 112 u The Porphyrias 975
concentrations continue to fall from pretreatment levels (generally 10-­
25 μg/dL) to below the upper limit of normal (1 μg/dL), usually after
several more weeks. This is followed by gradual clearing of skin lesions,
sometimes including pseudoscleroderma. Liver function abnormalities may improve, and hepatic siderosis, needle-­like inclusions, and
red fluorescence of liver tissue will disappear. Although remission usually persists even if ferritin levels later return to normal, it is advisable
to follow porphyrin levels and reinstitute phlebotomies if porphyrins
begin to increase. Infusions of deferoxamine, an iron chelator, may be
used when phlebotomy is contraindicated.
An alternative when phlebotomy is contraindicated or poorly
tolerated is a low-­dose regimen of hydroxychloroquine (or chloroquine). Normal doses of these 4-­aminoquinoline antimalarials in
PCT increase plasma and urinary porphyrin levels and increase photosensitivity, reflecting an outpouring of porphyrins from the liver.
This is accompanied by acute hepatocellular damage, with fever, malaise, nausea, and increased serum transaminases, but is followed by
complete remission of the porphyria. These adverse consequences of
normal doses are largely avoided by a low-­dose regimen (for adults,
hydroxychloroquine 100 mg or chloroquine 125 mg, i.e., half a normal tablet, twice weekly), which can be continued until plasma or
urine porphyrins are normalized. In young children, half the adult
dose is recommended. There is at least some risk of retinopathy, which
may be lower with hydroxychloroquine. The mechanism of action of
4-­aminoquinolines in PCT is not known but is quite specific, because
these drugs are not useful in other porphyrias. Recent studies indicate
that low-­dose hydroxychloroquine is as safe and effective as phlebotomy in adults with PCT.
Experience to date supports treatment of patients with PCT and
hepatitis C with direct-­acting antiviral agents to achieve cure of this
viral infection within a few months as well as remission of PCT and
avoiding treatment by phlebotomy or low-­dose hydroxychloroquine.
PCT in patients with ESRD is often more severe and difficult to treat.
However, erythropoietin administration can correct anemia, mobilize
iron, and support phlebotomy in many cases. Improvement is expected
after renal transplantation, related in part to resumption of endogenous
erythropoietic production.
Liver imaging and a serum α-­fetoprotein determination may be
advisable in all PCT patients with cirrhosis or advanced fibrosis at
6-­month intervals for early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Finding low-­erythrocyte UROD activity or a UROD pathogenic variant
identifies those with an underlying genetic predisposition, which does
not alter treatment but is useful for genetic counseling.

Prognosis

Porphyria cutanea tarda is the most readily treated form of porphyria,
and complete remission is expected with treatment by phlebotomy or
low-­dose hydroxychloroquine or by treatment of hepatitis C. There is
little information on rates of recurrence and long-­term outlook. Risk
for cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma is increased, and some susceptibility factors such as alcohol, hepatitis C, and iron overload can
contribute to such risks.

Prevention and Genetic Counseling

A heritable UROD pathogenic variant can usually be detected or
excluded by measuring erythrocyte UROD activity, although DNA
studies are more sensitive. Relatives of patients with UROD pathogenic variants have an increased risk for developing PCT and may have
increased motivation to avoid adverse behaviors such as ethanol and
tobacco use and exposures to HCV and HIV (although such counseling would be given to anyone). The finding of HFE pathogenic variants,
and especially C282Y, should prompt screening of relatives, some of
whom may be C282Y homozygotes and warrant lifelong monitoring
of serum ferritin.

HEPATOERYTHROPOIETIC PORPHYRIA

HEP is the homozygous form of familial (type 2) PCT; it resembles
CEP clinically. Excess porphyrins originate mostly from liver, with a
pattern consistent with severe UROD deficiency.

Etiology

HEP is an autosomal recessive disorder, and most patients have inherited different pathogenic variants from unrelated parents. In contrast
to most pathogenic variants in familial PCT, most causing HEP are
associated with expression of some residual enzyme activity. At least
one genotype is associated with the predominant excretion of pentacarboxyl porphyrin.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

Excess porphyrins originate primarily from the liver in HEP, although
the substantial increase in erythrocyte zinc protoporphyrin indicates
that the heme biosynthetic pathway is also impaired in bone marrow
erythroid cells. Apparently, porphyrinogens accumulate in the marrow while hemoglobin synthesis is most active and are metabolized to
protoporphyrin after hemoglobin synthesis is complete. The cutaneous
lesions are a result of photoactivation of porphyrins in skin, as in other
cutaneous porphyrias.

Clinical Manifestations

This disease usually presents with blistering skin lesions, hypertrichosis, scarring, and red urine in infancy or childhood. Sclerodermoid
skin changes are sometimes prominent. Unusually mild cases have
been described. Concurrent conditions that affect liver function can
alter disease severity; the disease manifested because of hepatitis A in
a 2-­year-­old child and then improved with recovery of liver function.

Laboratory Findings

Biochemical findings resemble those in PCT, with accumulation and
excretion of uroporphyrin, heptacarboxyl porphyrin, and isocoproporphyrin. In addition, erythrocyte zinc protoporphyrin is substantially
increased.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

HEP is distinguished from CEP by increases in both uroporphyrin and
heptacarboxyl porphyrin and isocoproporphyrins. In CEP, the excess
erythrocyte porphyrins are predominantly uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I rather than protoporphyrin. Blistering skin lesions are
unusual in EPP, the excess erythrocyte protoporphyrin in that disease
is metal-­free and not complexed with zinc, and urinary porphyrins are
normal.

Treatment and Prognosis

Avoiding sunlight exposure is most important in managing HEP, as
in CEP. Oral charcoal was helpful in a severe case associated with dyserythropoiesis. Phlebotomy has shown little or no benefit. The outlook
depends on the severity of the enzyme deficiency and may be favorable
if sunlight can be avoided.

Prevention and Genetic Counseling

As part of genetic counseling in affected families, it is feasible to diagnose HEP in utero, either by analysis of porphyrins in amniotic fluid
or DNA studies.

HEREDITARY COPROPORPHYRIA

This autosomal dominant hepatic porphyria is caused by a deficiency
of CPOX. The disease presents with acute attacks, as in AIP. Cutaneous photosensitivity may occur, but much less often than in VP. Rare
homozygous cases present in childhood, including a variant form
known as harderoporphyria.

Etiology

A partial (50%) deficiency in CPOX activity has been found in all cells
studied from patients with HCP. A much more profound deficiency is
found in homozygous cases. Human CPOX is a homodimer composed
of 39-­kDa subunits and contains no metals or prosthetic groups. The
enzyme requires molecular oxygen and is localized in the mitochondrial intermembrane space. A single active site on the enzyme catalyzes
the oxidative decarboxylation of two of the four propionic acid groups
of coproporphyrinogen III to form the two vinyl groups at positions

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

976 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
two and four, on rings A and B, respectively, of protoporphyrinogen
IX. Most of the intermediate tricarboxyl porphyrinogen, termed harderoporphyrinogen, is not released before undergoing the second decarboxylation to protoporphyrinogen IX. Coproporphyrinogen I is not a
substrate for this enzyme.
The human CPOX gene contains a single promoter with elements
for both housekeeping and erythroid-­
specific expression. A variety of CPOX pathogenic variants have been described in HCP, with
a predominance of missense pathogenic variants and no genotype-­
phenotype correlations. Harderoporphyria, an autosomal recessive
biochemical variant form of HCP, is caused by CPOX pathogenic variants that impair substrate binding, leading to premature release of
harderoporphyrinogen.

Epidemiology

HCP is less common than AIP and VP, but its prevalence has not been
carefully estimated. Homozygous HCP is rare and presents during
childhood. Harderoporphyria, a biochemically distinguishable variant
of HCP, has been recognized in heteroallelic and homoallelic forms.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

Increased ALA and PBG during acute attacks of HCP may be explained
by induction of ALAS1 and by the normally relatively low activity of
PBGD in the liver. Hepatic ALAS1 is increased during acute attacks but
is normal when the disease is latent and porphyrin precursor excretion
is normal. Because coproporphyrinogen III concentration in the liver
is probably less than the Km for CPOX, the reaction rate is likely to be
determined in part by substrate concentration. The substrate coproporphyrinogen appears to be lost more readily from the liver cell than,
for example, uroporphyrinogen, especially when heme synthesis is
stimulated. Coproporphyrin and coproporphyrinogen are both transported into bile and excreted in urine and do not appear to accumulate
in the liver in HCP.

Clinical Manifestations

Symptoms are identical to those of AIP except that attacks are generally milder, and cutaneous lesions that resemble those in PCT develop
occasionally. Severe motor neuropathy and respiratory paralysis can
occur. HCP is almost always latent before puberty, and symptoms are
most common in adult women. Attacks are precipitated by the same
factors that cause attacks in AIP, including fasting, OCs, and hormone
increases during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. Concomitant
liver diseases may increase porphyrin retention and photosensitivity.
The risk of hepatocellular carcinoma is increased.
The clinical features of homozygous HCP or harderoporphyria begin
in early childhood and include jaundice, hemolytic anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, and skin photosensitivity. These symptoms are generally
quite distinct from those seen in heterozygotes. Hematologic features
are particularly characteristic in harderoporphyria.

Laboratory Findings

The porphyrin precursors ALA and PBG are increased during acute
attacks in HCP but may decrease more rapidly than in AIP. Marked
increases in coproporphyrin III in urine and feces are more persistent in HCP. Plasma porphyrins are usually normal or only slightly
increased.
In homozygous cases, porphyrin excretion may be more increased
and is accompanied by substantial increases in erythrocyte zinc protoporphyrin. Harderoporphyria is characterized by a marked increase
in fecal excretion of harderoporphyrin (tricarboxyl porphyrin) and in
coproporphyrin.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

The diagnosis of HCP is readily established in patients with clinically
manifest disease, although urinary ALA, PBG, and uroporphyrin may
revert to normal more quickly than in AIP. Urinary coproporphyrin
III is increased. Urinary porphyrins, especially coproporphyrin, can be
increased in many medical conditions (e.g., liver disease), and small
increases that are not diagnostically significant may lead to an incorrect

diagnosis of HCP. Fecal porphyrins are mostly coproporphyrin (isomer
III) in HCP, whereas in VP, coproporphyrin III and protoporphyrin are
often increased approximately equally. Plasma porphyrins are usually
normal in HCP and increased in VP.
The ratio of fecal coproporphyrin III to coproporphyrin I is especially sensitive for detecting latent heterozygotes (especially in adults).
Assays for CPOX, a mitochondrial enzyme, require cells such as
lymphocytes and are not widely available. Identification of a CPOX
pathogenic variant in an index case greatly facilitates screening family
members.

Treatment and Prognosis

Acute attacks of HCP are treated as in AIP, which includes IV hemin
and identifying and avoiding precipitating factors. Phlebotomy and
chloroquine are not effective. GnRH analogs can be effective for prevention of cyclic attacks. The prognosis is generally better than in AIP.
Givosiran, an siRNA therapeutic agent, has been approved for the prevention of acute attacks in all acute hepatic porphyrias, although experience in HCP is limited.
Prevention and genetic counseling are the same as in other acute
porphyrias.

VARIEGATE PORPHYRIA

This hepatic porphyria is caused by a deficiency of protoporphyrinogen
oxidase (PPOX), which is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
The disorder is termed variegate because it can present with neurologic
or cutaneous manifestations or both. Other terms have included porphyria variegata, protocoproporphyria, and South African genetic porphyria. Rare cases of homozygous VP are symptomatic in childhood.

Etiology

PPOX is approximately half-­normal in all cells studied in patients with
VP. The enzyme is more markedly deficient in rare cases of homozygous VP, with approximately half-­normal enzyme activity in parents.
Human PPOX is a homodimer that contains flavin adenine dinucleotide and is localized to the cytosolic side of the inner mitochondrial membrane. Membrane-­binding domains may be docked onto
human FECH, the next enzyme in the pathway, which is embedded
in the opposite side of the membrane. PPOX catalyzes the oxidation
of protoporphyrinogen IX to protoporphyrin IX by the removal of six
hydrogen atoms. The enzyme requires molecular oxygen. The substrate
is readily oxidized nonenzymatically to protoporphyrin under aerobic
conditions or if exported into the cytosol. PPOX is highly specific for
protoporphyrinogen IX and is inhibited by tetrapyrroles such as heme,
biliverdin, and bilirubin and by certain herbicides that cause protoporphyrin to accumulate and induce phototoxicity in plants. Inhibition by
bilirubin may account for decreased PPOX activity in Gilbert disease.
The human PPOX gene consists of one noncoding and 12 coding
exons. Many PPOX pathogenic variants have been reported in VP
families. A missense pathogenic variant, R59W, is prevalent in South
Africa. No convincing genotype-­phenotype correlations have been
identified. Pathogenic variants in homozygous cases of VP are more
likely to encode enzyme proteins with residual activity.

Epidemiology

VP is less common than AIP in most countries. The R59W pathogenic
variant is highly prevalent in South African Whites (3 in 1,000 in this
population). This example of “genetic drift” or founder effect has been
traced to a man or his wife who emigrated from Holland to South
Africa in 1688. In Finland, prevalence is 1.3 in 100,000 people and is
about as common as AIP.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

Acute attacks develop in a minority of heterozygotes for PPOX deficiency and are often attributable to drugs, steroids, and nutritional
factors that play a role in other acute porphyrias. Protoporphyrinogen IX accumulates and undergoes autoxidation to protoporphyrin
IX. Coproporphyrinogen III accumulates, perhaps as the result of a
close functional association between PPOX in the inner mitochondrial

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 112 u The Porphyrias 977
membrane and CPOX in the intermembrane space. Liver porphyrin
content is not increased. The increased porphyrin content in plasma
consists of porphyrin-­peptide conjugates, which may be formed from
protoporphyrinogen. Increased ALA and PBG during acute attacks
may be explained, as in HCP, by induction of ALAS1 by exacerbating
factors and by the normally relatively low activity of PBGD in liver.
Furthermore, PBGD is inhibited by protoporphyrinogen, the substrate
for PPOX.

Clinical Manifestations

Symptoms develop in some heterozygotes after puberty. Neurovisceral
symptoms occurring as acute attacks are identical to AIP but are generally milder and less often fatal. Drugs, steroids, and nutritional alterations such as fasting, which are harmful in AIP, can also induce attacks
of VP. Attacks occur equally in males and females, at least in South
Africa. Cutaneous fragility, vesicles, bullae, hyperpigmentation, and
hypertrichosis of sun-­exposed areas are much more common than in
HCP. They are likely to occur apart from and to be longer lasting than
the neurovisceral symptoms. OCs can precipitate cutaneous manifestations. Acute attacks have become less common, and skin manifestations are more frequently the initial presentation; this may result from
earlier diagnosis and counseling. The risk of hepatocellular carcinoma
is increased.
Symptoms of homozygous VP begin in infancy or childhood. These
children generally have severe photosensitivity, neurologic symptoms,
seizures, developmental disturbances, and sometimes growth retardation, but they do not have acute attacks.

Laboratory Findings

Urinary ALA, PBG, and uroporphyrin are increased during acute
attacks, but often less so than in AIP, and may be normal or only
slightly increased during remission. Plasma porphyrins, urinary
coproporphyrin III, and fecal coproporphyrin III and protoporphyrin
are more persistently increased between attacks. The pattern of urinary
porphyrins can sometime resemble that seen in PCT. Erythrocyte zinc
protoporphyrin levels are greatly increased in homozygous VP and
may be modestly increased in heterozygous cases.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

VP is readily distinguished biochemically from AIP and HCP, which
also present with acute attacks and increases in PBG. Plasma porphyrin analysis is especially useful because the plasma porphyrins in VP
are tightly protein bound, resulting in a characteristic fluorescence
emission spectrum at neutral pH. Fecal porphyrins are increased, with
approximately equal amounts of coproporphyrin III and protoporphyrin. Fluorometric detection of plasma porphyrins is more sensitive
than stool porphyrin analysis in asymptomatic VP. PPOX assays using
cells that contain mitochondria, such as lymphocytes, are sensitive for
identifying asymptomatic carriers but are not widely available. Knowing the PPOX pathogenic variant in an index case enables the identification of relatives who carry the same pathogenic variant.

Treatment

Acute attacks are treated as in AIP. Hemin is beneficial for acute attacks
but not for cutaneous symptoms. Light protection is important in
patients with skin manifestations, using long-­sleeved clothing, gloves,
a broad-­
brimmed hat, and opaque sunscreen preparations. Exposure to short-­wavelength UV light, which does not excite porphyrins,
may increase skin pigmentation and provide some protection. Phlebotomy and chloroquine are not effective. Surprisingly, oral activated
charcoal was reported to increase porphyrin levels and worsen skin
manifestations.

Prognosis and Prevention

The outlook of patients with VP has improved, which may be attributed
to improved treatment, earlier diagnosis, and detection of latent cases.
Cyclic acute attacks in women can be prevented with a GnRH analog,
as in AIP. Givosiran, an siRNA therapeutic agent, has been approved for
the prevention of acute attacks in all acute hepatic porphyrias, although

experience in VP is limited. A diagnosis of VP or any other acute porphyria should not lead to difficulty obtaining insurance, because the
prognosis is usually good once the diagnosis is established.
Genetic counseling is the same as in other acute porphyrias.

ERYTHROPOIETIC PROTOPORPHYRIA AND
X-­LINKED PROTOPORPHYRIA

These forms of protoporphyria are genetically distinct but have essentially the same phenotype. In EPP, an autosomal recessive disorder, protoporphyrin accumulates as the result of a marked deficiency of FECH,
the last enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway, because of FECH
pathogenic variants. EPP is sometimes termed erythrohepatic protoporphyria, although the liver does not contribute substantially to production of excess protoporphyrin. XLP is the most recently described
porphyria, in which gain-­of-­function ALAS2 pathogenic variants lead
to overproduction of ALA in the marrow, where it is metabolized to
excess amounts of protoporphyrin.

Etiology

Ferrochelatase (FECH), the enzyme that is deficient in EPP, catalyzes
the final step in heme synthesis, which is insertion of ferrous iron
(Fe2+) into protoporphyrin IX (see Fig. 112.1). The enzyme is also
termed heme synthetase or protoheme ferrolyase. The human enzyme is
a dimer, and each homodimer contains a [2Fe-­2S] cluster, which may
have a role in bridging homodimers. FECH is found in the mitochondrial inner membrane, where its active site faces the mitochondrial
matrix. It may be associated with complex I of the mitochondrial electron transport chain, and the ferrous iron substrate may be produced
on nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide oxidation. FECH is specific for
the reduced form of iron but can use other metals, such as Zn2+ and
Co2+, and other dicarboxyl porphyrins. Accumulation of metal-­free
protoporphyrin rather than zinc protoporphyrin in EPP indicates that
formation of the latter is dependent on FECH activity in vivo.
The human FECH gene has a single promoter sequence and contains 11 exons. Two mRNAs of 1.6 and 2.5 kb were described, which
may be explained by the use of two alternative polyadenylation signals. The larger transcript is more abundant in murine erythroid cells,
suggesting erythroid-­specific regulation of FECH. A variety of FECH
pathogenic variants have been reported in EPP, including missense,
nonsense, and splicing pathogenic variants; small and large deletions;
and an insertion.
The inheritance of two alleles associated with reduced FECH activity is required for disease expression. This is consistent with FECH
activities as low as 15–25% of normal in EPP patients. In most patients,
a pathogenic variant on one FECH allele is combined with a common variant affecting the other allele. This common-­variant FECH
allele (IVS3-­48T>C) produces less-­than-­normal amounts of enzyme
because it expresses an aberrantly spliced mRNA that is degraded by
a nonsense-­mediated RNA decay mechanism. The IVS3-­48T>C FECH
variant by itself does not cause disease, even when homozygous. In a
few families, two severe FECH pathogenic variants have been found
without the IVS3-­48T>C allele. EPP with autosomal recessive inheritance occurs naturally in cattle and in mouse models.
XLP is associated with gain-­of-­function deletions in the last exon of
ALAS2. These lesions delete the last 10-­20 amino acids of the ALAS2
polypeptide and apparently make the enzyme more stable. Metal-­
free protoporphyrin predominates in erythrocytes in these cases, but
because FECH activity is normal, the proportion of zinc protoporphyrin is greater than in EPP. XLP accounts for approximately 2% of cases
with the EPP phenotype in Europe and approximately 10% of cases in
North America.
EPP is sometimes associated with myelodysplastic or myeloproliferative disorders and expansion of a clone of hematopoietic cells with
deletion of one FECH allele or with other FECH pathogenic variants.
In such cases there is late onset of the disease.

Epidemiology

EPP is the most common porphyria to cause symptoms in children
but is often not diagnosed until adult life. Overall, it is the third most

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

978 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
common porphyria, although its prevalence is not precisely known
(see Table 112.2). An analysis from the UK biobank exome sequencing
data suggests that EPP is 1.7-­3.0 times more common than previously
thought in the UK. It is described mostly in Whites but occurs in other
ancestries. The IVS3-­48T>C splice variant is common in Whites and
Japanese but rare in Africans, which explains lower disease prevalence
in populations of African origin.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

FECH is deficient in all tissues in EPP, but bone marrow reticulocytes
are thought to be the primary source of the excess protoporphyrin,
some of which enters plasma and circulates to the skin. Circulating
erythrocytes are no longer synthesizing heme and hemoglobin, but
they contain excess free protoporphyrin, which also contributes. In
XLP caused by terminal deletions in exon 11 of ALAS2, all intermediates of the heme pathway are overproduced and ultimately accumulate
in bone marrow erythroblasts as protoporphyrin. FECH is not deficient in XLP, so this enzyme chelates some of the excess protoporphyrin with zinc. An aberrantly spliced mitoferrin transcript, which limits
iron transport into mitochondria, has also been described in EPP. The
liver functions as an excretory organ rather than a major source for
excess protoporphyrin. FECH deficiency in the skin and liver may be
important, however, because tissue transplantation studies in mice
suggest that skin photosensitivity and liver damage occur only when
FECH is deficient in these tissues.
Patients with EPP and XLP are maximally sensitive to light in the
400-­nm range, which corresponds to the so-­called Soret band, the narrow peak absorption maximum that is characteristic for protoporphyrin and other porphyrins. Having absorbed light, porphyrins enter an
excited energy state and release energy as fluorescence, singlet oxygen,
and other ROS. Resulting tissue damage is accompanied by lipid peroxidation, oxidation of amino acids, cross linking of proteins in cell membranes, and damage to capillary endothelial cells. Such damage may
be mediated by photoactivation of the complement system and release
of histamine, kinins, and chemotactic factors. Repeated acute damage
leads to thickening of the vessel walls and perivascular deposits from
accumulation of serum components. Deposition of amorphous material containing immunoglobulin, complement components, glycoproteins, acid glycosaminoglycans, and lipids occurs around blood vessels
in the upper dermis.
There is little evidence for impaired erythropoiesis or hemolysis
in EPP. However, mild anemia with microcytosis, hypochromia, and
reticulocytosis is common. Iron accumulation in erythroblasts and
ring sideroblasts has been noted in bone marrow in some patients.
Decreased transferrin saturation and low or low-­normal serum ferritin suggest iron deficiency. Iron status should be carefully evaluated in
EPP patients. Poor response to oral iron supplements is described in
EPP and is unexplained, because iron absorption is not impaired. Some
patients report increased photosensitivity when given iron supplements, but whether this is from transient increases in porphyrins when
iron deficiency is corrected and erythropoiesis increases is not known.
Case reports suggest that iron supplementation decreases protoporphyrin and improves anemia, especially in patients with XLP. However,
recent evidence suggests that iron deficiency may reduce protoporphyrin levels in some EPP patients.
Liver damage develops in a small proportion of EPP and XLP
patients and is attributed to excess protoporphyrin, which is insoluble
in water and excreted only by hepatic uptake and biliary excretion.
Some may be reabsorbed by the intestine and undergo enterohepatic
circulation. At very high levels, protoporphyrin is cholestatic, can damage cholangiocytes, and can accumulate in hepatocytes to form crystalline structures and impair mitochondrial function.

Clinical Manifestations

Symptoms of cutaneous photosensitivity begin in childhood and consist of acute pain and itching, often occurring within minutes of sunlight exposure and followed by redness and swelling with continued
exposure (Fig. 112.7). Petechiae and purpuric lesions may be seen,
but blisters are rare. Swelling may resemble angioneurotic edema and

A

B

Fig. 112.7 Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP). A, Linear erosions of

the lateral nasal bridge and lower lip in a patient with EPP. B, Erosions
with crusting on the left helix of a patient with EPP. (From Horner ME,
Alikhan A, Tintle S, et al. Cutaneous porphyrias. Part 1. epidemiology,
pathogenesis, presentation, diagnosis, and histopathology. Int J Dermatol. 2013;52:1464–1480, Figs. 7 and 8.)

solar urticaria. Symptoms are usually worse in the spring and summer.
Chronic changes may include lichenification, leathery pseudovesicles,
labial grooving, and nail changes, but changes in pigmentation and
pronounced scarring are unusual. Although physical findings in EPP
and XLP may not be impressive, efforts to avoid sunlight and resulting
symptoms significantly impair quality of life. An association between
EPP caused by pathogenic variants affecting both FECH alleles and
seasonal palmar keratoderma is unexplained. Neuropathy develops
only in some patients with severe hepatic decompensation. XLP males
have a more severe phenotype with higher protoporphyrin levels than
most EPP patients. XLP females have a variable clinical presentation—
some with no symptoms or mild symptoms and others with severe
symptoms similar to XLP males. This variability in females is likely the
result of random X chromosome inactivation.
Unless hepatic or other complications develop, protoporphyrin levels and symptoms of photosensitivity remain remarkably stable for
many years in most patients. Factors that exacerbate hepatic porphyrias play little or no role in EPP or XLP. Erythrocyte protoporphyrin
levels may decrease and sunlight tolerance may improve during pregnancy, which is unexplained.

Laboratory Findings

Protoporphyrin is substantially increased in circulating erythrocytes in
EPP and consists almost entirely of metal-­free protoporphyrin. In XLP,
both zinc protoporphyrin and metal-­free protoporphyrin are increased,
although the latter still predominates. Protoporphyrin is also increased
in bone marrow, plasma, bile, and feces. Other porphyrins and porphyrin precursors are normal in uncomplicated EPP and XLP.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

A diagnosis of EPP is confirmed biochemically by finding a substantially elevated concentration of total erythrocyte protoporphyrin,
which is predominantly (at least 85%) metal-­free and not complexed
with zinc. In XLP, both metal-­free and zinc-­complexed protoporphyrins are elevated. Erythrocyte total protoporphyrin levels are, on
average, higher in XLP and more variable between individuals in EPP,
possibly reflecting differences in severity of the many reported FECH
pathogenic variants. Erythrocyte zinc protoporphyrin concentration is
increased with little increase in metal-­free protoporphyrin in homozygous porphyrias (except CEP), iron deficiency, lead poisoning, anemia
of chronic disease, hemolytic conditions, and many other erythrocytic
disorders. Measurement of FECH activity requires cells containing
mitochondria and is not widely available.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 112 u The Porphyrias 979
Plasma total porphyrin concentration is often less increased in EPP
than in other cutaneous porphyrias and may be normal. Great care must
be taken to avoid light exposure during sample processing, because
plasma porphyrins in EPP are particularly subject to photodegradation.
Urinary porphyrin precursors and porphyrins are not increased.
DNA studies are strongly recommended for confirming FECH or
ALAS2 pathogenic variants and for genetic counseling.
Life-­threatening protoporphyric hepatopathy is characterized by
greater increases in erythrocyte and plasma protoporphyrin levels,
increased photosensitivity, and either chronically abnormal liver function tests or rapidly progressive hepatic failure. Presumably this is heralded by increases above the patient’s baseline erythrocyte and plasma
porphyrin levels, but this has not been documented, because most such
patients have not had sufficiently long-­term determinations of porphyrin values. Increases in urinary porphyrins, especially coproporphyrin,
in this setting are attributable to liver dysfunction.

Complications

There is an increased risk of biliary stones, which contain protoporphyrin and are sometimes symptomatic, requiring cholecystectomy.
Protoporphyric hepatopathy occurs in <5% of protoporphyria patients,
including children, and may be chronic or progress rapidly to death
from liver failure. Rarely, hepatopathy is the major presenting feature of
EPP or XLP. Protoporphyric hepatopathy can cause acute upper abdominal pain suggesting biliary obstruction, and unnecessary laparotomy to
exclude this possibility can be detrimental. Other types of liver disease,
such as viral hepatitis or alcohol-­or drug-­induced liver disease, must
be excluded, or may contribute to the development of protoporphyric
hepatopathy. Whether iron deficiency may contribute is unclear. Liver
histology shows marked deposition of protoporphyrin as inclusions in
liver cells and bile canaliculi. The bone marrow is probably the major
source of protoporphyrin, even in EPP patients with hepatic failure.

Treatment

Exposure to sunlight should be avoided, which is aided by wearing closely woven clothing. Beta-­carotene, oral cysteine, and vitamin
C have no proven efficacy. One report suggested that high doses of
cimetidine were effective in reducing symptoms in three children with
EPP, but no objective clinical evidence of efficacy was presented.
Increasing skin melanin by narrow-­band UV-­B phototherapy may
improve sunlight tolerance. Studies in the United States and Europe of
afamelanotide, a synthetic analog of melanocyte-­stimulating hormone,
darkened the skin, increased pain-­free sun exposure, and improved
quality of life in patients with protoporphyria. This drug is approved
for use in adults in Europe and the United States. Dersimelagon, an
orally administered small molecule and a selective melanocortin-­1
receptor (MC1R) agonist that increases skin melanin, is currently in
phase 3 trials in EPP and XLP in the United States and other countries.
Drugs or hormone preparations that impair hepatic excretory
function should be avoided. Iron deficiency should be corrected, particularly in XLP. Vitamin D supplementation and hepatitis A and B
vaccination are recommended.
Treatment of protoporphyric hepatopathy must be individualized
and exclude other causes of liver disease. Spontaneous resolution may

occur, especially if another reversible cause of liver dysfunction, such as
viral hepatitis or alcohol abuse, is contributing. In patients with severe
hepatic decompensation, combined treatment with plasmapheresis,
transfusion to correct anemia and suppress erythropoiesis, IV hemin
to suppress erythroid and possibly hepatic protoporphyrin production,
ursodeoxycholic acid, vitamin E, and cholestyramine may be beneficial
and bridge patients to liver transplantation.
Motor neuropathy resembling that seen in acute porphyrias sometimes develops in protoporphyria patients with liver disease before
or after transfusion or liver transplantation and is sometimes reversible. Artificial lights, such as operating room lights during liver transplantation or other surgery, may cause severe photosensitivity, with
extensive burns of the skin and peritoneum and damage to circulating
erythrocytes.
Although liver disease may recur in the transplanted liver as a result
of continued bone marrow production of excess protoporphyrin, outcomes are comparable to transplantation for other types of liver disease.
Bone marrow transplantation can be considered after liver transplantation if a suitable donor is available.

Prognosis

Typical EPP patients have lifelong photosensitivity but can otherwise
expect normal longevity. Protoporphyric liver disease is often life-­
threatening; however, the incidence is low.

Prevention and Genetic Counseling

Symptoms can be prevented by avoiding sunlight. Avoiding agents that
may cause liver damage may help prevent liver complications. Opinions vary on the value of iron replacement, and this is currently under
study.
DNA studies to identify FECH pathogenic variants, the common
IVS3–48T>C FECH hypoexpression allele, or ALAS2 exon 11 deletions
are important for genetic counseling. When EPP is caused by a severe
FECH pathogenic variant and the common IVS3–48T>C FECH allele,
DNA studies in the spouse to determine the presence, or more likely
the absence, of the hypoexpression allele can predict whether offspring
are at risk for EPP. EPP may improve during pregnancy.

DUAL PORPHYRIA

An unusual pattern of porphyrin precursors and porphyrins has led to
documentation of pathogenic variants of two heme pathway enzymes.
One such patient presented with acute porphyria and had heterozygous
pathogenic variants of both CPOX and ALAD. Another had symptoms
of AIP and PCT and was reported to have both HMBS and UROD
pathogenic variants. In other reported cases, one or both enzyme deficiencies were based on enzyme measurements.

PORPHYRIA RESULTING FROM TUMORS

Erythropoietic porphyrias can develop late in life in patients with
myelodysplastic or myeloproliferative diseases and clonal expansion of
erythroid cells with an inherited or somatic pathogenic variant of an
enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

980 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders

Chapter 113

Hypoglycemia
Katherine Lord and Diva D. De León-­
Crutchlow

concentrations. In young children, signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia are suggestive but nonspecific; thus the reliance on signs and
symptoms to indicate hypoglycemia in this age-­group may be problematic (Table 113.1).
In older children, evidence of hypoglycemia is based on Whipple’s
triad: (1) signs and symptoms consistent with hypoglycemia, (2) a low
plasma glucose concentration, and (3) resolution of the symptoms with
normalization of the plasma glucose concentration.
100

Glucose plays a central role in fuel metabolism and energy storage
in the body. It provides 38 mol of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) per
mole of glucose oxidized. Glucose is also essential for energy metabolism in the brain, where it is the preferred substrate. Its use accounts
for nearly all the brain’s oxygen consumption. Cerebral transport of
glucose is a glucose transporter-­
1 (GLUT-­
1)–facilitated diffusion
process that is dependent on blood glucose concentration and not regulated by insulin. Low concentrations of blood glucose result in cerebral
glucopenia, energy failure, and brain injury. An elaborate regulatory
system has evolved to maintain glucose homeostasis and prevent
plasma glucose from falling precipitously to levels that impair brain
function. The defense against hypoglycemia includes the autonomic
nervous system and hormones that act in concert to enhance glucose
production through glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, while simultaneously limiting peripheral glucose use, which conserves glucose
for cerebral metabolism. With prolonged fasting, fat stores are mobilized via lipolysis, and fatty acid oxidation in the liver results in the
generation of ketone bodies, an alternative fuel source for the brain
(Fig. 113.1). Hypoglycemia results from a failure in one or several of
these fasting mechanisms that normally integrate glucose homeostasis.

DEFINITION

Hypoglycemia is defined as a plasma glucose concentration low
enough to cause signs and symptoms of brain dysfunction (Fig. 113.2).
However, a numerical value can be difficult to define because the brain
responses to hypoglycemia occur across a range of plasma glucose

↓ Insulin

Insulin suppressed

Neurogenic responses:
Glucagon and epinephrine
Cortisol and growth hormone

Good

Target for
treatment

70
Caution
Neurogenic
symptoms

Neuroglycopenic responses

Neuroglycopenic
symptoms

50

Target for
terminating
provocative
tests

Danger
30

Fig. 113.2 Interpreting glucose levels and glucose treatment targets.

Glucose thresholds are shown for suppression of insulin secretion, neurogenic (neuroendocrine hormone-­mediated) responses, and neuroglycopenic (impaired cognition) responses. Colors show the normal range
(green), the range for symptoms caused by activation of sympathetic
nervous system (yellow), and the range for impaired neuronal function
(red). (From Stanescu DL, Stanley CA. Advances in understanding the
mechanism of transitional neonatal hypoglycemia and implications for
management. Clin Perinatol. 2022;49:55–72, Fig. 2.)

↑ Endogenous glucose production
(via glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis)

(when plasma glucose
< 80-85 mg/dL)

↓ Peripheral glucose utilization

↑ Glucagon
↑ Epinephrine
↑ Cortisol
↑ Growth hormone
(when plasma glucose
< 65–70 mg/dL)

↑ Glycogenolysis

↑ Glucose release

↑ Gluconeogenesis
(precursors: glycerol,
lactate, amino acids)

↑ Glucose release

↑ Lipolysis
↑ Lipid oxidation

Euglycemia

↑ Glycerol
↑ Free fatty acids

↑ Ketogenesis

Fig. 113.1 The metabolic response to fasting. With fasting, declining glucose levels result in suppression of insulin and a rise of the counter-­
regulatory hormones. These changes in hormone levels lead to increased glucose output from the liver via glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.
With prolonged fasting, counter-­regulatory hormones stimulate lipolysis, which results in generation of glycerol (a key precursor in the gluconeogenic pathway) and, through ketogenesis, ketone bodies, a critical alternative fuel.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 113 u Hypoglycemia

FEATURES ASSOCIATED WITH ACTIVATION OF AUTONOMIC
NERVOUS SYSTEM AND EPINEPHRINE RELEASE*
Anxiety
Perspiration
Palpitation (tachycardia)
Pallor
Tremulousness
Weakness
Hunger
Nausea
Emesis
FEATURES ASSOCIATED WITH CEREBRAL GLUCOPENIA
Headache
Mental confusion
Visual disturbances (↓ acuity, diplopia)
Inability to concentrate
Dysarthria
Staring
Paresthesias
Dizziness
Amnesia
Ataxia
Refusal to feed
Somnolence, lethargy
Seizures
Coma
Stroke, hemiplegia, aphasia
Decerebrate or decorticate posture
*Some of these features will be attenuated if the patient is receiving β-­adrenergic
blocking agents.

SIGNIFICANCE AND SEQUELAE

Brain metabolism uses the majority of endogenous hepatic glucose
production in neonates, infants, and children. Because the brain grows
most rapidly in the first year of life and a larger proportion of glucose
turnover is used for brain metabolism, hypoglycemia in infants and
children can affect brain development and function and can result in
developmental delays and learning disabilities. The brain also has the
capacity to absorb and oxidize ketone bodies. However, the capacity of
the liver to produce ketone bodies is limited in the immediate newborn
period. This is especially restricted in the presence of hyperinsulinism (HI), which acutely inhibits hepatic glucose output, lipolysis, and
ketogenesis, thereby depriving the brain of any alternative fuel sources.
Furthermore, although the brain can metabolize ketones, these alternative fuels cannot completely replace glucose as an essential central
nervous system (CNS) fuel. The deprivation of the brain’s major energy
source during hypoglycemic events has predictable adverse consequences on brain metabolism and growth. These arise from decreased
brain oxygen consumption and increased breakdown of endogenous
structural brain components, with impairment and loss of functional
membrane integrity.
The major long-­term sequelae of hypoglycemia are developmental
delays, learning disabilities, epilepsy, and behavioral issues. A prospective cohort study of neonates at risk for hypoglycemia found that at
4 years of age, children who had experienced symptomatic hypoglycemia during the neonatal period had a two-­to threefold increased
risk of low executive and visual-­motor function with greater impairment in children with severe or recurrent episodes. Cross-­sectional
studies in children with HI have found that 26–48% of children with
both transient and persistent forms of HI have abnormal neurodevelopment. Children with HI have the highest risk of neurologic damage given the severity of the hypoglycemia in the condition and their
inability to generate ketones as an alternative fuel for the brain. In addition, hypoglycemia associated with hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy
increases the risk of CNS sequalae. However, there are no precise data

mg/dL mmol/L
Plasma glucose concentration

Table 113.1  Manifestations of Hypoglycemia in Childhood

981

120
6
100
80

90th percentile

5

50th percentile
10th percentile

4

60

3

40

2

20

1

0

0
0

24

48
72
Age (hours)

96

120

Fig. 113.3 Glucose percentiles in healthy term infants. (Modified

from Harris DL, Weston PJ, Gamble GD, Harding JE. Glucose profiles in
healthy term infants in the first 5 days: the Glucose Well Babies (GLOW)
study. J Pediatr. 2020;223:34–41, Fig. 2.)

relating the duration or severity of hypoglycemia to subsequent neurologic development of children in a predictable manner. Nonetheless,
early detection of hypoglycemia and effective treatment are critical to
mitigating the risk of brain damage and developmental delays. Many
neonates may have asymptomatic hypoglycemia identified by routine
screening or laboratory testing. Although asymptomatic hypoglycemia
in an otherwise healthy newborn is usually benign and transient, there
remains a risk that if untreated (glucose gel, human milk, formula feedings), the hypoglycemia may become symptomatic. Hypoglycemia in
older children may also produce long-­term neurologic defects through
neuronal death, mediated in part by cerebral excitotoxins released during hypoglycemia.

PHYSIOLOGIC MECHANISMS OF GLUCOSE
HOMEOSTASIS

Fetal glucose is derived entirely from the mother through placental-­
facilitated diffusion; therefore fetal glucose concentration reflects, but
is slightly lower than, maternal glucose levels. After birth, plasma glucose decreases, reaching a nadir at about 2 hours of life and remaining
below the normal adult range of 70-­100 mg/dL for the first 3-­4 days of
life; this is known as transitional hypoglycemia. A study of healthy, full-­
term infants found a mean plasma glucose concentration of 59 ± 11
mg/dL during the first 48 hours of life, which then increased to 83 ± 13
mg/dL during days 4-­5 of life (Fig. 113.3). Transitional asymptomatic
hypoglycemia is likely caused by a persistence of fetal pancreatic β-­cell
fuel metabolism, which allows for the secretion of insulin at lower glucose concentrations to support insulin-­mediated fetal growth. Beyond
this transitional period, plasma glucose concentration and mechanisms that regulate glucose homeostasis in neonates are the same as in
older children and adults.
During fasting, mechanisms responsible for the maintenance of
glucose homeostasis include glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, and fatty acid oxidation, as well as the hormones that regulate
the activation of these processes (see Fig. 113.1). Plasma glucose
concentrations are maintained by both metabolism of the nutrients
consumed in the immediate postprandial period and then by glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis starting 2-­4 hours after the meal.
The liver of a 10-­kg child contains 20-­25 g of glycogen, which is sufficient to meet normal glucose requirements of 4-­6 mg/kg/minute
during an overnight fast. Glucose production during this time is
augmented by gluconeogenesis (see Fig. 113.1). Defects in glycogenolysis or gluconeogenesis may not be manifested in infants until
the frequent feeding pattern at 3-­to 4-­hour intervals ceases and
infants sleep through the night, a situation usually present by 3-­6
months of age.
With prolonged fasting, the glycogen stores are depleted, and
energy metabolism is more dependent on fatty acid and ketone oxidation. Lipolysis generates fatty acids, which undergo β-­oxidation in
the liver to generate ketone bodies. Peripheral tissues use free fatty
acids (FFAs) and ketones, whereas the CNS can use ketones for a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

982 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
portion of its energy needs. Defects in β-­oxidation and ketogenesis
may not manifest until fasting exceeds the overnight period or, with
illnesses, result in catabolism, fasting, and increased body energy
requirements.
Amino acid precursors for gluconeogenesis are derived primarily
from muscle protein. The muscle bulk of infants and small children is
substantially smaller relative to body mass than that of adults, whereas
glucose requirements per unit of body mass are greater in children.
Therefore the ability to compensate for glucose deprivation by gluconeogenesis is more limited in infants and young children, as is the ability to
withstand fasting for prolonged periods. The ability of muscle to generate
alanine, the principal gluconeogenic amino acid, may also be limited.
The switch from glycogen synthesis during and immediately after
meals to glycogen breakdown and later gluconeogenesis is governed
by hormones, with insulin of central importance (see Fig. 113.1).
After a meal, plasma insulin concentrations increase to peak levels
of 5-­to 10-­fold greater than their normal baseline concentration,
which serves to lower the plasma glucose through the enhancement
of peripheral glucose uptake, activation of glycogen synthesis, and
inhibition of gluconeogenesis. In addition, lipogenesis is stimulated, whereas lipolysis and ketogenesis are curtailed. During fasting, plasma insulin concentrations fall, and together with the rise of
counter-­regulatory hormones, result in maintenance of plasma glucose concentration (see Fig. 113.1).
These counter-­regulatory hormones—glucagon, growth hormone, cortisol, and epinephrine—act synergistically and in concert
to increase plasma glucose concentrations by activating glycogenolytic enzymes (glucagon, epinephrine); inducing gluconeogenic
enzymes (glucagon, cortisol); inhibiting glucose uptake by muscle
(epinephrine, growth hormone, cortisol); mobilizing amino acids
from muscle for gluconeogenesis (cortisol); activating lipolysis and
thereby providing glycerol for gluconeogenesis and fatty acids for
ketogenesis (epinephrine, cortisol, growth hormone, glucagon); and
inhibiting insulin release and promoting growth hormone and glucagon secretion (epinephrine).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Clinical features of hypoglycemia fall into two categories: (1) symptoms and signs associated with the activation of the autonomic nervous system and epinephrine release (autonomic symptoms) and (2)
symptoms and signs caused by decreased cerebral glucose use (neuroglycopenic symptoms) (see Table 113.1). In newborns and infants,
symptoms and signs of hypoglycemia may be subtler and include
cyanosis, apnea, hypothermia, hypotonia, irritability, jitteriness, poor
feeding, lethargy, and seizures. It is important to note that neonates and
infants are frequently asymptomatic when hypoglycemic.

DIAGNOSIS

Infants and children with a suspected hypoglycemia disorder require a
timely and comprehensive diagnostic workup to establish the underlying
cause and to initiate specific treatment, prevent hypoglycemia, and minimize the risk of brain damage and neurologic dysfunction. The Pediatric
Endocrine Society provides guidelines that outline which children and
adolescents should be evaluated for a hypoglycemia disorder:
u Older children and adolescents who demonstrate Whipple’s triad
u Infants and younger children (who cannot communicate symptoms)
with plasma glucoses <60 mg/dL on laboratory-­quality assays
u Neonates at high risk of a persistent hypoglycemic disorder
u Glucose screening is recommended for those born large for gestational age, a history of perinatal stress, premature or postmature
delivery, infants of diabetic mothers, family history of hypoglycemia disorder, or a congenital syndrome associated with hypoglycemia.
u 
A persistent hypoglycemia disorder should be ruled out in those
with severe hypoglycemia (symptomatic or requiring intravenous
[IV] dextrose), inability to maintain plasma glucose >50 mg/dL (up
to 48 hours of life) or >60 mg/dL (after 48 hours of life), family history of a genetic form of hypoglycemia, and those with a congenital
syndrome associated with hypoglycemia.

Table 113.2  Clinical Features of Hypoglycemia Disorders
BIRTH HISTORY
Large for gestational age
Small for gestational age
Maternal gestational diabetes
FAMILY HISTORY
Sudden infant death
Diabetes*
PHYSICAL EXAM
Hepatomegaly
Congenital heart disease
Midline defect
Macroglossia
Hyperpigmentation
Short stature

Congenital HI, BWS
Perinatal stress HI
Infant of diabetic mother,
dominant KATP -­HI
Fatty acid oxidation disorder
HNF4A-­HI, HNF1A-­HI, dominant
KATP -­HI
Glycogen storage disease
Perinatal stress HI, Kabuki or
Turner syndrome
Hypopituitarism
BWS
Primary adrenal insufficiency
Growth hormone deficiency,
glycogen storage disease

*Specifically, non–type 1 diabetes diagnosed at a younger age in lean individuals.
HI, Hyperinsulinism; BWS, Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome; KATP, ATP-­sensitive potassium channel; HNF, hepatocyte nuclear factor.

The etiology of hypoglycemia varies based on the age of the child,
associated clinical and laboratory features, and more detailed diagnostic testing, including gene panels or whole exome sequencing (Tables
113.2, 113.3, 113.4, and 113.5).
A thorough history and physical exam may provide clinical clues to
the underlying diagnosis (see Table 113.2). Evaluation for hypoglycemia disorders requires obtaining blood and urine at the time of hypoglycemia, ideally when the plasma glucose is <50 mg/dL. This “critical
sample” is used to measure hormones, which regulate glucose metabolism, and metabolic fuels (Table 113.6, Fig. 113.4). The critical sample
can be obtained during a spontaneous episode of hypoglycemia or during a supervised diagnostic fast. Given the likelihood of hypoglycemia,
a diagnostic fast should be performed in a hospital setting with close
supervision and placement of an IV catheter to facilitate obtaining the
critical sample. Point-­of-­care glucose (and β-­hydroxybutyrate if available) should be followed closely, so the samples can be obtained as soon
as the plasma glucose falls below 50 mg/dL. The evaluation of neonates
should not occur during the first 48-­72 hours of life to avoid the period
of transitional hypoglycemia.
After the critical sample is obtained and before the child is allowed
to eat, a glucagon stimulation test should be performed to assess for
hyperinsulinism. While the child is still hypoglycemic, 1 mg of glucagon is administered, and glucose is measured by a point-­of-­care meter
every 10 minutes for a total of 40 minutes. A greater than 30-­point
rise in plasma glucose concentration is consistent with insulin excess
or hyperinsulinism. If children do not have an increase in their glucose
during the first 20 minutes of the test, the test should be terminated and
the child should be given juice or IV dextrose as rescue therapy.
The levels of alternative fuels at the time of hypoglycemia (β-­
hydroxybutyrate, FFAs, and lactate) allow for the classification of the
hypoglycemia disorders into four distinct groups (see Fig. 113.4). The
results from the critical sample then allow for narrowing of the differential and guide additional testing. Interpretation of the critical
sample results has several important caveats. Low cortisol and growth
hormone levels on the critical sample are not diagnostic of a hormone
deficiency, and in most cases, the appropriate (specific) stimulation
testing is needed if these levels are low. Additionally, a low or undetectable insulin level does not rule out hyperinsulinism. Insulin concentrations can be affected by hemolysis, and assays have variable sensitivity
for detecting insulin. Other biomarkers of insulin effect, such as β-­
hydroxybutyrate (to evaluate ketogenesis), FFAs (to evaluate lipolysis),
and the glycemic response to glucagon (to evaluate glycogenolysis),
should be used to assess for hyperinsulinism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 113 u Hypoglycemia

983

Table 113.3  Classification of Hypoglycemia in Infants and Children
NEONATAL TRANSITIONAL (ADAPTIVE) HYPOGLYCEMIA
Associated with inadequate substrate or immature enzyme function
in otherwise normal neonates
Prematurity
Small for gestational age
Normal newborn
Transient Neonatal Hyperinsulinism
Infant of diabetic mother
Small for gestational age
Discordant twin
Birth asphyxia
Infant of toxemic mother
NEONATAL, INFANTILE, OR CHILDHOOD PERSISTENT
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Hyperinsulinism (see Tables 113.4 and 113.5)
Counter-­Regulatory Hormone Deficiency
Panhypopituitarism
Isolated growth hormone deficiency
Adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency
Addison disease (including congenital adrenal hypoplasia, adrenal
leukodystrophy, triple A syndrome, ACTH receptor deficiency, and
autoimmune disease complex)
Epinephrine deficiency
Glycogenolysis and Gluconeogenesis Disorders
Glucose-­6-­phosphatase deficiency (GSD Ia)
Glucose-­6-­phosphate translocase deficiency (GSD Ib)
Amylo-­1,6-­glucosidase (debranching enzyme) deficiency (GSD III)
Liver phosphorylase deficiency (GSD VI)
Phosphorylase kinase deficiency (GSD IX)
Glycogen synthetase deficiency (GSD 0)
Fructose-­1,6-­diphosphatase deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Galactosemia
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Lipolysis Disorders
Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders
Carnitine transporter deficiency (primary carnitine deficiency)
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase-­1deficiency
Carnitine translocase deficiency
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase-­2 deficiency
Secondary carnitine deficiencies
Very long-­, long-­, medium-­, and short-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase
deficiency

OTHER ETIOLOGIES
Substrate-­Limited Causes
Ketotic hypoglycemia
Poisoning—drugs
Salicylates
Alcohol
Oral hypoglycemic agents
Insulin
Propranolol
Pentamidine
Quinine
Disopyramide
Ackee fruit (unripe)—hypoglycin
Litchi-­associated toxin (toxic hypoglycemic syndrome)
Vacor (rat poison)
Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (with renal failure)
L-­Asparaginase and other antileukemic drugs
Liver Disease
Reye syndrome
Hepatitis
Cirrhosis
Hepatoma
AMINO ACID AND ORGANIC ACID DISORDERS
Maple syrup urine disease
Propionic acidemia
Methylmalonic acidemia
Tyrosinosis
Glutaric aciduria
3-­Hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaric aciduria
SYSTEMIC DISORDERS
Sepsis
Carcinoma/sarcoma (secreting—insulin-­like growth factor II)
Heart failure
Malnutrition
Malabsorption
Antiinsulin receptor antibodies
Antiinsulin antibodies
Neonatal hyperviscosity
Renal failure
Diarrhea
Burns
Shock
Chiari malformation
Postsurgical complication
Pseudohypoglycemia (leukocytosis, polycythemia)
Excessive insulin therapy of insulin-­dependent diabetes mellitus
Factitious disorder
Nissen fundoplication (dumping syndrome)
Falciparum malaria

GSD, Glycogen storage disease; HI, hyperinsulinemia; KATP, regulated potassium channel.

Table 113.4  Endocrine and Metabolic Causes of
­Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemia
TRANSIENT
Infant of diabetic mother
Perinatal asphyxia
Rhesus hemolytic disease
Intrauterine growth restriction
HNF4A / HNF1A
CONGENITAL
ABCC8 / KCNJ11 / GCK / GDH / HADH / HNF4A / HNF1A / UCP2 /
SLC16A1 / PMM2 / HK1 / PGM1 / FOXA2 / CACNA1D / EIF2S3
OTHERS
Postprandial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
Insulinoma
Munchausen by proxy
Exercise-­induced hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
Modified from Güemes M, Rahman SA, Kapoor RR, et al. Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia in children and adolescents: recent advances in understanding of pathophysiology
and management. Rev Endo Metab Dis. 2020;21:577–597, Table 1.

MANAGEMENT
Acute Treatment

A child presenting with hypoglycemia should be rapidly treated with
oral carbohydrates or IV dextrose to normalize their plasma glucose
(>70 mg/dL). If the child is asymptomatic or has mild symptoms and is
capable of oral intake, the hypoglycemia can be treated with 15 grams
of rapid-­acting carbohydrates, such as 4 ounces of juice or two graham
crackers. If a child is symptomatic or unable to tolerate oral intake (risk
of aspiration, impending depressed level of consciousness), 2 mL/kg of
dextrose 10% water (D10W) should be administered. After administration of the bolus, the child should be placed on an IV dextrose infusion (for infants, a glucose infusion rate of 5-­6 mg/kg/minute and for
older children 2-­3 mg/kg/minute) to prevent recurrent hypoglycemia.
Plasma glucose via point-­of-­care testing should be monitored every 15-­
20 minutes until it is >70 mg/dL, and then checks may be spaced once
stable levels are demonstrated.
In an asymptomatic child with a plasma glucose <50 mg/dL, a critical
sample can be obtained if the appropriate supplies and tubes are readily
available. Otherwise, treatment of the hypoglycemia should not be delayed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

984 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 113.5  Syndromic Forms of Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemia*
GENETIC ETIOLOGY
GENE (LOCATION)

SYNDROME NAME

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS

PRENATAL AND POSTNATAL OVERGROWTH (MACROSOMIA)
Beckwith-­Wiedemann
(11p15)

Macroglossia, abdominal wall defects, ear lobe pits/creases,
hemihypertrophy, tumor risk; IUGR if associated with
placental
mesenchymal dysplasia

Sotos

NSD1 (5q35)

Macrocephaly, frontal bossing, pointed chin, developmental
delay, tumor risk

Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel

GPC3 (Xq26), GPC4 (Xp22)

Coarse facial features, broad feet, polydactyly, cryptorchidism,
hepatomegaly, tumor risk

Perlman

DIS3L2 (2q37)

Inverted V-­shaped upper lip, prominent forehead,
developmental delay, hypotonia, tumor risk

POSTNATAL GROWTH FAILURE (SHORT STATURE)
Kabuki
KMT2D (12q13), KDM6A (Xp11.3)
Costello

Arched eyebrows, long eyelashes, developmental delay, fetal
finger pads, scoliosis, heart defects, hypotonia

HRAS (11p15)

Deep palmar/plantar creases, developmental delay, coarse
facial features, heart abnormalities, papillomas, tumor risk

CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITY
Mosaic Turner
Loss of X in some cells
Patau

Milder Turner syndrome phenotype (short stature, coarctation
of aorta, gonadal dysgenesis)

Trisomy 13

Developmental delay, microphthalmia, heart and neural
defects

CONGENITAL DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION
Types 1a, 1b, and 1d
PMM2 (16p13.2), MPI (15q24.1), ALG3 (3q27.1)

Developmental delay, hypotonia, growth failure

CONTIGUOUS GENE DELETION AFFECTING THE ABCC8 GENE
Usher
11 genes

Hearing loss, visual impairment

ABNORMALITIES IN CALCIUM HOMOEOSTASIS
Timothy
CACNA1C (12p13.33)

Long QT syndrome, syndactyly, developmental delay, immune
deficiency

INSULIN RECEPTOR PATHOGENIC VARIANT
Insulin resistance syndrome
INS (19p13)
(leprechaunism)

Hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia, prenatal and postnatal
growth restriction, elfin-­like features, hirsutism

OTHER SYNDROMES
Congenital central
hypoventilation syndrome

Central hypoventilation, “box-­shaped” face,
neurocristopathies (Hirschsprung disease, tumor risk)

PHOX2B (4p13)

IUGR, intrauterine growth restriction.
*Various developmental syndromes have been described with the gene/s linked to the condition and the common clinical features.
Modified from Güemes M, Rahman SA, Kapoor RR, et al. Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia in children and adolescents: recent advances in understanding of pathophysiology and
management. Rev Endo Metab Dis. 2020;21:577–597, Table 2.

Ongoing Management

Treatment goals of hypoglycemia disorders include maintaining
euglycemia (plasma glucose >70 mg/dL), promoting normal development, and monitoring for medication side effects. Once the diagnostic evaluation identifies a specific hypoglycemia disorder, tailored
treatment should be initiated promptly. Effective treatment allows the
child to maintain euglycemia, both while eating an age-­appropriate
diet and fasting overnight. Continuous or forced feeds should not
be used as treatment for hypoglycemia, as they result in long-­term
oral aversion and excessive weight gain. Additionally, hypoglycemia
should not routinely be treated with steroids or cornstarch unless
indicated as a treatment for specific disorders, such as adrenal insufficiency or glycogen storage disease. Home glucose monitoring is
required for all children with hypoglycemia disorders and is particularly important during times of illnesses, as this may provoke additional hypoglycemia.
Management of individual hypoglycemia disorders is given in more
detail in the following sections and in Table 113.7.

DISORDERS OF HYPOGLYCEMIA

Disorders of hypoglycemia can be classified by the metabolic fuel
response to fasting (see Fig. 113.4).

Insulin-­Mediated Disorders

Insulin-­mediated disorders (see Table 113.4) are characterized by low
plasma β-­hydroxybutyrate and FFAs and a positive glycemic response
to glucagon (Table 113.8).

Hyperinsulinism

HI is the most common cause of persistent hypoglycemia in infants and
children. HI is caused by dysregulated insulin secretion by the pancreatic β-­cells, resulting in severe and recurrent hypoglycemia (Fig.
113.5). HI can be categorized into three main forms: (1) perinatal
stress-­induced, (2) congenital or monogenic (see Table 113.4), and (3)
syndromic (see Table 113.5).
Perinatal stress-­induced HI (PSHI), the most common form of HI,
occurs in the setting of stress on the fetus in utero or during delivery.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 113 u Hypoglycemia
Table 113.6  Hypoglycemia Diagnostic Evaluation
“CRITICAL SAMPLE” TO BE OBTAINED WHEN PLASMA
GLUCOSE <50 MG/DL
LABORATORY TEST
INTERPRETATION
Comprehensive
metabolic panel

Low HCO3 suggests elevation of ketones
or lactate
Elevated liver function tests may indicate
GSD

β-­hydroxybutyrate

Low levels suggest insulin excess (most
commonly HI) or FAO disorder
Elevated levels suggest GSD, hormone
deficiency, or ketone utilization disorder

Insulin
C-­peptide

Detectable levels consistent with insulin
excess
Detectable insulin with undetectable
c-­peptide is consistent with exogenous
insulin

Cortisol
Growth hormone

Low levels concerning for hormone
deficiency; need stimulation testing to
confirm

Lactate

Elevated levels concerning for disorder of
gluconeogenesis

Ammonia

Elevation can be seen in forms of HI and
in IEM

Acylcarnitine profile
Free and total carnitine
Urine organic acids

Abnormalities suggestive of FAO disorder

IGF-­BP1

Low levels suggest insulin excess

GLUCAGON STIMULATION TEST
Administer 1 mg of glucagon IV or IM when plasma glucose <50 mg/dL
Check point-­of-­care glucose every 10 min for 40 min
If glucose does not increase 20 points in 20 min, terminate test and
feed child
Interpretation: Increase in glucose by 30 points is consistent with
insulin excess
HCO3, Bicarbonate; GSD, glycogen storage disorder; HI, hyperinsulinism; FAO, fatty
acid oxidation; IEM, inborn errors of metabolism.

In a study of 514 neonates at risk of hypoglycemia, 19% of late-­preterm
and small-­for-­gestational-­age (SGA) infants had recurrent hypoglycemia, which is concerning for PSHI. Common causes of PSHI include
intrauterine growth restriction, being born SGA, maternal preeclampsia, birth asphyxia, and congenital heart disease. Most infants with PSHI
respond to diazoxide, although a subset, particularly those with liver
dysfunction and hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy, may fail to respond.
PSHI typically resolves within the first 3-­6 months of life.
Congenital HI is the result of genetic defects in the insulin secretory pathways of the β-­cell. It is estimated to occur in 1:28,000-­50,000
live births but may be as high as 1:3,000 in populations with a high
frequency of consanguinity. The most common and severe type of congenital HI is caused by inactivating pathogenic variants of ABCC8 and
KCNJ11, which encode the ATP-­sensitive potassium (KATP) channel of
the β-­cell. Infants born with KATP-­HI are commonly large for gestation
age and have high glucose requirements (glucose infusion rate [GIR]
>10 mg/kg/min) (see Fig. 113.5). However, the spectrum of presentation is wide, and some infants have normal birthweights and lower
glucose requirements. In addition to fasting hypoglycemia, children
with this type of HI have protein-­induced hypoglycemia, in which
isolated protein ingestion leads to increased insulin secretion and low
plasma glucose. KATP-­HI is most frequently unresponsive to treatment

985

with diazoxide, the only approved drug for HI, which acts on the KATP
channel.
KATP-­HI has two distinct histologic forms: a diffuse form, in which
β-­cells throughout the pancreas show evidence of hyperactivity, and
a focal form, characterized by a localized area of β-­cell overgrowth
or adenomatosis. The diffuse form is caused by biallelic recessive
pathogenic variants in ABCC8 or KCNJ11 or, less commonly, monoallelic dominant pathogenic variants of these genes. Focal HI occurs
as a result of a “two-­hit” mechanism: a paternally inherited recessive
pathogenic variant in ABCC8 or KCNJ11 combined with somatic loss
of the maternal 11p15 region, resulting in paternal uniparental isodisomy. Infants with the focal form are cured with resection of the focal
lesion. In contrast, those with the diffuse form may require a palliative near-­total pancreatectomy if intensive medical therapy fails to
control the hypoglycemia (Fig. 113.6). Given the different treatment
approaches and outcomes for the diffuse and focal forms of KATP-­HI,
distinguishing between the two is critical and is best done through
genetic testing. A paternally inherited recessive pathogenic variant
in ABCC8 or KCNJ11 has a 94% positive predictive value for focal
KATP-­HI.
In children with genetic testing consistent with the focal form, an
18-­fluoro L-­3,4-­dihydroxyphenylalanine positron emission tomography (18F-­DOPA PET) scan is used before surgery to localize the focal
lesion (see Fig. 113.6). Frozen section evaluation of biopsies taken
during surgery is used to confirm the presence of the focal lesion and
guides the extent of the resection. Children with the focal form of HI
should receive care at specialized centers with 18F-­DOPA PET access
and a multidisciplinary team of endocrinologists, surgeons, pathologists, and radiologists with expertise in HI. Children with the diffuse
form also benefit from care at these centers because their management
and the decision to pursue intensive medical therapy or a near-­total
pancreatectomy are complex.
The second most common form of congenital HI is caused by dominant activating pathogenic variants of GLUD1, which encodes glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH). This protein regulates the first step of
amino acid–stimulated insulin secretion in the β-­cell. Children with
GDH-­HI or hyperinsulinism-­hyperammonemia syndrome (HI/HA)
have fasting hypoglycemia, significant protein-­
induced hypoglycemia, and elevated plasma ammonia concentration. Seizures, attention-­
deficit disorder, and learning disabilities also occur in this form of HI,
and these neurologic issues do not seem to correlate with the degree of
hypoglycemia or ammonia elevation. This form of HI responds well to
diazoxide.
Activating pathogenic variants of GCK, which encodes glucokinase, cause an autosomal dominant form of congenital HI. Glucokinase is the key enzyme triggering glucose-­mediated insulin secretion.
Children with GCK-­HI have fasting hypoglycemia of variable severity
and diazoxide responsiveness. Severe cases may require a near-­total
pancreatectomy.
Pathogenic variants in HNF4A and HNF1A, which encode the transcription factors hepatic nuclear factors 4-­alpha and 1-­alpha, cause a
dominant form of diazoxide-­responsive HI. These infants may be large
for gestational age and have high GIR requirements at birth. The HI
resolves within the first several years of life. However, some individuals experience progressive β-­cell failure and progress to an early-­onset
diabetes, known as maturity-­onset diabetes of the young (MODY).
Syndromes associated with HI are increasingly being recognized
(see Table 113.5). Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), an imprinting disorder, is characterized by macroglossia, lateralized overgrowth,
omphalocele, and a predisposition to embryonal tumors (Fig. 113.7).
Hyperinsulinism occurs in approximately 50% of infants with BWS,
although most cases are mild and resolve within the first several weeks
of life. These cases are typically responsive to diazoxide. Children
with BWS caused by paternal uniparental isodisomy of 11p can have
severe and persistent HI, which does not respond to diazoxide and may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

986 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Hypoglycemia: PG ≤50 mg/dL

Maternal & infant
history, physical exam

Obtain critical labs if blood sugar
<50 mg/dL from glucometer: serum glucose
(to confirm hypoglycemia), GH, cortisol,
insulin, FFA, β OHB, lactate, urinary ketones

No acidosis

Acidosis

High lactate

Ketosis

No ketosis & no FFA

No ketones, high FFA

Short fasting period

Moderate fasting period

Short to moderate fasting period

Prolonged fasting period

Glycogen storage disease
• Glucose-6-phosphatase
deficiency (type 1 GSD)

Defects in glycogenolysis
(type 3, 6, 9 GSD)

Defects in hepatic
gluconeogenesis
• Fructose-1.6diphosphatase deficiency
• Pyruvate carboxylase
deficiency
• Phosphoenolpyruvate
deficiency

• Debrancher
• Liver phosphorylase
• Phosphorylase
kinase deficiencies

IDDM or insulin therapy
Oral hypoglycemic agents

Genetic defects in fatty acid
oxidation and/or ketogenesis

SGA & birth asphyxia
Neonatal hypopituitarism
Infants of diabetic mothers
Congenital hyperinsulinism

Normal fasting child
Ketotic hypoglycemia
Growth hormone or
cortisol deficiency

Insulinoma
Transient neonatal
hypoglycemia
AKT2 pathogenic variant

Ethanol ingestion

Fig. 113.4 Diagnostic algorithm for determining the etiology of hypoglycemia in children. OHB, Hydroxybutyrate; FFA, free fatty acid; GH, growth

hormone, GSD, glycogen storage disease; PG, plasma glucose; IDDM, insulin-­dependent diabetes mellitus. (Modified from Melmed S, Auchus RJ,
Goldfine AB, Koenig RJ, Rosen CJ. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 14th ed. Elsevier; 2020:1547, Fig. 38.14.)

require a pancreatectomy. Other syndromes known to be associated
with HI include Kabuki, Turner, and Rubinstein-­Taybi. HI in these
syndromes presents with variable degrees of severity and responsiveness to diazoxide.
After establishing a diagnosis of HI, a trial of diazoxide, the first-­
line agent for the treatment of HI, should be undertaken (Fig. 113.8).
Diazoxide opens the KATP channel, inhibiting insulin secretion. Children are considered responsive to diazoxide if the cardinal feature
of HI, hypoketotic hypoglycemia, is corrected. This is assessed by
demonstrating that the child can maintain plasma glucose >70 mg/

dL both while feeding and during an overnight fast and/or plasma β-­
hydroxybutyrate concentration increases to >2 mmol/L before plasma
glucose decreases below 50-­60 mg/dL during fasting. Failure to respond
to diazoxide strongly suggests KATP-­HI, and those children require expedited genetic testing for ABCC8 and KCNJ11 to determine their risk for
focal HI. Thus the assessment of the response to diazoxide has important therapeutic and diagnostic implications.
Somatostatin analogs are used off-­label as second-­line agents
for the treatment of diazoxide-­unresponsive diffuse HI. Octreotide
requires multiple daily injections, and its effectiveness is limited by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 113 u Hypoglycemia

987

Table 113.7  Treatments for Hypoglycemia Disorders
DRUG/THERAPY

INDICATION

DOSE (ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION)

SIDE EFFECTS/COMMENTS

Diazoxide

HI

5-­15 mg/kg/day every 12 hr (PO)

Hypertrichosis, fluid overload* neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia, respiratory distress,
hyperglycemia

Octreotide

HI

2-­20 mcg/kg/day every 6 hr (SQ)

Gallstones, transaminitis, malabsorption,
suppression of thyroid and growth hormones

Lanreotide

HI

60-­90 mg every 28 days (SQ)

Gallstones, transaminitis, malabsorption,
suppression of thyroid and growth hormones

Enteral D20

HI

Up to 10 mg/kg/min continuously (via
gastrostomy or nasogastric tube)

Vomiting, diarrhea, fluid overload

Cornstarch

GSD, rarely FAOD, IKH

1-­2 g/kg per dose (PO)

Diarrhea in infants

Growth hormone

Growth hormone
deficiency

0.3 mg/kg/wk daily or every 12 hr (infants)
(SQ)

Pseudotumor cerebri, edema, slipped capital
femoral epiphysis, hyperglycemia

Hydrocortisone

Adrenal insufficiency

8-­12 mg/m2/day (PO)

High doses: Immunosuppression,
hyperglycemia, hypertension, obesity

Acarbose

Postprandial
hypoglycemia

12.5-­50 mg with meals

Transaminitis, diarrhea, abdominal pain

PANCREATECTOMY
Partial
Near-­total (98%)

Focal HI
Insulinoma

>50% pancreatectomy increases risk of
diabetes and exocrine insufficiency later in life

Severe diffuse HI

Insulin-­dependent diabetes, exocrine
insufficiency

*Concomitant use of diuretics is strongly recommended in neonates and infants; older children may require this as well.
HI, Hyperinsulinism; GSD, glycogen storage disease; FAOD, fatty acid oxidation disorder; IKH, idiopathic ketotic hypoglycemia.

Table 113.8  Criteria for Diagnosing Hyperinsulinism and
Other Forms of Insulin Excess
DRAWN AT A TIME OF FASTING HYPOGLYCEMIA:
PLASMA GLUCOSE <50 MG/DL
Detectable insulin or c-­peptide (plasma insulin ≥2 μU/mL or plasma
C-­peptide ≥0.5 ng/mL)*
Hypofattyacidemia (plasma free fatty acids <1.7 mmol/L)
Hypoketonemia (plasma β-­hydroxybutyrate <1.8 mmol/L)
Inappropriate glycemic response to glucagon (increase in glucose
>30 mg/dL)
*Depends on sensitivity of insulin assay. Detectable insulin and C-­peptide is not necessary to make a diagnosis of HI.

tachyphylaxis. A long-­acting analog, lanreotide, is administrated
monthly in children greater than 1 year old and can be an effective
and more convenient alternative to octreotide. Somatostatin analogs should not be used in neonates or infants less than 2 months
old because they are associated with fulminant necrotizing enterocolitis. Continuous intragastric dextrose administered via gastrostomy tube is used in combination with a somatostatin analog and
allows for an age-­appropriate feeding schedule.

Infants Born to Diabetic Mothers

See Chapter 147.1.
Gestational diabetes affects approximately 2% of pregnant
women, and 1 in 1,000 pregnant women have insulin-­dependent
diabetes. Infants born to mothers with poorly controlled diabetes
are born large for gestational age and with severe hypoglycemia
resulting from a transient hyperinsulinemic state. Exposed to high
glucose concentrations, the fetal islets compensate with increased
insulin secretion that, during intrauterine life, leads to overgrowth and, after birth, results in hypoglycemia. The hypoglycemia

resolves within the first 3-­7 days of life. Mothers whose diabetes
has been well controlled during pregnancy, labor, and delivery generally have infants near normal size who are less likely to develop
hypoglycemia.

Insulinoma

Older children and adolescents presenting with insulin-­
mediated
hypoglycemia should be evaluated for an insulinoma, a rare islet cell
tumor. These tumors may be insidious, slow growing, and difficult
to localize with conventional imaging modalities. Surgical resection
is curative. Children diagnosed with an insulinoma should undergo
genetic testing for the tumor predisposition syndrome, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1).

Factitious Hypoglycemia

Surreptitious administration of insulin presents with abrupt onset
and erratic hypoglycemia. In a younger child, a parent or guardian
may provoke hypoglycemia (factitious disorder imposed on another:
Munchhausen by proxy), but an adolescent may be self-­administering
insulin. The biochemical hallmark of exogenous insulin administration is a detectable insulin level with undetectable c-­peptide. However,
specialized assays may be needed to detect the analog insulins, such
as aspart or glargine. Intentional or accidental ingestion of sulfonylureas also presents with hypoglycemia. In these cases, both insulin and
c-­peptide are detectable, and sulfonylurea blood levels are required for
confirmation.

Defects of Fatty Acid Oxidation

Fatty acid oxidation disorders are characterized by low plasma β-­
hydroxybutyrate and high plasma FFAs. See Chapter 106.1.
Multiple enzymatic deficiencies in the mitochondria pathway of
fatty acid oxidation cause defective carnitine or fatty acid metabolism.
These disorders are characterized by fasting hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, cardiomyopathy, and hypotonia, although the spectrum of
severity is wide. Infants may present with a Reye-­like syndrome (see

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

988 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Glutamate

α-ketoglutamate
Pyruvate

GLUT2

Glucose

SLC16A1
β-oxidation

GLUD1
HK1
TCA
cycle

GCK
ADP

ATP

SUR1 (ABCC8)

UCP2

Glycolysis

Kir6.2 (KCNJ11)
K+

ADP

HNF-4α
HNF-1α

HADH

ATP
ATP closes KATP channel

Secretory vesicles
Ca2+
CACNA1D
Membrane
depolarization
Insulin
exocytosis

Voltage-gated Ca2+
channel

Fig. 113.5 Diagrammatic representation of β-­cell function. Genetic defects associated with congenital HI are included in red. Postprandial glucose is
taken into the β-­cells via the glucose transporter 2 (GLUT-­2). Glucose then enters the glycolysis pathway followed by the mitochondrial citric acid cycle
(TCA), yielding the high-­energy molecule, adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ATP molecules travel to and inhibit the potassium-­dependent ATP channels
(KATP), which prevents influx of potassium resulting in membrane depolarization. This triggers voltage-­gated calcium channels to open, and influx of
calcium (Ca2+) occurs. The Ca2+ activates the enzyme phospholipase C (PLC) to produce inositol 1,3,5 triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG) from
phosphatidyl 1,3 bisphosphate (PIP2). The IP3 molecule binds to the protein receptor on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to promote a release of Ca2+
from the ER. This subsequent increase in cytoplasmic Ca2+ promotes exocytosis of the prepackaged mature insulin and active C-­peptide, which are
released into circulation. GLUT2: Glucose transporter 2; Glucokinase (GCK) encoded by GCK gene; ADP: Adenosine diphosphate; ATP: Adenosine
triphosphate; Monocarboxylate transporter (MCT1) encoded by SLC16A1 gene; Glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) encoded by GLUD1 gene; Uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) encoded by UCP2 gene; L-­3hydroxyacyl-­coenzyme A dehydrogenase (HADH) encoded by HADH gene; SUR1 subunit of the KATP
channel encoded by the ABCC8 gene; Kir6.2 subunit of the KATP channel encoded by KCNJ11 gene; Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α (HNF4α) encoded
by HNF4A gene; Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1α (HNF1α) encoded by HNF1A gene; HK1: Hexokinase 1 encoded by the gene HK1; CACNA1D: calcium
voltage-­gated channel subunit alpha1 D. Gene variants in forkhead box protein A2 (FOXA2), phosphoglucomutase 1 (PGM1), and phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2) are not included in the drawing. (From Güemes M, Rahman SA, Kapoor RR, et al. Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia in children and
adolescents: recent advances in understanding of pathophysiology and management. Rev Endo Metab Dis. 2020;21:577–597, Fig. 1.)

Liver

Liver

Liver
Pancreas
Pancreas

Pancreas

Pancreas

H
T

I A

Kidneys

Kidney

C

B

Focal lesion in
head of pancreas

Focal lesion in
head of pancreas

Focal lesion in
head of pancreas

Liver

Pancreas
Liver

Liver

II A

Kidney

D

Kidneys

B

C

Kidney

D

Kidney

Fig. 113.6 Imaging of congenital hyperinsulinism. I Panels (diffuse): 18-­fluoro L-­3,4-­dihydroxyphenylalanine positron emission tomography (18F-­
DOPA PET) of a patient with a diffuse form of congenital hyperinsulinism. A, Diffuse uptake of 18F-­DOPAa is visualized throughout the pancreas.
Transverse views show (B) normal pancreatic tissue on abdominal CT, (C) diffuse uptake of 18F-­DOPA in the pancreas, and (D) confirmation of pancreatic uptake of 18F-­DOPA with co-­registration. H, Head of pancreas; T, tail of pancreas. II Panels (focal): 18F-­DOPA PET of a patient with a focal form
of congenital hyperinsulinism. (A) Discrete area of increased 18F-­DOPA uptake is visualized in the head of the pancreas. The intensity of this area is
greater than that observed in the liver and neighboring normal pancreatic tissue. Transverse views show (B) normal pancreatic tissue on abdominal
CT, (C) focal uptake of 18F-­DOPA in the pancreatic head, and (D) confirmation of 18F-­DOPA uptake in the pancreatic head with co-­registration. (Courtesy Dr. Olga Hardy, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 113 u Hypoglycemia

989

Chapter 409) and recurrent episodes of fasting hypoglycemia, cardiorespiratory arrest, and coma, whereas older children with less severe
forms may only develop symptoms with illness. Most cases are detected
via newborn screening and confirmed with genetic testing. Abnormalities are seen in the acylcarnitine and urine organic acid profiles in children who are not identified through newborn screening. Treatment
typically involves avoidance of fasting and administration of dextrose-­
containing fluids with illness.
Interference with fatty acid metabolism also underlies the fasting hypoglycemia associated with Jamaican vomiting sickness. In
Jamaican vomiting sickness, the unripe ackee fruit contains a water-­
soluble toxin, hypoglycin, which produces vomiting, CNS depression,
and severe hypoglycemia. The hypoglycemic activity of hypoglycin
derives from its inhibition of gluconeogenesis secondary to its interference with the acyl-­CoA and carnitine metabolism essential for
the oxidation of long-­chain fatty acids. The disease is almost totally
confined to Jamaica, where ackee forms a staple of the diet. The ripe
ackee fruit no longer contains this toxin. A similar illness noted in
India, acute toxic encephalopathy-­hypoglycemic syndrome, may be
caused by litchi consumption. Litchi contains hypoglycin A and/or
methylenecyclopropylglycine, which may inhibit fatty acid oxidation
or gluconeogenesis.

KETOTIC HYPOGLYCEMIC DISORDERS

These disorders are characterized by elevated levels of plasma β-­
hydroxybutyrate (>2.5 mmol/L) (Table 113.9).

Glycogen Storage Disorders
Fig. 113.7 Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome. (Courtesy Dr. Michael

Cohen, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia. From Jones KL.
Smith’s recognizable patterns of human malformation, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006.)

See Chapter 107.1.
The hepatic glycogen storage disorders (GSDs; 0, I, III, VI, and IX) result
from genetic defects in the enzymes that regulate the synthesis, breakdown,
and release of glycogen in the liver. GSD type I also affects gluconeogenesis. GSDs are characterized by fasting ketotic hypoglycemia and various
degrees of hepatomegaly, liver function abnormalities, hyperlipidemia, and

Diagnosis of HI

5 day trial of diazoxide

Safety fast with
PG ≥70 mg/dL
(3.9 mmol/L)

Diazoxide
unresponsive

Diazoxide
responsive

Bi-allelic recessive or
dominant ABCC8 or
KCNJ11 pathogenic variant;
GCK pathogenic variant

Rapid genetic analysis

Negative pathogenic variant
analysis; ABCC8 or KCNJ11
variant of unknown significance;
BWS

Paternal recessive
monoallelic ABCC8
or KCNJ11 pathogenic
variant

Continue diazoxide
Consider comprehensive
genetic testing

Transient

Diazoxide for
3–6 months

Persistent

Intensive medical therapy
Wait until 8 weeks old to trial
octreotide given NEC risk

Diazoxide treatment
until puberty*

Unresponsive

Subtotal
Pancreatectomy

18F-DOPA PET scan

No focal lesion
identified

Focal lesion

Lesion
resection

Fig. 113.8 Management algorithm for hyperinsulinism. HI, Hyperinsulinism; BWS, Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome. *Some individuals may require
diazoxide treatment into adulthood and possibly lifelong.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

990 Part IX u Metabolic Disorders
Table 113.9  Causes of Ketotic Hypoglycemia in Children
GENE OR CHROMOSOME

INHERITANCE

HORMONAL
Growth hormone deficiency or resistance
ACTH deficiency or resistance; cortisol deficiency
Glucagon deficiency*
Dopamine β-­hydroxylase deficiency*

Genetic or acquired
Genetic or acquired
GCG, DBH
GCG, DBH

Variable
Variable
N/D
N/D

METABOLIC
Glycogen storage disease (GSD)
GSD 0; glycogen synthase deficiency
GSD III; glycogen debranching enzyme deficiency
GSD VI; glycogen phosphorylase deficiency
GSD IX; phosphorylase kinase subunit deficiencies

GYS2
AGL
PYGL
PHKA2, PHKB, PHKG2

AR
AR
AR
X-­linked, AR

GLUCOSE METABOLISM AND TRANSPORT
Phosphoglucomutase I deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency

PMG1
PC

AR
AR

Multiple genes

AR

SLC16A1 (MCT1)

AR, AD

SCOT
ACAT1

AR
AR

11p15 or 7**
15q11-­q13***
SLC2A2 (GLUT2)
—­

Mostly sporadic
Mostly sporadic
AR
—­

—
—­
IGF2BP1
SLC5A2
NCOR1
NEK11

—­
—­
N/D
N/D
N/D
N/D

ORGANIC ACIDEMIAS
Maple syrup urine disease, propionic aciduria, methylmalonic aciduria
Ketone body transport and metabolism
Monocarboxylase transporter 1 defect
Ketolysis
Succinyl CoA oxoacid transferase deficiency
Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-­CoA thiolase (β-­ketothiolase) deficiency
SYNDROMES
Silver-­Russel syndrome
Prader-­Willi syndrome
Fanconi-­Bickel syndrome
KH secondary to chronic malnutrition, severe malaria, other chronic diseases
Idiopathic ketotic hypoglycemia
Physiologic KH in prolonged fasting or acute illness
Pathologic KH
IGF2BP1 deficiency*
Sodium glucose co-­transporter 2 defect*
PEP carboxykinase 1 and G-­6P catalytic transcriptional induction*
Mitosis gene A-­related kinase 11 defect*

*Suggested, not well-­established, causes of KH.
**Several mechanisms, rare other mechanisms, or unknown.
***Paternal deletion, maternal uniparental disomy, or imprinting defect.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; N/D, no data; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; G-­6P, glucose 6-­phosphate. The list is not fully inclusive.
From Drachmann D, Hoffman E, Carrigg A, et al. Towards enhanced understanding of idiopathic ketotic hypoglycemia: a literature review and introduction of the patient organization, Ketotic Hypoglycemia International. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021;16:173, Table 1.

failure to thrive. Muscle involvement is a feature of GSD type III, resulting
in proximal muscle weakness and risk of cardiomyopathy. GSD types 0, VI,
and IX present with less severe hypoglycemia compared with type I and III.
The diagnosis of GSD is suspected in patients presenting with ketotic hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, and liver enzyme abnormalities and is confirmed
through genetic testing. The treatment of GSDs consists of uncooked cornstarch therapy, protein supplementation, and limited fasting.

Hormone Deficiencies

Deficiencies of cortisol or growth hormone can result in ketotic hypoglycemia, as these counter-­regulatory hormones play a role in mobilizing glucose production by the liver. Hypoglycemia occurs in both
primary or secondary (central) adrenal insufficiency and is commonly
seen during an adrenal crisis. Growth hormone deficiency results in
hypoglycemia mainly during infancy and early toddlerhood. Combined hormone deficiencies, known as hypopituitarism, can also result

in hypoglycemia and are commonly caused by structural abnormalities
of the pituitary gland. A clinical clue to the diagnosis of hypopituitarism is the presence of midline defects, cleft lip or palate, or in males,
a microphallus. In the neonatal period, hypopituitarism presents with
a hypoketotic hypoglycemia pattern that is indistinguishable from the
pattern seen in neonates with HI. Thus in neonates with features suggestive of hypopituitarism, it is important to rule out hormone deficiencies before making a diagnosis of HI.
Low cortisol and growth hormone levels on a critical-­sample laboratory result are suggestive of hormone deficiencies but not diagnostic.
To confirm these diagnoses in a child presenting with hypoglycemia,
appropriate hormone stimulation testing is recommended. A child
diagnosed with central adrenal insufficiency, growth hormone deficiency, or hypopituitarism requires magnetic resonance imaging of
their pituitary gland to assess for structural abnormalities or lesions.
Hormone replacement with either hydrocortisone or growth hormone

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 113 u Hypoglycemia
resolves the hypoglycemia. Neonates and infants require twice-­a-­day
growth hormone dosing to prevent ongoing hypoglycemia.

Idiopathic Ketotic Hypoglycemia

Idiopathic ketotic hypoglycemia (IKH) commonly occurs during
the first 1-­4 years of life and typically resolves by age 6-­8 years old.
Children present with hypoglycemia and elevated β-­hydroxybutyrate
(>2-­3 mmol/L), frequently in the setting of illness, and demonstrate
shortened fasting tolerance on a diagnostic fast. IKH is a diagnosis of
exclusion, and it is important to rule out other causes of ketotic hypoglycemia, such as GSDs or hormone deficiencies, before making this
diagnosis. IKH is likely the result of the lower energy stores in toddlers and young children and is not caused by an underlying metabolic
defect, as evidenced by its spontaneous resolution (see Table 113.9).
Treatment typically consists of limited fasting time and home glucose monitoring during times of illness. IV dextrose infusion may be
required with illness if children are unable to tolerate oral feeds.

Disorders of Gluconeogenesis

Disorders of gluconeogenesis are characterized by elevated plasma lactate levels during hypoglycemia.

Glycogen Storage Disease Type I

See Chapter 107.1.
Glucose-­6-­phosphatase regulates the terminal step of gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, and deficiency of this enzyme results in GSD
type I. Children with this condition experience hypoglycemia within
2-­3 hours after a meal and significant elevations of lactate, uric acid,
and triglycerides because of shunting of gluconeogenic precursors to
alternative pathways in the liver. The diagnosis should be suspected
in an infant with hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, and the characteristic
metabolic abnormalities. Sequencing of G6PC (type Ia) or SLC37A4
(type Ib) confirms the diagnosis. Treatment includes frequent meals
or feeds and after the first 6-­12 months of life, uncooked cornstarch
administered every 3-­4 hours. Fasting beyond 4-­6 hours can provoke
life-­threatening lactic acidosis.

Fructose-­1,6-­Bisphosphatase Deficiency

See Chapter 107.3.
A deficiency of this enzyme results in a block of gluconeogenesis from
all possible precursors below the level of fructose-­1,6-­bisphosphate.
Features are similar to GSD type I with fasting hypoglycemia, severe
lactic acidosis, and elevations of uric acid and triglycerides. However,
glycogenolysis remains intact, so patients do not have significant hepatomegaly or transaminitis. The diagnosis is confirmed through genetic
testing of FBP1. Similar to GSD type I, treatment involves frequent
meals, cornstarch, and avoidance of prolonged fasting.

OTHER CAUSES OF HYPOGLYCEMIA
Postprandial Hypoglycemia

Up to 30% of infants and children with Nissen fundoplication, a procedure used to ameliorate gastroesophageal reflux, develop postprandial
hypoglycemia, or “late dumping syndrome.” Characteristic features
include hyperglycemia followed by severe hypoglycemia (average 32

991

mg/dL in one series) 1.5-­3 hours later. The early hyperglycemia phase is
associated with brisk and excessive insulin release that causes the resultant hypoglycemia. A role for exaggerated GLP-­1 secretion has been
proposed as being responsible for the excessive insulin release. Treatment consists of feed modifications for formula-­or tube-­fed children,
such as the use of complex formulas or prolonged feeds. Acarbose has
been successfully used in some orally fed children.

Acute Alcohol Intoxication

The generation of reducing equivalents during the oxidation of ethanol in
the liver inhibits several gluconeogenic enzymes, resulting in hypoglycemia if glycogen stores are depleted by starvation or by preexisting abnormalities in glycogen metabolism. There is no correlation between blood
ethanol levels and the occurrence of hypoglycemia. In toddlers who have
been fasting for some time, even the consumption of small quantities
of alcohol can precipitate hypoglycemia. Alcohol-­induced hypoglycemia
promptly responds to IV dextrose. However, if there is an associated alcohol
toxicity, the patient may not show clinical signs of improvement despite
now having a normal blood glucose level. A careful history allows the diagnosis to be made and may avoid additional workup.

β Blockers

β-­Adrenergic stimulation enhances glucagon secretion and increases
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. β blockers impair the counter-­
regulatory response to hypoglycemia and blunt the autonomic symptoms described earlier. Children at highest risk of hypoglycemia from β
blockers include those with insulin-­dependent diabetes and infants and
toddlers in the setting of prolonged fasting or illness. Despite increased
use of propranolol for infantile hemangiomas, the prevalence of hypoglycemia in this population appears to be low (0.9%). Propranolol has
also been safely used in children with underlying hypoglycemia disorders, although close monitoring of glucose is needed during illness.

Salicylate Intoxication

See Chapter 94.
Both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia occur in children with
salicylate intoxication. Accelerated use of glucose, resulting from augmentation of insulin secretion by salicylates, and possible interference
with gluconeogenesis may contribute to hypoglycemia. Infants are
more susceptible than older children. Monitoring of blood glucose
levels with appropriate glucose infusion in the event of hypoglycemia
should form part of the therapeutic approach to salicylate intoxication
in childhood. Ketosis may occur.

Systemic Disorders

Several systemic disorders are associated with hypoglycemia in infants
and children. Children with acute liver failure develop hypoglycemia
because of loss of gluconeogenesis. Sepsis, particularly in neonates,
may result in hypoglycemia. Falciparum malaria is also associated with
hypoglycemia, which is thought to be the result of increased glucose
use and impaired gluconeogenesis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1028 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Aneuploidy screening is offered to pregnant persons in the
first trimester or at midgestation to evaluate the risk for common
aneuploidies such as Down syndrome (trisomy 21), trisomy 18,
trisomy 13, and congenital malformations (e.g., abdominal wall
or NTDs) known to cause elevations of various markers. A combination of these biochemical markers (including AFP, inhibin A,
estriol, pregnancy-­associated plasma protein A, β-­human chorionic gonadotropin [β-­hCG]) and US increases the positive predictive value (PPV) of these screening tests. Fetal DNA in maternal
plasma and fetal cells circulating in maternal blood are potential
noninvasive sources of material for prenatal genetic testing. This
testing, however, is not diagnostic, and a positive test requires
either amniocentesis or postnatal analysis to confirm the diagnosis.
Nonetheless, fetal karyotyping by analysis of fetal DNA in maternal
plasma is another screening test that is very sensitive for the detection of Down syndrome, with a higher PPV than any other prenatal
screening test for Down syndrome. Currently, however, the use of
this technology is only advocated in pregnancies deemed at high
risk for aneuploidy.

for the fetus and the parents. Termination of pregnancy is also an option
that should be discussed during the initial phases of counseling.
Folic acid supplementation decreases the incidence and recurrence
of NTDs. Because the neural tube closes within the first 28 days of conception, periconceptional supplementation is needed for prevention. It
is recommended that women without a prior history of a NTD ingest
400 μg/day of folic acid throughout their reproductive years. Women
with a history of a prior pregnancy complicated by an NTD or a first-­
degree relative with an NTD should have preconceptional counseling
and should ingest 4 mg/day of supplemental folic acid beginning at least
1 month before conception. Fortification of cereal-­grain flour with folic
acid is established policy in the United States and some other countries.
The optimal concentration of folic acid in enriched grains is somewhat
controversial. The incidence of NTD in the United States and other
countries has decreased significantly since these public health initiatives were implemented. Use of some antiepileptic drugs (valproate,
carbamazepine) during pregnancy is associated with an increased risk
of NTD. Women taking these medications should ingest 1-­5 mg of folic
acid daily in the preconception period.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

117.7 Treatment and Prevention of Fetal
Disease
Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Susan S. Cohen
See also Chapter 118.
Management of a fetal disease depends on coordinated advances
in diagnostic accuracy and knowledge of the disease’s natural history;
an understanding of fetal nutrition, pharmacology, immunology, and
pathophysiology; the availability of specific active drugs that cross the
placenta; and therapeutic procedures. Progress in providing specific
treatments for accurately diagnosed diseases has improved with the
advent of real-­time ultrasonography, amniocentesis, and cordocentesis
(see Tables 117.1 and 117.9).
The incidence of sensitization of Rh-­negative women by Rh-­positive
fetuses has been reduced by prophylactic administration of Rh(D)
immunoglobulin to mothers early in pregnancy and after each delivery
or abortion, thus reducing the frequency of hemolytic disease in their
subsequent offspring. Fetal erythroblastosis (see Chapter 140) may be
accurately detected by fetal Doppler assessment of the peak systolic
velocity of the middle cerebral artery and treated with intrauterine
transfusions of packed Rh-­negative blood cells via the intraperitoneal
or, more often, intraumbilical vein approach.
Pharmacologic approaches to fetal immaturity mostly revolve
around the administration of antenatal corticosteroids to the mother
to promote fetal production of surfactant with a resultant decrease in
the incidence of respiratory distress syndrome (see Chapter 126).
Tocolytic agents have been demonstrated to prolong pregnancy to
allow the administration of antenatal corticosteroids (48 hours); however, there is no proven benefit beyond this time frame. Maternal
administration of magnesium sulfate for fetal/neonatal neuroprotection is recommended in pregnancies deemed to be at risk of imminent
delivery before 32 weeks’ gestation in light of evidence demonstrating a
reduction in frequency of cerebral palsy compared with those who did
not receive this treatment.
Management of definitively diagnosed fetal genetic disease or congenital
anomalies consists of multidisciplinary parental counseling. Rarely, high-­
dose vitamin therapy for a responsive inborn error of metabolism (e.g.,
biotin-­dependent disorders) or fetal transfusion (with red blood cells or
platelets) may be indicated. Fetal surgery is well-­established treatment for
certain conditions but remains a largely experimental approach to therapy
for other conditions and is available only in a few, highly specialized perinatal centers (see Table 117.9 and Chapter 118). The nature of the defect
and its consequences must be considered, as well as ethical implications

Chapter 118

Fetal Intervention and
Surgery
Natalie E. Rintoul, Emily A. Partridge, and
Holly L. Hedrick
Congenital anomalies have always been recognized as a therapeutic
challenge. Numerous diagnoses have been evaluated for the possibility
of fetal intervention (Tables 118.1 and 118.2). Some have proved beneficial to the developing infant, some have been abandoned, and some
remain under investigation.

FETAL THERAPY ETHICS

With the development of advanced fetal ultrasound (US), ultrafast fetal
MRI, and fetal echocardiography, the ability to accurately diagnose
fetal disease has improved substantially over the past 3 decades. The
first prenatal therapeutic intervention was reported in 1963 with the
successful treatment of erythroblastosis fetalis by fetal intraperitoneal
infusion. Other innovations, though groundbreaking, brought to light
the high morbidity (fetal and maternal) and mortality associated with
open fetal interventions, and it would take greater experience and techniques before open fetal surgery would be safer and therapeutic.

OBSTRUCTIVE UROPATHY

Obstructive uropathy is a diverse set of diseases affecting the bladder neck
or urethra and affects between 2.2 and 3.3 per 10,000 live births. It is most
frequently caused by posterior urethral valves (PUVs) but can be caused
by a variety of other defects, including urethral atresia, persistent cloaca,
caudal regression, and megacystis–microcolon–intestinal hypoperistalsis
syndrome (see Chapters 577 and 578). Although male fetuses are more
commonly affected, females are more commonly associated with severe
pathologic variants, and 30% of survivors will require renal replacement
therapy or transplantation before age 5. Congenital obstructive uropathy

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 118 u Fetal Intervention and Surgery

1029

Table 118.1  Fetal Diagnoses Evaluated and Treated in Fetal Centers
Amniotic band syndrome (ABS)
Anomalies in monochorionic twins
Aortic stenosis
Arachnoid cyst
Bladder exstrophy
Bladder outlet obstruction
Bronchopulmonary sequestration (BPS)
Cervical teratoma
Cloaca
Cloaca exstrophy
Complete heart block
Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM)
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH)
Congenital high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS)
EXIT to airway procedure for CHAOS
Conjoined twins
Dandy-­Walker malformation
Duodenal atresia
Encephalocele
Enteric duplication atresia
Esophageal atresia

Gastroschisis
Hydrocephalus
Hydronephrosis
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS)
Imperforate anus
Intraabdominal cyst
Lymphangioma
Mediastinal teratoma
Myelomeningocele, spina bifida
Neuroblastoma
Obstructive uropathy
Omphalocele
Pentalogy of Cantrell
Pericardial teratoma
Pleural effusions
Pulmonary agenesis
Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum
Sacrococcygeal teratoma (SCT)
Twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence
Twin-­to-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS)
Vein of Galen aneurysm

EXIT, Ex utero intrapartum treatment.

Table 118.2  Indications and Rationales for In Utero Surgery on the Fetus, Placenta, Cord, or Membranes
FETAL SURGERY

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

RATIONALE FOR IN UTERO INTERVENTION

SURGERY ON THE FETUS
1. Congenital diaphragmatic
hernia

Pulmonary hypoplasia and anatomic substrate for
pulmonary hypertension

Reversal of pulmonary hypoplasia and reduced degree
of pulmonary hypertension
Repair of actual defect delayed until after birth

2. Lower urinary tract
obstruction

Progressive renal damage due to obstructive uropathy
Pulmonary hypoplasia due to oligohydramnios

Prevention of renal failure and pulmonary hypoplasia
by anatomic correction or urinary deviation

3. Sacrococcygeal teratoma

High-­output cardiac failure due to AV shunting and/or
bleeding
Direct anatomic effects of the tumoral mass
Polyhydramnios-­related preterm labor

Reduction of functional impact of tumor by ablation of
tumor or (part of) its vasculature
Reduction of anatomic effects by drainage of cysts or
bladder
Amnioreduction preventing obstetric complications

4. Thoracic space-­occupying
lesions

Pulmonary hypoplasia (space-­occupying mass)
Hydrops due to impaired venous return (mediastinal
compression)

Creation of space for lung development
Reversal of the process of cardiac failure

5. Neural tube defects

Damage to exposed neural tube
Chronic CSF leak, leading to Arnold-­Chiari
malformation and hydrocephalus

Prevention of exposure of the spinal cord to amniotic fluid
Restoration of CSF pressure correcting Arnold-­Chiari
malformation

6. Cardiac malformations

Critical lesions causing irreversible hypoplasia or
damage to developing heart

Reversal of process by anatomic correction of
restrictive pathology

SURGERY ON THE PLACENTA, CORD, OR MEMBRANES
7. Chorioangioma
High-­output cardiac failure due to AV shunting
Effects of polyhydramnios

Reversal of process of cardiac failure and hydrops
fetoplacentalis by ablation or reduction of flow

8. Amniotic bands

Progressive constrictions causing irreversible
neurologic or vascular damage

Prevention of amniotic band syndrome leading to
deformities and function loss

9. Abnormal monochorionic
twinning: twin-­to-­twin
transfusion; fetus acardius,
and discordant anomalies

Twin-twin transfusion leading to oligopolyhydramnios
sequence, hemodynamic changes; preterm labor,
and rupture of membranes; in utero damage to
brain, heart, or other organs
In utero fetal death may cause damage to co-­twin
Cardiac failure of pump twin and consequences of
polyhydramnios
Serious anomaly raising the question of termination
of pregnancy
Selective feticide

Arrest of intertwin transfusion
Prevention/reversal of cardiac failure and/or neurologic
damage, including at in utero death
Prolongation of gestation
Selective feticide to arrest parasitic relationship, to
prevent consequences of in utero fetal death, and to
avoid termination of entire pregnancy

AV, Arteriovenous; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
From Deprest J, Hodges R, Gratacos E, Lewi L. Invasive fetal therapy. In: Creasy RK, Resnick R, Iams JD, et al., eds. Creasy & Resnik’s Maternal-­Fetal Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2014. Table 35-­1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1030 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
causes hydronephrosis and renal dysplasia of variable severity. Although
the mechanism of renal injury is debated, hypotheses include cyst formation secondary to urinary retention and subsequent disruption of nephrogenesis versus obstruction-­associated apoptosis of renal tubular cells.
Obstructive uropathy usually presents on fetal US with an enlarged
bladder, bilateral hydroureteronephrosis, and oligohydramnios in
the second and third trimester. Mild forms of obstructive uropathy
may lead to minimal short-­or long-­term clinical sequelae. However,
reduced fetal urine output resulting in oligohydramnios or anhydramnios in more severe forms can cause significant pulmonary hypoplasia, which is associated with death shortly after delivery in >80% of
infants. Pulmonary survivors remain subject to high mortality and
chronic morbidity resulting from renal dysplasia, renal failure, and
the need for chronic renal replacement therapy. Workup of congenital
obstructive uropathy includes genetic and structural evaluation, with
additional imaging and fetal urinalysis aiding in prognostication. For
example, a fetal urine sodium <100 mEq/L, chloride <90 mEq/L, and
urine osmolality >210 mEq/L at a mean gestational age of 23.8 weeks
predicts “good outcome,” as reflected by the presence of nondysplastic
kidneys at autopsy or biopsy, or normal renal and pulmonary function
at birth. Fetuses with salvageable renal function should have down-­
trending values of urine sodium, chloride, calcium, total protein and
β2-­microglobulin on repeat vesicocentesis. Fetal bladder filling time
[(fetal bladder volume 48 hours post-­vesicocentesis − fetal bladder volume prior to vesicocentesis)/fetal bladder volume prior to vesicocentesis)], fetal MRI, and three-­dimensional fetal cystoscopy have also been
shown to have utility in predicting postnatal renal function.
The primary objective of fetal intervention in fetuses with obstructive uropathy is restoration of amniotic fluid volume to prevent pulmonary hypoplasia. Although prevention of ongoing renal injury is
also desired, the efficacy of fetal intervention in achieving this goal is
uncertain. Therefore fetal intervention for obstructive uropathy is currently limited to fetuses in whom the obstruction is sufficient to cause
oligohydramnios or anhydramnios.
For fetuses that still have adequate renal function and can produce
urine, treatment options include vesicoamniotic shunting, valve ablation via cystoscopy, and vesicostomy. Vesicoamniotic shunting is the
most common and involves percutaneous, US-­guided placement of a
double-­pigtailed shunt from the fetal bladder to the amniotic space,
allowing decompression of the obstructed bladder and restoration of
the amniotic fluid volume (Figs. 118.1 and 118.2). Although simple
in concept, bladder decompression may not always occur, and many
catheters will become dislodged as the fetus develops; a fetus typically
requires three catheter replacements before completion of pregnancy.
Vesicoamniotic shunting may improve perinatal survival, but at the
expense of poor long-­term renal function. In a systematic review of
over 250 fetuses, increased prenatal survival is present in the shunted
population, but there is no difference in the 12-­and 24-­month survival.

Fetal cystoscopy is more technically challenging than vesicoamniotic shunt placement, more invasive, and requires more sedation, but
this option holds some important advantages. Cystoscopy allows for
direct visualization of the obstruction and does not require amnioinfusion. Moreover, when the obstruction is visualized and the diagnosis
of PUV confirmed, the valves can be treated, restoring urine flow to
the amniotic space, and eliminating the need for repeated fetal interventions in most patients. Creation of a vesicostomy (direct opening
from bladder through fetal abdominal wall) by open fetal surgery has
improved perinatal survival (Fig. 118.3). However, the current dataset evaluating this approach is still limited, and direct comparisons to
shunting suggest no significant difference between these interventions.

NONOBSTRUCTIVE RENAL DISEASE

Nonobstructive fetal renal disease can result from renal hypoplasia/dysplasia and from genetic diseases such as autosomal recessive polycystic
kidney disease. Similar to obstructive uropathy, fetal therapy is focused
on restoring amniotic fluid volume in patients with oligohydramnios or
anhydramnios. However, restoration of amniotic fluid volume in nonobstructive renal disease requires external sources of amniotic fluid. Current treatment options include serial percutaneous amnioinfusion and
infusion of fluid by amnioport. Serial amnioinfusions are less invasive as
a single procedure, but most pregnancies will require weekly infusions
to maintain adequate amniotic fluid volume. Amnioinfusion through
an amnioport involves open surgical placement of a catheter into the
amniotic space that is connected to an ex utero subcutaneous port. This
allows repeated fluid infusion into the amniotic space. The amnioport is
more challenging and invasive as an individual procedure but provides
more reliable access to the amniotic space for the duration of the pregnancy. Small studies suggest both these procedures improve pulmonary
outcomes and perinatal survival in infants with renal disease, but these
infants will require dialysis and then renal transplant when the infant is
large enough (2-­3 years of age). The Renal Anhydramnios Fetal Therapy
(RAFT) is a multi-site clinical trial to determine the feasibility, safety and
success rate of serial amnioinfusions for early pregnancy renal anhydramnios (EPRA). The trial originally included EPRA caused both by
congenital bilateral renal agenesis (CoBRA) and by fetal renal failure

A

B
Fig. 118.1 Ultrasound image showing fetoscopic placement of a

transurethral vesicoamniotic shunt in a patient with posterior urethral
valves. (Courtesy Dr. Foong Lim, Cincinnati Fetal Center at Cincinnati
Children’s Hospital Medical Center.)

Fig. 118.2 Vesicoamniotic shunt placement. A, The shunt is loaded

into the trocar, passed into the bladder, and recoils to a pigtail shape.
B, The other end of the shunt recoils to a pigtail outside the abdominal wall, releasing urine into the amniotic fluid space around the fetus.
(Copyright 2021, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 118 u Fetal Intervention and Surgery

1031

Perfusion scope

Ultrasound

Balloon inflated

Fig. 118.3 Creation of a fetal vesicostomy. The uterine opening is sta-

pled to prevent bleeding, and a catheter is inserted to replace amniotic
fluid and maintain uterine volume. The fetus is positioned with the legs
to the lower part of the field and the umbilical cord to the upper part
of the field. A vesicostomy is created through the bladder and the abdominal wall to allow drainage of the obstructed bladder and restoration of amniotic fluid volume. (Courtesy Dr. Foong Lim, Cincinnati Fetal
Center at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.)

(FRF) with kidney tissue present. At the time of this publication, the
CoBRA arm is no longer recruiting. The primary objective of this trial is
to determine the proportion of neonates surviving to successful dialysis
after serial amnioinfusions.

CONGENITAL DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a structural birth defect in
which the diaphragm fails to fully close during development resulting in
herniation of the abdominal contents into the thorax and inhibition of
fetal lung growth (see Chapter 131). CDH occurs in 1,500 live births in
the United States annually and is the leading cause of in-­hospital neonatal deaths as well as the costliest noncardiac birth defect. Although the
pathophysiology of CDH remains unclear, most patients are affected by
some degree of pulmonary hypoplasia and persistent pulmonary hypertension. A dual-­hit hypothesis has been suggested to characterize lung
injury in CDH, with an initial injury occurring during organogenesis
resulting in bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia and a secondary insult of
the ipsilateral lung due to compression by the herniated abdominal viscera. Fetal breathing and fluidic lung distension are features of normal
lung development, which are mechanically compromised by the diaphragmatic defect, resulting in not only reduced parenchymal volume
but also decreased vascular density. Compensatory vascular remodeling
results in hypermuscularization of the arteriolar bed, increased vascular
resistance, and ultimately pulmonary hypertension. It is the severity of
pulmonary hypoplasia and persistent pulmonary hypertension that represents the greatest determinant of morbidity and mortality.
In mild cases of CDH, surgical repair of the diaphragm is typically
performed in the first few days of life after respiratory and hemodynamic
stabilization. Although these infants are affected by pulmonary hypoplasia and close monitoring is required during the first years of life, long-­
term outcomes are excellent in the majority of survivors of mild CDH. In
cases of severe CDH, pulmonary hypertension leads to right ventricular
dysfunction and right-­to-­left shunting across the patent foramen ovale
and ductus arteriosus, which can result in left ventricular dysfunction
and cardiac failure necessitating extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) in the perinatal period. Mortality is high in severely affected
infants, and survivors often have significant impairments in long-­term
respiratory, feeding, and neurodevelopmental outcomes.
More than half of all CDH cases are identified on routine second trimester anatomy US, whereas delayed diagnosis may occur secondary to
small defects, technical limitations, or unavailability of prenatal care. In
50–70% of cases the lesion is isolated, whereas syndromic or complex CDH
may be associated with additional anomalies warranting further imaging
and genetic studies. Fetal echocardiography and ultrafast MRI should be

Balloon detached

Fig. 118.4 Technique for fetoscopic tracheal occlusion using a balloon. (Modified from Hirose S, Harrison MR. Fetal therapy. In Holcomb
GW III, Murphy JP, eds. Ashcraft’s Pediatric Surgery. 5th ed. St Louis:
Elsevier; 2010. Fig. 10.1.)

included in comprehensive fetal diagnosis, permitting calculation of fetal
lung volumes as well as ruling out major structural cardiac anomalies.
The first reports of attempted in utero repair of CDH noted impairment of umbilical blood flow after reduction of the liver resulting in
fetal demise in a number of cases. Although the procedure proved to
be technically feasible in fetuses without liver herniation, comparative
analysis revealed higher rates of preterm delivery (32 vs 38 weeks’ gestation) and similar rates of survival (75% fetal repair vs 86% postnatal
repair), leading to abandonment of prenatal attempts at surgical repair.
Given the disappointing results after attempted open fetal surgical repair
of CDH, researchers turned to the fetal lamb model to assess the impact
of tracheal ligation on pulmonary development. By blocking the efflux of
fetal lung fluid into the amniotic space, pulmonary distension results in
increased lung volumes. To mitigate the risks associated with open tracheal ligation, a fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion (FETO)
approach with balloon tracheal occlusion was developed (Fig. 118.4). In
a study of 210 fetuses with severe hypoplasia due to isolated CDH, the use
of FETO had an acceptable safety profile in the mother with improved
neonatal survival but increased risk of preterm birth. In this trial the balloon was inserted at approximately 28 weeks of gestation and removal at
34 weeks, with this timing based on the hypothesis that tracheal occlusion
will promote lung expansion while removal of the balloon before delivery
will promote alveolar type II cell maturation. The multicenter prospective
randomized Tracheal Occlusion to Accelerate Lung Growth (TOTAL)
study results had inclusion criteria of gestational age less than 29 weeks 6
days at randomization, isolated left-­sided CDH with no other major structural or chromosomal defects, and severe pulmonary hypoplasia defined
as observed-­to-­expected lung-­to-­head ratios of less than 25%. Forty percent of infants with severe CDH in the FETO group survived to discharge
compared to 15% in the expectant care group, with survival to 6 months
identical to survival at discharge and increased rate of preterm rupture of
membranes (47% vs 11%) and preterm birth (75% vs 29%).

CONGENITAL PULMONARY AIRWAY
MALFORMATION

Congenital pulmonary airway malformations (CPAM), or fetal lung
lesions, are a group of rare congenital pulmonary neoplasms including
congenital cystic adenomatoid malformations (CCAMs), bronchopulmonary sequestrations (BPSs), congenital lobar emphysema, and bronchogenic cysts (Fig. 118.5). The reported incidence of CPAM is 9 per
100,000 live births, with prenatal diagnosis by fetal US most commonly
coinciding with the 18–20-­week anatomy scan. CCAMs are caused by
abnormal branching and hamartomatous growth of the terminal respiratory structures, resulting in cystic and adenomatoid malformations (see
Chapter 444), and are the most common congenital lung lesion. CCAMs

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1032 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Normal Heart and Lung Anatomy
with Lobes of Lungs

Small Microcystic CCAM/CPAM,
Heart Not Compressed

Small microcystic
CCAM/CPAM in left
upper lobe

•

Right upper lobe

Left upper lobe
•

•

•

Right middle lobe

•

•

Right lower lobe

•

•

Heart in normal position
Heart

Left lower lobe

Large Microcystic CCAM/CPAM,
Heart Compressed

Large Macrocystic CCAM/CPAM,
Heart Compressed

Large macrocystic
CCAM/CPAM in lower
left lobe

Large microcystic
CCAM/CPAM in left
lower lobe

•

Heart compressed

•

•

•

Heart compressed

Fig. 118.5 Different types of congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM)/congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), and how
the different sizes and presentations of lung lesions can impact the heart and lungs. (Copyright 2021, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)

have been classified as microcystic (maximal cyst diameter <5 mm) vs
macrocystic (≥5 mm), and prognosis is correlated with lesion size as well
as presence of macrocysts (see Fig. 118.5). In contrast, BPSs appear as
echogenic homogeneous masses on US and can be distinguished from
CCAM by US evidence of systemic aortic arterial blood supply.
Large CPAMs may cause significant pulmonary hypoplasia and
polyhydramnios due to decreased fetal swallowing secondary to
esophageal compression. In severe cases, hydrops fetalis may result due
to compression of the heart and great vessels. Hydrops with concomitant placentomegaly may result in maternal mirror syndrome, which
is postulated to result from the release of vasoactive substances from
the inflamed and edematous placenta. Due to the variable natural
history of these lesions, a prenatal prognostic parameter, the CPAM
volume ratio (CVR), is followed. The CVR is an index that compares
the volume of the CPAM to the fetal head circumference. Most studies
indicate >95% survival in CPAM patients with no hydrops and CVR
<1.6, with greater risk for hydrops and need for closer surveillance in
patients with a CVR >1.6.

Management of pregnancies complicated by prenatal diagnosis of a
fetal lung lesion requires a plan for safe delivery. In the absence of mediastinal shift or flattening, small microcystic lesions will typically meet criteria for community delivery with a plan for close postnatal follow-­up. Due
to the risk of recurrent infection and malignant transformation, elective
postnatal resection is anticipated; a CT angiogram (CTA) is performed
at 4-­6 weeks of age with surgical intervention following a few weeks later,
when the potential for compensatory growth of the remaining lobe(s) is
maximized. In the example of large macrocystic lesions with concern for
respiratory compromise, delivery at an experienced center with access
to ECMO and advanced emergent resection approaches is critical. For
large lesions with CVR >1.6 or associated hydrops, the presence of macrocysts permits fetal thoracentesis and eventual thoracoamniotic shunt
placement, which may reverse hydrops and allow continuation of the
pregnancy without open fetal surgical intervention. Irrespective of the
presence of drainable cysts, large lesions with threatened hydrops are
treated with maternal betamethasone, which has been shown to reduce
lesion size and reverse hydrops and may be given in multiple courses

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 118 u Fetal Intervention and Surgery
to maximize therapeutic impact. Lesions not responsive to steroids or
amenable to drainage may require open fetal surgery if the gestational
age is less than 32 weeks; beyond 32 weeks’ gestation, early delivery by
C-­section or ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) with planned immediate resection is recommended.

resulting in dilated distal pulmonary airways and enlargement of the
fetal lungs with potential for cardiac compression and the development
of fetal hydrops. The diagnosis is confirmed by fetal MRI (Fig. 118.6).
In addition to CHAOS, extrinsic compression of the airway may be
secondary to mass lesions (lymphangioma, teratoma, goiter) making
respiratory efforts after birth difficult.
EXIT (ex utero intrapartum treatment) is a procedure to secure
an airway during elective delivery (while the umbilical cord is patent and connected to the placenta), by C-­section, before the onset of
labor and before the fetus attempts to breathe (Fig. 118.7). The EXIT
to airway procedure may be performed by direct laryngoscopy and

CONGENITAL HIGH AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
SYNDROME

Congenital high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS) is secondary to
partial or complete intrinsic fetal upper airway obstruction. Most often
due to laryngeal or tracheal atresia, CHAOS prevents lung fluid efflux

A

1033

B

Fig. 118.6 A, Ultrafast MRI of fetus with giant cervical teratoma showing polyhydramnios and hyperextension of the neck. B, Fetus with giant

cervical teratoma at the time of intubation by direct laryngoscopy and rigid bronchoscopy. (From Lazar DA, Olutoye OO, Moise KJ, et al. Ex-­utero
intrapartum treatment procedure for giant neck masses – fetal and maternal outcomes. J Pediatr Surg. 2011;46:817–822, Fig. 1.)
Indications for EXIT-to-Airway

Severe Micrognathia
Jaw Index <5th percentile

Extrinsic Airway Compression
Cervical or oropharyngeal teratoma,
lymphatic malformation, epulis

Intrinsic airway obstruction
CHAOS

Rigid bronchoscopy

Direct laryngoscopy
No

Yes
Laryngeal or tracheal
atresia

Laryngeal web
or cyst

Rigid bronchoscopy
Yes

Bronchoscopy-guided
decompression or excision
No

Yes

No
Additional maneuvers
Elevate mass off the airway
Release neck strap muscles
Partially resect mass
Tracheotomy with retrograde intubation

Yes
Formal tracheostomy

Orotracheal intubation

No
Formal tracheostomy

EXIT complete

Fig. 118.7 Fetal airway management algorithm for ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) procedures. Yes, Successful; No, not successful; CHAOS,
congenital high airway obstruction syndrome. (Adapted from Chatterjee D, Crombleholme TM. Airway management in EXIT procedures. In Jagannathan N, Fiadjoe JE, eds. Management of the Difficult Pediatric Airway. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 2020.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1034 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
endotracheal intubation or, if needed, rigid bronchoscopy, fiberoptic
intubation, or tracheostomy (see Fig. 118.6).

SACROCOCCYGEAL TERATOMA

Sacrococcygeal teratoma (SCT) is one of the most common solid
tumors of the newborn, with an incidence of 4.8 per 100,000 live births.
This germline tumor has a female predominance (4:1) and is rarely
associated with other congenital anomalies including nervous, skeletal,
and cardiac abnormalities.
The high morbidity and mortality associated with SCT is multifactorial and is associated with both high rates of preterm delivery
as well as hemodynamic sequelae. The mechanism of preterm delivery in SCT is believed to be a result of polyhydramnios-­associated
uterine irritability and premature rupture of membranes. Rupture
of the tumor itself is rare but is most often fatal. The vascular composition of the tumor has hemodynamic implications for the fetus/
newborn as high-­output cardiac failure results from arteriovenous
shunting causing vascular steal away from the placenta and the
fetus to the SCT and compromised perfusion. Hydropic fetuses with
placentomegaly may develop maternal mirror syndrome mandating immediate delivery. Prenatal diagnosis relies on US to identify
the lesion and subsequent fetal MRI and echocardiography to assess
for placental size, hydrops, and cardiac output physiology. Specific
echocardiographic and Doppler US measurements of prognostic utility include cardiac output, cardiac/thoracic ratio, placental
thickness, amniotic fluid index, and markers of hydrops including
ascites as well as skin and scalp edema.
Given the morbidity and mortality associated with open fetal
resection, prenatal intervention is limited to fetuses with mostly
external masses manifesting hydrops and fetal cardiac insufficiency.
The fetal approach to SCT debulking involves incision of the fetal
skin circumferentially around the base of the tumor, application of a
Rummel tourniquet, and debulking of the mass with a tissue stapler
or energy device to interrupt the high output state (Fig. 118.8). Completion resection of the tumor and coccyx is performed postnatally.
More often in the setting of early signs of evolving hydrops in the
third trimester, early delivery (28-­29 weeks’ gestation) and debulking
are considered with a similar strategy of staged debulking followed
by completion resection when the neonate has stabilized. Resection
of the coccyx is critical to avoid recurrence.
Reports of noninvasive interruption of blood flow with laser
ablation, radiofrequency ablation, or vascular coiling are tempting
but have been complicated by the inability to control the energy
source leading to destructive tissue injury and injury to adjacent
structures.

MYELOMENINGOCELE

Myelomeningocele (MMC) is the most common neural tube defect
with an incidence of 1-­2 per 1,000 live births. The disease is characterized by an abnormal outgrowth of the nerve root through
the meninges with a concomitant vertebral bone and skin defect

A

resulting in neural tissue exposure to the amniotic fluid. Associated
defects include Chiari II malformation, characterized by descent
of the cerebellar vermis through the foramen magnum, medullary
kinking, and obliteration of the cistern magna leading to brainstem
herniation. Hydrocephalus complicates up to 85% of MMC patients
and is a major source of long-­term morbidity, with high rates of
shunting of cerebrospinal fluid required in survivors. Dermoid
cysts are also common and may require intervention. Developmental and cognitive impairment is prevalent and profound, and current estimates suggest rates between 60% and 70% of pregnancies
complicated by a prenatal diagnosis of MMC end in termination or
demise. The etiology of MMC is likely multifactorial, with folic acid
deficiency as well as use of folic acid antagonists associated with
the development of neural tube defects. Screening for neural tube
defects includes measurement of maternal serum α-­fetoprotein
(MSAFP) and US. Expectant mothers with screening concerns for
MMC should be evaluated at a specialized center with further anatomic US, genetic screening, and ultrafast fetal MRI. In addition to
identification of the neural tube defect, expert US can assess lower
extremity function, and fetal MRI can define the extent of hindbrain herniation and ventricular size.
Before the introduction of fetal repair of MMC, fetal surgery was
limited to life-­threatening anomalies with high predictive mortality for the fetus or infant without intervention. However, a growing body of data suggested that the neurologic outcome in MMC
was directly related to progressive injury from ongoing damage to
the exposed spinal cord during pregnancy (see Chapter 631.3) (Fig.
118.9). A large multicenter National Institutes of Health–sponsored
Management of Myelomeningocele Study (MOMS) comparing the
safety and efficacy of prenatal repair of MMC with that of standard
postnatal repair was performed and determined a clear advantage
for prenatal surgery before 26 weeks’ gestation. The MOMS trial
demonstrated a significant reduction in the need for ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt at 12 months in the fetal repair group (40%
vs 82% in postnatal repair group) with reduced hindbrain herniation and improved mental development and motor function at 30
months. Furthermore, the need for shunting was independent of
lesion level and degree of hindbrain herniation. The 1-­year neurosurgical outcomes for the complete cohort showed that prenatal
surgery did not decrease the need for shunting in those fetuses with
a cerebral ventricular size of ≥15 mm at initial screening. Prenatal
surgery was associated with an increased risk for earlier gestational
age at birth. Delivery occurred before 30 weeks of gestation in 11%
of neonates that had fetal MMC repair. Adverse pulmonary sequelae
were rare in the prenatal surgery group despite an increased rate
of oligohydramnios. The benefits of prenatal surgery outweigh the
complications of prematurity.
Open fetal repair of MMC has been a paradigm-­shifting advance
in fetal surgery and has led to the formation of the North American
Fetal Therapy Network (NAFTNet) registry of fetal MMC patients,
with follow-­
up studies continuing to demonstrate the benefits

B

Fig. 118.8 A, Exposure of 26-­week fetus through hysterotomy revealing sacrococcygeal teratoma (SCT). B, Closure of skin flaps after resection.
(Copyright 2021, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 118 u Fetal Intervention and Surgery

Fig. 118.9 Open fetal myelomeningocele repair. (From Hirose S, Har-

rison MR. Fetal therapy. In Holcomb GW III, Murphy JP, eds. Ashcraft’s
Pediatric Surgery. 5th ed. St Louis: Elsevier; 2010. Fig. 10-­5.)

observed in the MOMS trial in subsequent series. The risk of prematurity and requirement for cesarean section deliveries for all
future pregnancies remain significant considerations for this procedure. The less invasive fetoscopic MMC repair approach, which is
being developed at a limited number of centers, may reduce maternal morbidity and prematurity rates associated with open fetal
MMC repair, but this remains a question of active ongoing investigation. At this time, fetoscopic fetal MMC repair is recommended
in an investigational setting according to the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for Maternal-­Fetal
Medicine.

TWIN-­TO-­TWIN TRANSFUSION SYNDROME

Twin-­to-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is a condition that
affects approximately 10–15% of monochorionic diamniotic identical twin pregnancies. In these cases, shared fetoplacental circulation
can lead to unbalanced blood flow between the two fetuses which,
left untreated, results in perinatal loss of one or both fetuses in
approximately 80% of cases (Fig. 118.10). Unlike dichorionic twins,
which do not have any vascular connections between the placentas,
monochorionic twins have vascular anastomoses within the shared
fetoplacental circulation. Unbalanced deep arteriovenous anastomoses without proper compensation from the superficial bidirectional vessels results in discordant blood supply, with the “donor”
fetus presenting with oligohydramnios and intrauterine growth
restriction while the “recipient” fetus develops polyhydramnios,
heart failure, and hydrops due to hypervolemia. Neurodevelopmental delay is commonly observed in long-­term survivors.
TTTS is usually a gradual process that is usually observed in the second trimester. Diagnosis is performed via US in the second trimester. The
Quintero classification system is used to stratify TTTS into five stages.
• Stage I: Abnormal amniotic fluid levels (oligo-­ and polyhydramnios)
with bladder filling in the donor twin
• Stage II: Features of stage I with collapsed bladder in the donor twin
• Stage III: New abnormal flow through the umbilical artery or ductus
venosus in either the donor or recipient twin with stage II features present
• Stage IV: Hydrops in either the donor or recipient twin
• Stage V: Intrauterine demise of either the donor or recipient twin
Several therapies have been proposed for the treatment of TTTS.
Amnioreduction is performed to remove excess fluid from the sac

1035

Fig. 118.10 In twin-­to-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), blood flow

through vascular connections on the surface of the placenta is unequal.
One twin (“donor twin”) pumps blood to the other twin (“recipient”). This
unequal blood flow between twins results in the recipient twin (right) having too much amniotic fluid, and donor twin (left) with little or no amniotic
fluid. (Copyright 2021, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)

with polyhydramnios and can be done serially to help prevent preterm later. Endoscopic or fetoscopic laser ablation of the superficial
vascular anastomoses is another therapeutic option. Under local
or regional anesthesia, a trocar is placed under US guidance and
an endoscope passed, through which superficial anastomoses are
then identified and coagulated, followed by amnioreduction. The
procedure is performed only once during the pregnancy, usually
prior to 26 weeks. Several observational studies have noted perinatal survival approximating 60% with both amnioreduction and
laser coagulation. A multicenter randomized trial demonstrated a
survival and neurologic advantage after laser coagulation therapy
vs amnioreduction; although after 26 weeks, amnioreduction is
often still recommended for technical reasons. Other surgical therapies include septostomy (disrupting the membrane between the
twins) and selective umbilical cord coagulation in severe cases. Like
amnioreduction, septostomy does not alter the underlying pathophysiology. All cases should be referred to tertiary care centers with
extensive experience in the treatment of TTTS.

OTHER INDICATIONS

Antenatal intervention for cardiac defects, such as aortic stenosis,
pulmonic stenosis, and hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), have
been used to dilate, with balloon valvuloplasty, stenotic valves (aortic
stenosis) to prevent further development of HLHS (creating biventricular physiology) (Fig. 118.11) (see Chapter 480.10).
Laser therapy has been used to treat TTTS (Chapter 119.1) and
amniotic bands (Fig. 118.12).

FETAL CENTERS

The value of fetal surgical program centers extends beyond fetal
intervention itself. Often, families will present to a fetal center
with a new diagnosis and little understanding of the implications
for their baby and family. Prenatal counseling by the fetal team
provides the opportunity to confirm the diagnosis, investigate for
other anomalies and genetic susceptibilities, and provide detailed
counseling to achieve understanding of both the diagnosis and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1036 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

B

A

© UZ Leuven

Fig. 118.11 A, Ultrasound image (right panel) is a cross section at the level of the fetal chest, demonstrating the four-­chamber view in a fetus
with aortic stenosis. Notice that the left ventricle (arrowhead) is dilated. Dilation occurs before the development of hypoplasia, which can be seen
(arrowhead) in another fetus (left panel). B, Schematic representation of percutaneous valvuloplasty, in this case of the left ventricular outlet tract. (A
from van Mieghem T, Baud D, Devlieger R, et al. Minimally invasive fetal therapy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2012;26:711–725; B copyright
UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.)

OPP HEEL

UE 1

H

A

B

C

E

F

*

H
A

D

G

H

I

Fig. 118.12 Amniotic band sequence in two different fetuses. A and B, Effects on the extremities. Limbs of a fetus with amniotic band sequence

show multiple amniotic bands (short arrows, A and B), amputation of fingers and toes (long arrows, A and B), and a fixed deformity of the hand at
the wrist (arrowhead, B). C and D, Effects on the thorax and abdomen of the same fetus as in A and B. Sagittal image (C) shows a thoracoabdominal
wall defect (arrows) with a large amount of herniated abdominal and thoracic contents (asterisk) outside the body. White H, Head. D, Axial image of
the fetal abdomen (A) confirms the presence of a large ventral abdominal hernia (H), in the setting of amniotic bands (arrow). E to G, Effects on craniofacial structures in a different fetus. E, Coronal image of face shows multiple amniotic bands (short arrows) and nonvisualization of the calvarium.
This results in a craniofacial appearance that resembles anencephaly (long arrow). F, A large encephalocele (black arrow) is seen above the level of
the orbits (long white arrow) in a different scan plane. An amniotic band (short white arrow) is also seen. G, Coronal image of anterior portion of face
shows facial clefts (black arrows) due to amniotic bands. Short white arrow, Amniotic band; long white arrow, orbits. H, Band constricting the ankle,
leading to deformational defects. I, Pseudosyndactyly, amputation, and disruption of finger morphogenesis. (A-­G from Hertzberg BS, Middleton
WD. Ultrasound: The Requisites. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016. Figs. 19-­22; H and I from Jones KL, Smith DW, Hall BD, et al. A pattern of
craniofacial and limb defects secondary to aberrant tissue bands. J Pediatr. 1974;84:90–95.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 118 u Fetal Intervention and Surgery

1037

Table 118.3  Selection of Patients for Fetal Repair
LEVEL OF CERTAINTY
DIAGNOSTIC CERTAINTY/PROGNOSTIC CERTAINTY
Genetic problems

DIAGNOSIS
Trisomy 13, 15, or 18
Triploidy

Central nervous system abnormalities

Anencephaly/acrania
Holoprosencephaly
Large encephaloceles

Heart problems

Acardia
Inoperable heart anomalies

Kidney problems

Potter syndrome/renal agenesis
Multicystic/dysplastic kidneys
Polycystic kidney disease

DIAGNOSTIC UNCERTAINTY/PROGNOSTIC CERTAINTY
Genetic problems
Thanatophoric dwarfism or lethal forms of osteogenesis imperfecta
Early oligo/anhydramnios and pulmonary hypoplasia

Potter syndrome with unknown etiology

Central nervous system abnormalities

Hydranencephaly
Congenital severe hydrocephalus with absent or minimal brain growth

Prematurity

<23 weeks’ gestation

PROGNOSTIC UNCERTAINTY/BEST INTEREST
Genetic problems

Errors of metabolism that are expected to be lethal even with available therapy

Mid oligo/anhydramnios

Renal failure requiring dialysis

Central nervous system abnormalities

Complex or severe cases of meningomyelocele
Neurodegenerative diseases, such as spinal muscular atrophy

Heart problems

Some cases of hypoplastic left heart syndrome
Pentalogy of Cantrell (ectopia cordis)

Other structural anomalies

Some cases of giant omphalocele
Severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia with hypoplastic lungs
Idiopathic nonimmune hydrops
Inoperable conjoined twins
Multiple severe anomalies

Prematurity

23-­24 weeks’ gestation

From Leuthner SR. Fetal palliative care. Clin Perinatol 2004;31:649–665. Table 1.

all available treatment options. This collaborative and multidisciplinary family-­centered approach allows for the development of a
management plan that may include fetal surgery or intervention,
enhanced monitoring of the fetus and mother, and coordination of
complex deliveries involving multidisciplinary delivery teams and
specialized equipment as required for EXIT to ECMO, EXIT to airway, EXIT to tumor resection, delivery to cardiac catheterization,
and procedures on placental support.
In some highly specialized fetal centers, delivery may be facilitated
with the neonatal intensivists, perinatal anesthesiologist, and pediatric surgical care teams present in the same location to permit expert
stabilization and resuscitation of the neonate. The benefits range from

the psychological benefits of avoiding maternal-­infant separation as
well as improved outcomes in diagnoses such as CDH, in which early
stabilization of the neonate is critical to minimize pulmonary hypertensive crisis.
Finally, but equally importantly, not all severely affected fetuses
will have available therapies in utero or after birth. In these lethal
situations, fetal care planning will provide support for the family
and a plan for delivery room or nursery palliative care (Table 118.3)
(see Chapter 8).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1038 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Erik Brandsma, Lori A. Christ, and
Andrea F. Duncan
The term high-­risk infant designates an infant at greater risk for neonatal morbidity and mortality; many factors can contribute to an infant
being high risk (Table 119.1). There are four broad categories of high-­
risk infants: the preterm infant, infants with special healthcare needs or
Table 119.1  Factors in Considering Infants as High Risk for
Morbidity or Mortality in the Neonatal Period
BIRTH PARENT DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS
Maternal age <16 yr or >40 yr
Environmental, economic, social disadvantage, racial discrimination
BIRTH PARENT MEDICAL HISTORY
Genetic disorders
Diabetes mellitus
Hypertension
Asymptomatic bacteriuria
Rheumatologic illness (systemic lupus erythematosus)
Immune-­mediated diseases
Long-­term medication (see Chapters 117.4 and 117.5)
PREVIOUS PREGNANCY
Intrauterine fetal demise
Neonatal death
Prematurity
Intrauterine growth restriction
Congenital malformation
Incompetent cervix
Blood group sensitization, neonatal jaundice
Neonatal thrombocytopenia
Hydrops
Inborn errors of metabolism
PRESENT PREGNANCY
Vaginal bleeding (abruptio placentae, placenta previa)
Sexually transmitted infections (colonization: herpes simplex, group
B streptococcus, chlamydia, syphilis, hepatitis B, HIV)
Multiple gestation
Preeclampsia
Premature rupture of membranes
Short interpregnancy time
Poly-­/oligohydramnios
Acute medical or surgical illness
Familial or acquired hypercoagulable states
Abnormal fetal ultrasonographic findings
Treatment of infertility
Inadequate prenatal care
Substance use disorder
LABOR AND DELIVERY
Premature labor (<37 wk)
Postdates pregnancy (≥42 wk)
Fetal distress
Breech presentation
Meconium-­stained fluid
Nuchal cord
Cesarean delivery
Forceps or vacuum assisted delivery
Apgar score <4 at 5 min
NEONATE
Birthweight <2,500 g or >4,000 g
Birth <37 wk or ≥42 wk of gestation
Small or large for gestational age
Respiratory distress, cyanosis
Congenital malformation
Pallor, plethora, petechiae

3000
2750
2500
2250
2000
Birth Weight (g)

The High-­Risk Infant

dependence on technology, infants at risk because of family issues, and
infants with anticipated early death.
All high-­risk infants require closer evaluation and/or treatment by
experienced physicians and nurses. This often starts before delivery
and continues in the delivery room and through a neonatal intensive
care unit (NICU) stay (see Chapter 121). Regionalized care for infants
is based on the acuity of care that can be provided at hospitals with
different levels of care and whether transport should be undertaken
(see Chapter 120). It is important to note that additional care does not
stop at time of NICU discharge, and that many high-­risk infants also
benefit from additional resources and follow-­up after discharge from
the hospital (see Chapter 119.5).
Twins and higher-­order multiples are at increased risk for morbidity and mortality and are discussed in Chapter 119.1, whereas other
infants deemed high risk are discussed throughout this textbook. Preterm infants comprise the majority of high-­risk infants. Approximately
15 million infants are born preterm (before 37 weeks’ gestational age)
each year worldwide, accounting for about 1 in every 10 babies born.
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines infants born before 28
weeks’ gestational age as extremely preterm infants, infants born between
28 and 31 6/7 weeks as very preterm (see Chapter 119.2), and infants
born between 32 and 36 6/7 weeks as moderate to late preterm infants
(see Chapter 119.3). Risk of both morbidity and mortality increases
with earlier gestational age. Gestational age, birthweight, and gender
are all important factors that impact neonatal mortality (Fig. 119.1).
The highest risk of neonatal and infant mortality occurs in infants with
birthweight <1,000 g and/or with gestational age <28 weeks. The lowest
risk of neonatal mortality occurs in infants with birthweight of 3,000-­
4,000 g and a gestational age of 39-­41 weeks. As birthweight increases

1750
1500
1250
1000

98%

750
500
25%

50%

25

26

95%

90%

75%

250
0
23

A

24

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

Gestation Age (Weeks)
3000
2750
2500
2250
2000

Birth Weight (g)

Chapter 119

1750
1500
1250
98%

1000
95%
90%

750
75%

50%

500
25%
250
0

B

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

Gestation Age (Weeks)

Fig. 119.1 Contour plot of predicted survival according to gestational

age, birthweight, and gender. A, Female. B, Male. The contour lines
join combinations of gestational age and birthweight of equal estimated probability of survival. Birthweight percentiles are shown for information. Data based on singleton infants born in the United Kingdom
between January 2008 and December 2010 who survived to NICU admission. (From Manktelow BN, Seaton SE, Fields DJ, et al. Population-­
based estimates of in-­unit survival for very preterm infants. Pediatrics.
2013;131:e425e432. Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 119 u The High-­Risk Infant 1039
from 400 to 3,000 g and gestational age increases from 23 to 39 weeks,
a logarithmic decrease in neonatal mortality occurs. Once birthweight
exceeds 4,000 g and/or gestational age exceeds 42 weeks, the incidence
of neonatal morbidities and mortality increases (see Chapter 119.4).

119.1 Multiple-­Gestation Pregnancies
Lori A. Christ

CLASSIFICATION OF TWINS
Monozygotic vs Dizygotic Twins

Traditionally, twins have been classified as either monozygotic (originating from one ovum fertilized by one sperm in a single fertilization event
that then results in postzygotic division of the conceptus into two embryos)
or dizygotic (originating from two fertilization events each occurring
when a single ovum is fertilized by a single sperm). Identifying twins as
monozygotic or dizygotic is useful in determining the relative influence of
heredity and environment on human development and disease. Detailed
blood typing, gene analysis, or tissue (human leukocyte antigen) typing
can be used for zygosity testing (an exception being blood typing in cases
of chimeric twins, where one or both twins contain distinct cell lines from
multiple zygotes). While often referred to as “identical” twins, physical
and cognitive differences may still exist between monozygotic twins due
to differences in the in utero environment, the mitochondrial genome, in
posttranslational gene product modification, or in the epigenetic modification of nuclear genes in response to environmental factors.

Chorionicity and Amnionicity

Twins can also be classified by the number of chorions and amnions in
the pregnancy. Dizygotic twins largely result in dichorionic, diamniotic
pregnancies, although rarely may result in atypical twinning (see later).
The chorionicity and amnionicity of monozygotic twins depends on
the timing of fission of the zygote. One-­third of monozygotic twins are
dichorionic and diamniotic, and result from splitting on embryonic day
1-­3. Monochorionic, diamniotic twins result from splitting on embryonic day 3-­8, and monochorionic, monoamniotic twins result from splitting on day 8-­13. Determination of amnionicity and chorionicity are not

reliable ways of determining zygosity. An apparently single placenta may
be present with either monozygotic or dizygotic twins, but inspection of
a dizygotic placenta usually reveals that each twin has a separate chorion
that crosses the placenta between the attachments of the cords and two
amnions. Separate or fused dichorionic placentas may be disproportionate in size, resulting in growth restriction or malformation of the fetus
attached to the smaller placenta or the smaller portion of the placenta.

Incidence

Differences in the incidence of twins worldwide mainly involve dizygotic twins, as monozygotic twinning appears to be independent of
heritable factors. In 2019 the U.S. final natality report recorded a twin
rate of 32.1 per 1,000 live births, which has continued to decline after
an all-­time high in 2014. Increases in monozygotic and dizygotic twinning had been associated with advanced maternal age (AMA) and the
use of assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs). The rate of triplets
and higher-­order multiple births was 87.7 per 100,000 live births in
the United States and has continued to decline since 1998. The use of
single-­embryo transfer in ART has decreased the numbers of triplet
births and higher-­order multiples.

ETIOLOGY

Dizygotic twins result from polyovulation, or the release of more than
one ovum at a single ovulation. Polyovular pregnancies are more frequent after the second pregnancy, with increasing maternal age, and in
families with a history of dizygotic twins. They may result from simultaneous maturation of multiple ovarian follicles, but follicles containing two ova have also been described as a genetic trait leading to twin
pregnancies. Twin-­prone women have higher levels of gonadotropin.
Polyovular pregnancies occur in many women treated for infertility
with ovarian stimulants such as clomiphene or gonadotropins.
The etiology of monozygotic twinning is unknown, but there are
two prevailing theories. In the classic fission theory, twinning results
from the splitting of a single conceptus, with the timing of splitting
resulting in differing amnionicity and chorionicity (i.e., the earlier the
fission occurs, the more likely the twins are to be diamniotic dichorionic) (Fig. 119.2). However, this theory fails to account for several
forms of atypical twinning, including the occurrence of diamniotic
dichorionic monozygotic twinning after single-­embryo transfer in the

Fig. 119.2 Classical fission theory of twinning. Dizy-

gotic twins result from two distinct fertilization events,
with dichorionic diamniotic twins each developing to
become a genetically distinct individual. Monozygotic
twins result from postzygotic splitting of the product of
a single fertilization event. Splitting on days 1-­3 (up to
the morula stage) results in dichorionic diamniotic twins,
on days 3-­8 (during which blastocyst hatching occurs) in
monochorionic diamniotic twins, on days 8-­13 in monochorionic monoamniotic twins. (Illustration copyright
LeventEfe, CMI. www.leventefe.com.au.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1040 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Fig. 119.3 Fusion theory of monozygotic twinning.

Splitting occurs at the postzygotic two-­cell stage, with
each cell forming a distinct individual. If twin blastocysts
hatch from the zona pellucida together, dichorionic diamniotic twins will result. If the two trophectoderms fuse
before hatching and the inner cell masses are separated
within the shared trophectoderm, monochorionic diamniotic twins will result. If the inner cell masses are fused
and separated later, monochorionic monoamniotic
twins will result. (Illustration copyright LeventEfe, CMI.
www.leventefe.com.au)

late blastocyst state, phenotypically discordant monozygotic twins, and
asymmetrically attached conjoined twins. An alternate fusion theory
of twinning has been proposed to account for this discrepancy, in
which the inner cell masses of trophectoderm fuse after the initial two-­
cell splitting stage (Fig. 119.3).

Atypical Twinning

Conjoined twins occur in 1 in 50,000 pregnancies and 1 in 250,000
live births. Theoretically, they result from later fission of a single
zygote (10-­14 days) or from fusion of two zygotes (as proposed for
asymmetrically attached conjoined twins). Most conjoined twins are
female. The prognosis for symmetrically conjoined twins depends on
the possibility of surgical separation, which in turn depends on the
extent to which vital organs are shared. The site of connections varies,
as follows: thoracoomphalopagus (28% of conjoined twins), thoracopagus (18%), omphalopagus (10%), craniopagus (6%), and incomplete
duplication (10%). The term parasitic twin has historically been used
to describe the smaller and less completely developed member of a
pair of conjoined twins; this twin has typically had embryonic demise
but remains vascularized by the surviving independent twin (the autocyte). For asymmetrically attached conjoined twins in whom one
twin is dependent on the cardiovascular system of the intact autocyte
(exoparasitic twins, 1 in 1 million live births) survival of the autocyte
depends on the feasibility of excising the exoparasitic twin. For endoparasitic twins (fetus in fetu, 1 in 500,000 live births) in whom one

(or more) fetus exists as a benign mass in the autocyte, survival of the
autocyte is unaffected. Superfecundation, or fertilization of an ovum
by an insemination that takes place after one ovum has already been
fertilized, and superfetation, or fertilization and subsequent development of an embryo when a fetus is already present in the uterus, have
been proposed as explanations for differences in size and appearance
of certain twins at birth.

Diagnosis

A prenatal diagnosis of pregnancy with twins is suggested by a uterine
size that is greater than that expected for gestational age, auscultation
of two fetal heartbeats, and/or elevated maternal serum α-­fetoprotein
(AFP) or human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels. It is confirmed
by ultrasonography. Physical examination of twins is necessary but not
sufficient to determine zygosity of twins. In the event that congenital
anomalies are present or there are transfusion or transplantation considerations, genetic testing of zygosity should be performed. Although
noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) is becoming more common, the
results should be interpreted with caution in multiple-­gestation pregnancies until normative values are better established.

Complications

Twin and higher-­order pregnancies are associated with poorer neonatal and perinatal outcomes compared with singleton pregnancies
of the same gestation. Severe maternal morbidities and death are also

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 119 u The High-­Risk Infant 1041
Predicted HIGH risk for adverse outcome

Predicted LOW risk for adverse outcome

1 cm

5 cm

3 cm

3 cm

Discordant amniotic fluid

Concordant amniotic fluid

OR

OR
52 mm

75 mm

Fig. 119.4 Representation of first-­
trimester risk as-

sessment for the development of discordant growth,
twin-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), or intrauterine
demise. Discordant amniotic fluid in the first trimester
generally corresponded with deepest vertical pockets
≤3 cm in one sac and ≥6.5 cm in the other. Discordance
in crown-­rump length (CRL) was present if the difference
was ≥12 mm. (From Lewi L, Gucciardo L, Van Mieghem
T, et al. Monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancies:
natural history and risk stratification. Fetal Diagn Ther.
2010;27:121–133.)

CRL large-CRL small ≥12 mm
65 mm

73 mm

CAL

80% adverse outcome; 50% survival

twice as likely in twin pregnancies worldwide compared with singleton
pregnancies.
Most twins are born prematurely, which contributes to additional
neonatal and childhood morbidity and mortality. Spontaneous single
intrauterine demise occurs at a rate of about 6% of all twin pregnancies. Twin-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) and early-­onset discordant growth are associated with an overall worse prognosis (see
Chapter 118). The perinatal mortality of twins is about four times
that of singletons, with monochorionic twins being particularly
at risk. Monochorionic twins have an increased risk of a demised
twin in utero. The surviving twin has a greater risk for cerebral palsy
and other neurodevelopmental sequelae. Monoamniotic twins have
an increased likelihood of cord entanglement, which may lead to
asphyxia. Twins are at greater risk for congenital malformations, with
up to 25% of monozygotic twins being affected. Theoretically, the
twin delivered second is at higher risk of anoxia than the first because
the placenta may separate after birth of the first twin and before birth
of the second. In addition, delivery of the second twin may be difficult because it may be in an abnormal presentation (breech, entangled), uterine tone may be decreased, or the cervix may begin to close
after the first twin’s birth.
Triplet or higher-­order births are associated with an increased risk
of death or neurodevelopmental impairment compared with extremely
low birthweight (ELBW) singleton and twin infants after controlling
for gestational age. The mortality for multiple gestations with ≥4 fetuses
is excessively high for each fetus. Because of this poor prognosis, selective fetal reduction has been offered as a treatment option.

Twin-­Twin Transfusion Syndromes

CRL large - CRL small <12 mm

Placental vascular anastomoses occur with high frequency in monochorionic twins (see Chapter 118). In monochorionic placentas, the
fetal vasculature is usually joined, sometimes in a very complex manner. They are usually balanced and neither twin is appreciably affected.
Artery-­to-­artery communications cross over placental veins, and when
anastomoses are present, blood can readily be stroked from one fetal
vascular bed to the other. Vein-­to-­vein communications are similarly
recognized but are less common. A combination of artery-­to-­artery
and vein-­to-­vein anastomoses is associated with the condition of acardiac fetus. This rare lethal anomaly (1 in 35,000) is secondary to the
twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) syndrome. In utero radiofrequency or laser ablation of the anastomosis or cord occlusion can be
used to treat heart failure in the surviving twin. However, death of the
autocyte is reported in up to 75% of cases. In rare cases, one umbilical

20% adverse outcome; 93% survival

Table 119.2  Characteristic Changes in Monochorionic
Twins with Uncompensated Placental
Arteriovenous Shunts
TWIN ON:
ARTERIAL SIDE—DONOR
VENOUS SIDE—RECIPIENT
Prematurity

Prematurity

Oligohydramnios

Polyhydramnios

Intrauterine growth restriction

Hydrops

Pale

Plethoric

Anemic

Polycythemic

Hypovolemic

Hypervolemic

Hypoglycemic

Cardiac hypertrophy

Microcardia

Myocardial dysfunction

Glomeruli small or normal

Glomeruli large
Tricuspid valve regurgitation
Right ventricular outflow obstruction

Arterioles thin walled

Arterioles thick walled

cord may arise from the other after leaving the placenta, and the twin
attached to the secondary cord usually is malformed or dies in utero.
In twin-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), an artery from one
twin acutely or chronically delivers blood that is drained into the vein
of the other. The latter develops polyhydramnios and polycythemia,
and the former has oligohydramnios, anemia, and growth restriction
(Fig. 119.4). TTTS is more common in monozygotic twins and affects
up to 30% of monochorionic twins. Death of the donor twin in utero
may result in generalized fibrin thrombi in the smaller arterioles of the
recipient twin, possibly as the result of transfusion of thromboplastin-­
rich blood from the macerating donor fetus. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) may develop in the surviving twin. Table 119.2
lists the more frequent changes associated with a large shunt. Preterm
birth and/or death of the surviving twin is also highly likely. Treatment
of this highly lethal problem includes aggressive amnioreduction for
polyhydramnios, selective twin termination, and most often, laser or
fetoscopic ablation of anastomosis (Fig. 119.5).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1042 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
10
8.31

8.24

Percent

8
6.67

6.68

Low birthweight

5.59

5.62

Moderately low
birthweight

1.09

1.06

Very low
birthweight

6
6.93

6.90

4

2

0

Fig. 119.5 Color-­dye-­stained twin-­to-­twin transfusion syndrome pla-

centa that was treated using the Solomon technique. Blue and green
dye are used to stain the arteries, and pink and yellow dye are used to
stain the veins. After identification and coagulation of each individual
anastomosis, the complete vascular equator is coagulated from one
placental margin to the other. (From Slaghekke F, Lopriore E, Lewi L,
et al. Fetoscopic laser coagulation of the vascular equator versus selective coagulation for twin-­to-­twin transfusion syndrome: an open-­label
randomized controlled trial, Lancet. 2014;383:2144–2150. Fig. 3.)

Management

Prenatal detection of a multiple gestation pregnancy enables the
obstetrician and pediatrician to anticipate complications. The risk of
multiple-­gestation pregnancies due to ART may be reduced by elective
single-­embryo transfers. Asymptomatic early cervical dilation may be
managed with cerclage, which is 50% effective in preventing delivery
before 28 weeks’ gestation. Elective delivery of twins at 37 weeks (or
earlier for monochorionic, monoamniotic twins) reduces the complication rate for the fetuses and the birth parent. Furthermore, in twin
pregnancies between 32 and 39 weeks’ gestation, planned vaginal delivery is preferred if the first twin is in the cephalic presentation. Close
observation and attendance by a pediatric team are indicated in the
immediate neonatal period so that prompt treatment of asphyxia or
fetal transfusion syndrome can be initiated. The decision to perform
an immediate blood transfusion in a severely anemic “donor” twin
or a partial exchange transfusion of either twin due to anemia in the
“donor” or polycythemia in the “recipient” twin must be based on clinical judgment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

119.2 Extremely and Very Preterm Infants
Lori A. Christ and Erik Brandsma
Traditionally, the delivery date is determined 280 days after the last
menstrual period (LMP). However, only 4% of pregnant women
deliver at 280 days, and only 70% deliver within 10 days of the estimated delivery date.
Infants born before 37 weeks from the first day of the LMP are
termed premature by WHO. Infants born before 28 weeks’ gestation
are extremely preterm, also referred to as extremely low gestational
age newborns (ELGANs); whereas infants born between 28 and 31
weeks and 6 days’ gestation are very preterm. Moderate and late preterm infants (born between 32 and 36 week 6 days’ gestation) are discussed in Chapter 119.3.
In addition to classification by gestational age, classification is also
based on birthweight. ELBW is used to describe infants with a birthweight <1,000 g, very low birthweight (VLBW) describes infants
1,000-­1,500 g, and low birthweight (LBW) describes infants <2,500

1.38

1.34

2019

2020
All births

2019*
2020
Singleton births only

SOURCE: National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, Natality.

Fig. 119.6 Total and singleton low birthweight rates: United States,
2019 and 2020. *Numbers do not add to total du to rounding. (From
Osterman M, Hamilton B, Martin JA, Driscoll AK, Valenzuela CP. Births:
Final Data for 2020. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2021;70[17]:1–50. Fig. 3.)

g at birth. Birthweight, in general, is a proxy for gestational age, but
in the cases of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and small-­for-­
gestational-­age (SGA) infants, birthweight can sometimes be misleading for true gestational age and is an additional risk factor for
comorbidities of prematurity (see Chapter 119.4).

INCIDENCE

Preterm birth, or birth before 37 weeks of gestation, occurs at a rate
of approximately 11% worldwide, adding up to a total of 15 million
preterm births annually. Significant variations in preterm birthrates
exist between countries, with an approximate rate of 10% in the United
States. The U.S. preterm birthrate declined 1% in 2020 to 10.09%. Most
of this decline is due to a decrease in rate of late preterm births (7.40%
of all births in 2020) and in preterm births less than 34 weeks’ gestation
(2.70%). These results are reflected in birthweight-­specific categories
(Fig. 119.6). Disparities in preterm birthrates continue to exist, ranging
from a high of 14.39% of babies born to non-­Hispanic black mothers to
a low of 8.72% of babies born to non-­Hispanic Asian mothers.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of preterm birth is multifactorial and involves complex
interactions between fetal, placental, uterine, and maternal factors. In
the setting of maternal or fetal conditions that prompt early delivery,
as well as placental and uterine pathology, causes of preterm birth can
sometimes be identified (Table 119.3). Most preterm births are spontaneous without an identifiable cause. AMA, maternal health conditions,
history of previous preterm delivery, short interpregnancy interval,
and lower socioeconomic status (SES) have all been associated with
preterm birth. Racial disparities also exist and can only be partially
predicted when factoring in education and income level. Large population studies have found associations between maternal genetics and
epigenetics and preterm birth. Gestational duration and actual preterm
birth have been noted with genetic variants in the maternal genome.
Many of these genes have roles in regulation of the estrogen receptor,
uterine development, maternal nutrition, or vascular reactivity.

ASSESSMENT OF GESTATIONAL AGE

Ultrasound measurement of fetal crown-­rump length at 11-­14 weeks’
gestation remains the most accurate method of gestational age estimation. Estimates based on ultrasound at later gestation are less accurate,
but may be improved with newer methods and likely superior to postnatal assessment. With insufficient prenatal care or discrepancies between
birthweight and predicted gestational age at birth, it remains helpful to
be able to assess infants for an estimated gestational age. With a careful
physical exam, one may be able to distinguish SGA and IUGR infants

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 119 u The High-­Risk Infant 1043
Neuromuscular maturity

Table 119.3  Identifiable Risk Factors for Preterm Birth
FETAL
Fetal distress
Multiple gestation
Erythroblastosis
Nonimmune hydrops
Polyhydramnios
PLACENTAL
Placental dysfunction
Placenta previa
Placental abruption
UTERINE
Bicornuate uterus
Incompetent cervix (premature dilation)
MATERNAL
Previous preterm birth
Preeclampsia
Experiencing racism
Chronic medical illness (cyanotic heart disease, renal disease, thyroid
disease)
Short interpregnancy interval
Infection (Listeria monocytogenes, group B streptococcus, urinary
tract infection, bacterial vaginosis, chorioamnionitis)
Obesity
Substance use disorder
Extremes of maternal age
OTHER
Premature rupture of membranes
Polyhydramnios
Iatrogenic due to factors listed above
Assisted reproductive technology
Trauma

1

0

1

2

3

4

90

90

60

45

30

0

Square
window
(wrist)
Arm
recoil

Popliteal
angle 180

180 140-180 110-140 90-110 90
160

Skin

Lanugo

0

Sticky,
Gelatinous,
friable,
red,
transparent translucent

None

Sparse

Heel-toe
50 mm,
40-50
no
mm:–1
crease
40 mm: –2

1
Smooth,
pink,
visible
veins
Abundant

2

3

4

Bald
areas

Creases Creases
on ant.
over
2/3
entire sole

Stripped
areola,
1-2 mm
bud

Raised
areola,
3-4 mm
bud

Full
areola,
5-10 mm
bud

Lids open,
Slightly Well-curved Formed
Lids fused
pinna flat,
curved
pinna, soft and firm,
Eye/ear loosely (–1),
stays
pinna; soft; but ready
instant
tightly (–2)
folded
slow recoil
recoil
recoil

Thick
cartilage,
ear stiff

Breast

Faint
red
marks

ImpercepBarely
Flat areola–
tible
perceptible
no bud

Testes in
Testes
upper
descending,
canal,
few rugae
rare rugae

Testes
down,
good
rugae

Testes
pendulous,
deep rugae

Prominent Prominent
Majora
Clitoris
Genitals,
clitoris,
clitoris,
and minora
prominent,
female
small labia enlarging
equally
labia flat
minora
minora
prominent

Majora
large,
minora
small

Majora
cover
clitoris and
minora

Genitals,
male

Scrotum
flat,
smooth

Scrotum
empty,
faint rugae

score includes extremely premature infants and has been refined to improve accuracy in more mature infants. (From Ballard JL, Khoury JC,
Wedig K, et al. New Ballard score, expanded to include extremely premature infants. J Pediatr. 1991;119:417–423.)

from preterm infants. Compared with a premature infant of appropriate
weight, an infant with IUGR has a reduced birthweight and may appear
to have a disproportionately larger head relative to body size; infants in
both groups lack subcutaneous fat. Neurologic maturity (nerve conduction velocity) in the absence of asphyxia correlates with gestational age
despite reduced fetal weight. Physical signs may be useful in estimating
gestational age at birth. The commonly used Ballard scoring system is
accurate to within 2 weeks of actual gestational age (Figs. 119.7-­119.9).

90

90

Ballard score includes extremely premature infants and has been refined to improve accuracy in more mature infants. (From Ballard JL,
Khoury JC, Wedig K, et al. New Ballard score, expanded to include
extremely premature infants. J Pediatr. 1991;119:417–423.)
Maturity Rating

5

Fig. 119.7 Physical criteria for maturity. The expanded New Ballard

100

Fig. 119.8 Neuromuscular criteria for maturity. The expanded New

Mostly
bald

Anterior
transverse
crease
only

Plantar
surface

120

Heel
to ear

Superficial Cracking, Parchment,
Leathery,
peeling
pale
deep
cracked,
and/or rash, areas,
cracking,
wrinkled
few veins rare veins no vessels
Thinning

140

Scarf
sign

Physical maturity
1

5

Posture

Score

Weeks

– 10

20

–5

22

0

24

5

26

10

28

15

30

20

32

25

34

30

36

35

38

40

40

45

42

50

44

Fig. 119.9 Maturity rating. The physical and neurologic scores are

added to calculate gestational age. (From Ballard JL, Khoury JC, Wedig
K, et al. New Ballard score, expanded to include extremely premature
infants. J Pediatr. 1991;119:417–423.)

NURSERY CARE

At birth, the general measures needed to clear the airway, initiate
breathing, care for the umbilical cord and eyes, and administer vitamin
K are the same for premature infants as for those of normal weight
and maturity (see Chapter 123). Additional considerations are the need
for (1) thermal control and monitoring of the heart rate and respiration, (2) advanced respiratory support, and (3) special attention to the
details of fluid requirements and nutrition that may in turn lead to considerations of IV access. Preterm infants are at an increased risk of early
and late-­onset neonatal sepsis compared with their term counterparts.
Routine procedures that disturb these infants may result in hypoxia
and stress. The benefits of regular and active participation by the parents in the infant’s care in the nursery and the question of prognosis for
later growth and development require special consideration.

Thermal Control

Avoidance of hypothermia and hyperthermia decreases the risk of
morbidity and mortality in ELBW and VLBW infants. Neonates in
general, and ELBW and VLBW infants to an even greater extent, are
at increased risk of heat loss compared with older children due to an

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1044 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
increased body surface/weight ratio, decreased epidermal and dermal
skin thickness, minimal subcutaneous fat, and an immature nervous
system.
Preterm infants should be kept in a neutral thermal environment.
This environment comprises a set of thermal conditions, including air
and radiating surface temperatures, relative humidity, and airflow, at
which heat production (measured experimentally as oxygen consumption) is minimal and the infant’s core temperature is within the normal
range. The neutral thermal environment is a function of the size and
postnatal age of an infant; larger, older infants require lower environmental temperatures than smaller, younger infants. Incubators or radiant warmers can be used to maintain body temperature. Body heat is
conserved through provision of a warm environment and humidity,
while minimizing heat loss through conduction, convection, radiation,
and evaporation. The optimal environmental temperature for minimal
heat loss and oxygen consumption for an unclothed infant is one that
maintains the infant’s core temperature at 36.5–37.0°C (97.7–98.6°F).
The smaller and less mature the infant, the higher is the environmental
temperature required. Infant warmth can be maintained by heating the
air to a desired temperature or by servo-­control. Continuous monitoring of the infant’s temperature is required to maintain optimal body
temperature. Kangaroo care, especially in LBW infants, with direct
skin-­to-­skin contact between infant and parent, with a hat and blanket covering the infant, is to be encouraged (and not delayed), without
untoward effects on thermoregulation.
Maintaining increased relative humidity for preterm infants in
the first weeks of life aids in stabilizing body temperature by reducing heat loss at lower environmental temperatures. The ideal humidity
and duration of increased humidity at a specific gestational age is not
known, but typically is maintained between 60% and 80% for a week.
Humidification of inspired air for infants requiring respiratory support prevents drying and irritation of the lining of respiratory passages
and aids in thinning viscid secretions and reducing insensible water
loss. Humidification should be gradually weaned after the first week of
life to promote skin barrier formation and to reduce the risk of microbial growth associated with prolonged excessive humidity. The infant
should also be weaned and then removed from the incubator or radiant warmer when the gradual change to the atmosphere of the nursery
does not result in a significant change in the infant’s temperature, color,
activity, vital signs, or rate of weight gain.

Oxygen Administration

Administering oxygen to reduce the risk of injury from hypoxia and
circulatory insufficiency (risk of cerebral palsy, death) must be balanced against the risk of hyperoxia to the eyes (retinopathy of prematurity [ROP]) and injury to the lungs due to generation of free radicals.
For ELBW infants at birth, guidelines should be followed to determine
need for supplemental oxygen during resuscitation to maintain goal O2
saturation limits (see Chapter 123).
After the initial resuscitation period, ideal target O2 saturation limits for ELBW infants should be within the range of 90–95% for most
infants.

Nutrition for the High-­Risk Infant

In the absence of early parenteral and enteral nutritional support, deficits in protein, energy, and micronutrients will quickly accrue, placing
the infant at risk for poor growth and neurodevelopmental outcomes.
The goals of early nutritional support for extremely premature infants
include approximating the rate and composition of growth for a normal fetus at the same postmenstrual age. Achieving this goal requires
an understanding of the intrauterine growth rate to be targeted as well
as the unique nutrient requirements of premature infants. Strategies
to prevent growth failure include a combined approach of early parenteral and enteral nutrition, fortification of human milk, and the use
of standardized feeding guidelines. Careful monitoring of weight gain,
length, and head circumference using appropriate growth curves and
timely biochemical assessment of bone health and potential nutritional
deficiencies is paramount. Consultation with an experienced neonatal
dietitian is important to achieve optimal outcomes.

Early Parenteral Nutrition

In the absence of IV amino acids, extremely premature infants lose 1–2%
of body protein stores per day. IV amino acids and dextrose should be
started immediately after birth. Many units use a starter or stock solution
of amino acids and dextrose to accomplish this goal in infants weighing
<1,500 g. Ideally at least 2 g/kg of amino acids should be given in the first
24 hours after birth, with a goal of at least 3 g/kg within 24-­48 hours after
birth. To meet total energy requirements, up to 3 g/kg of IV lipids will also
be needed.

Benefits of Human Milk

Maternal milk is the preferred source of enteral nutrition for premature
infants and is associated with decreased in-­hospital morbidity, including
lower rates of necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), late-­onset sepsis, bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), and severe ROP. Maternal milk feeding is also associated with superior neurodevelopmental outcomes at 18-­and 30-­months
corrected age compared to infants fed premature formula. Donor human
milk is increasingly being used when maternal milk is not available, but it is
typically lower in protein and energy content than preterm maternal milk
and may result in suboptimal growth unless adequately fortified. Although
donor human milk has been associated with a reduction in NEC, the impact
of donor human milk on neurodevelopmental outcomes remains unclear.

Enteral Nutrition

Early enteral feedings are recommended in ELBW and VLBW infants,
typically beginning between 6 and 48 hours of life with some period
of trophic/minimal enteral feeding volume. Feedings are typically
advanced slowly (15-­30 mL/kg/day) with a target goal of delivering
approximately 110-­135 kcal/kg/day and 3.5-­4.5 g protein/kg/day. To
accomplish these goals, human milk must be fortified, or a premature
formula can be given. Additional supplements such as vitamins, iron,
or other micronutrients may be required and should be based on ongoing assessment and in consultation with a neonatal dietitian.

Standardized Feeding Guidelines

Standardized feeding guidelines should be developed incorporating
evidence-­based strategies for the provision of parenteral and enteral
nutrition in ELBW and VLBW infants, including a plan to manage feeding intolerance. Regardless of the specific protocol, having
a feeding guideline leads to improved outcomes (e.g., time to regain
birthweight, time to reach full enteral nutrition), decreased rates of
late-­onset sepsis and NEC, improved growth at 36 weeks’ postmenstrual age, and reduced length of hospital stay.

Transitioning to Discharge Nutrition

The earlier an infant is born before expected, the greater the likelihood
that not all nutritional deficits will be resolved before hospital discharge. Regardless of weight gain during the initial hospital stay, there
is strong evidence for improved bone mineralization with the use of
higher concentrations of calcium and phosphorus after discharge. Fortified human milk or preterm formula with higher concentrations of
protein, minerals, and trace elements is often recommended after discharge. An individualized approach to postdischarge nutrition should
be developed to transition from the NICU and communicated with the
outpatient pediatrician who will be caring for the infant.

Prevention of Infection

Extremely preterm infants have an increased susceptibility to infection;
thus meticulous attention to infection control is required. Prevention
strategies include strict compliance with handwashing and universal
precautions, minimizing the risk of catheter contamination and duration, meticulous skin care, encouraging early appropriate advancement
of enteral feeding, education and feedback to staff, and surveillance of
nosocomial infection rates in the nursery. Although no one with an
active infection should be permitted in the nursery, the risks of infection must be balanced against the disadvantages of limiting the infant’s
contact with the family. Early and frequent participation by parents in
the nursery care of their infant does not increase the risk of infection
when preventive precautions are maintained.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 119 u The High-­Risk Infant 1045
Preventing transmission of infection from infant to infant is difficult
because often neither term nor premature newborn infants have clear
clinical evidence of an infection early in their course. When epidemics occur within a nursery, cohort nursing and isolation rooms should
be used. Hand hygiene is of upmost importance. Because premature
infants have immature immune functions, some will develop nosocomial infection even when all precautions are followed.
Awareness of overutilization of antibiotics may mitigate associated
complications both at the population level (cost and antibiotics resistance) and for the individual patient (alteration of the microbiome).
Routine immunizations should be given on the regular schedule
based on chronological age at standard doses.

Transfusion Medicine

Premature infants are at increased risk of anemia due to impaired
erythropoiesis and iatrogenesis due to frequent laboratory sampling.
Most infants with a birthweight less than 1,000 g admitted to the NICU
receive at least one blood transfusion during their stay. The need for
repeated transfusion can be minimized by a thoughtful approach to
laboratory sampling and establishing set hemoglobin thresholds for
transfusions. A multicenter randomized controlled trial in infants 22
weeks 0 days to 28 weeks 6 days found that a lower transfusion threshold resulted in fewer transfusions per infant without an impact on neurodevelopment at 22 to 26 months’ corrected gestational age. The need
for transfusions depends in part on the cardiopulmonary stability of
the patient, postnatal age, birthweight, and the etiology of the anemia.
For severe cardiopulmonary disease, transfusions are recommended
to maintain the hematocrit between 40% and 45%. For asymptomatic
stable neonates with anemia of prematurity, maintaining the hematocrit at ∼25% is acceptable.
Transfusion of platelets is another common practice in the NICU.
Premature infants are at high risk for intraventricular hemorrhage in
the first week of life, which historically prompted platelet transfusion
at thresholds now considered safe. Additionally, preterm infants may
also develop thrombocytopenia in the setting of severe bleeding or
infection. A multicenter randomized controlled trial found that infants
randomized to a higher platelet transfusion threshold (50,000/m3)
paradoxically had a higher rate of death or severe bleeding that infants
randomized to a lower threshold (25,000/m3).

IMMATURITY OF DRUG METABOLISM

Great care must be taken when prescribing and dosing medications
for premature infants (Table 119.4). Renal clearance of almost all substances excreted in the urine is diminished in newborn infants, and to
even a greater extent in premature infants. The glomerular filtration
rate rises with increasing gestational age; therefore drug dosing recommendations vary with age. For drugs primarily excreted by the kidneys,
longer intervals between dosages are often needed with increasing
degree of prematurity. Drugs that are detoxified in the liver or require
chemical conjugation before renal excretion should also be given with
caution and in doses smaller than usual.
Many drugs apparently safe for adults on the basis of toxicity studies may be harmful to newborns, especially premature infants. Oxygen and a number of drugs have proved toxic to premature infants in
amounts not harmful to term infants. Thus, administering any drug,
particularly in high doses, that has not undergone pharmacologic testing in premature infants should be undertaken carefully after risks
have been weighed against benefits.

MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY

Rates of neonatal morbidity and mortality are high in extremely preterm infants, and risks increase with decreasing gestational age and
lower birthweight (Table 119.5). Data on extremely preterm infants
born between 2003 and 2007 found that 42% of VLBW infants developed BPD, 12% developed ROP requiring treatment, 11% NEC, 36%
late-­onset sepsis, 16% grade III or IV intraventricular hemorrhage,
and 3% periventricular leukomalacia (PVL). Mortality increased with
lower gestational age, with a 94% mortality in infants born at 22 weeks
and 8% mortality at 28 weeks. The group of extremely preterm infants

Table 119.4  Potential Adverse Reactions to Drugs
Administered to Premature Infants
DRUG

REACTION(S)

Oxygen

Retinopathy of prematurity,
bronchopulmonary dysplasia

Sulfisoxazole

Kernicterus

Chloramphenicol

Gray baby syndrome—shock, bone marrow
suppression

Novobiocin

Jaundice

Hexachlorophene

Encephalopathy

Benzyl alcohol

Acidosis, collapse, intraventricular bleeding

Intravenous vitamin E

Ascites, shock

Phenolic detergents

Jaundice

NaHCO3

Intraventricular hemorrhage

Amphotericin

Anuric renal failure, hypokalemia,
hypomagnesemia

Indomethacin

Oliguria, hyponatremia, intestinal perforation

Cisapride

Prolonged QTc interval

Tetracycline

Enamel hypoplasia

Tolazoline

Hypotension, gastrointestinal bleeding

Calcium salts

Subcutaneous necrosis

Aminoglycosides

Deafness, renal toxicity

Prostaglandins

Seizures, diarrhea, apnea, hyperostosis,
pyloric stenosis

Phenobarbital

Altered state, drowsiness

Morphine

Hypotension, urine retention, withdrawal

Pancuronium

Edema, hypovolemia, hypotension,
tachycardia

Iodine antiseptics

Hypothyroidism, goiter

Fentanyl

Seizures, chest wall rigidity, withdrawal

Dexamethasone

Gastrointestinal bleeding, hypertension,
infection, hyperglycemia, cardiomyopathy,
reduced growth

Furosemide

Deafness, hyponatremia, hypokalemia,
hypochloremia, nephrocalcinosis, biliary
stones

Heparin (not low-­dose
prophylactic use)

Bleeding, intraventricular hemorrhage,
thrombocytopenia

Erythromycin

Pyloric stenosis

had a 28% mortality rate, with 37% surviving without a significant neonatal morbidity.
Another study found that morbidity and mortality among VLBW
infants decreased between 2000 and 2009. This study was limited to
liveborn infants with birthweights of 500-­1,500 g. For infants born in
2009, this study found a 12.4% mortality rate; 28% of infants developed BPD, 7% severe ROP, 5% NEC, 15% late-­onset sepsis, 6% grade
III or IV IVH, and 3% PVL; 51% survived without significant neonatal
morbidity.
Outcomes are improving with time; survival among infants born at 22-­
24 weeks’ gestation is ∼50–80% in units providing active management.
The percentage surviving without neurodevelopmental impairment has
also increased. Factors that reduce morbidity and mortality in extremely
preterm infants include higher birthweight and gestational age, receipt
of antenatal corticosteroids, female sex, singleton pregnancy, and active

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1046 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 119.5  Neonatal Morbidities Associated with
Prematurity
RESPIRATORY
Respiratory distress syndrome (hyaline membrane disease)
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia*
Pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum; interstitial emphysema
Congenital pneumonia
Apnea
CARDIOVASCULAR
Patent ductus arteriosus
Hypotension
Bradycardia (with apnea)
HEMATOLOGIC
Anemia (early or late onset)
GASTROINTESTINAL
Poor gastrointestinal function—poor motility
Necrotizing enterocolitis*
Hyperbilirubinemia—indirect and direct
Spontaneous gastrointestinal isolated perforation
METABOLIC-­ENDOCRINE
Hypocalcemia
Hypoglycemia
Hyperglycemia
Metabolic acidosis
Hypothermia
Euthyroid but low thyroxine status
Osteopenia
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Intraventricular hemorrhage*
Periventricular leukomalacia*
Seizures
Retinopathy of prematurity*
Deafness
RENAL
Hyponatremia
Hypernatremia
Hyperkalemia
Renal tubular acidosis
Renal glycosuria
Edema
OTHER
Infections* (congenital, perinatal, nosocomial: bacterial, viral, fungal,
protozoal)
*Major neonatal morbidities.

resuscitation planned at delivery. With improvement in neonatal care, a
growing number of centers offer a trial of resuscitation starting at 22 0/7
weeks if that is consistent with parental goals. Outcome prediction tools
such as those based on data from the United States (NICHD-­VON) or
UK (BAPM) and the latter organization’s framework to guide management are resources for the clinician that can be used for parental counseling. The prediction tools underscore that extreme prematurity is still
associated with significant risk of both mortality and major neonatal
morbidities. For infants who survive to discharge, prematurity, as well as
neonatal morbidities, put them at increased risk for developmental delays
and impairment as they age (see Chapter 119.5). Perinatal centers should
develop consensus guidelines regarding an approach to periviable birth
to ensure a consistent approach to both maternal and neonatal care. Balanced and unbiased antenatal counseling that includes shared decision-­
making between neonatologists, obstetricians, and families is imperative.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

119.3 Moderate and Late Preterm Infants
Erik Brandsma
Whereas the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), and the WHO

have precise definitions for preterm, term, and postterm births, there
has been some debate on defining subcategories of preterm infants.
Because outcomes vary widely within broad gestational age range
groups, consensus on definitions of subcategories is important. Based
on a now widely adopted recommendation from a 2005 National
Institutes of Health (NIH) sponsored workshop, infants born at 34
0/7 through 36 6/7 weeks’ gestation are considered late preterm. The
WHO defines moderate to late preterm birth as infants born at 32 0/7
through 36 6/7 weeks’ gestation. Therefore most define moderate preterm infants as those born at 32 0/7 through 33 6/7 weeks’ gestation.
The initial effect of the NIH-­sponsored workshop and the resulting
2007 AAP Clinical Report from the Committee on Fetus and Newborn
on late preterm infants was encouraging. The report continues to be a
resource for pediatricians caring for late preterm infants, listing recommended minimum criteria for their discharge. A 2019 update from
the Committee on Fetus and Newborn addresses the concern of the
increasing incidence of late preterm birth since 2015.
The risk of morbidity in the individual infant born moderate or
late preterm is lower than infants born before 32 weeks of gestation.
Because late and moderate preterm births account for approximately
75% and 11.5% of preterm births in the United States, respectively,
morbidities in this group continue to be a significant burden on the
healthcare system. Etiology of preterm birth is discussed elsewhere (see
Chapter 117.2). The majority of moderate and late preterm births are
associated with spontaneous preterm labor, preterm premature rupture
of membranes (PPROM), and multiple gestation.

MODERATE PRETERM INFANT

Moderate preterm infants are at increased risk for postnatal morbidities, although to a lesser extent and severity than very preterm infants.
The most common morbidities associated with preterm birth at this
gestational age are temperature instability, respiratory distress, apnea,
sepsis, hypoglycemia, feeding difficulties, and hyperbilirubinemia.
Moderate preterm infants with birthweight >1,500 g and an unremarkable NICU course are thought to be at minimal risk for IVH and do
not routinely need a head ultrasound. Similarly, the AAP does not
recommend universal screening for ROP at this gestational age, unless
birthweight is below 1,500 g or in select cases for infants with a history
of significant cardiopulmonary compromise. Little research has examined moderate preterm infants as an isolated group; more often these
infants are grouped with very preterm infants when assessing complications and outcomes. A cohort of approximately 7,000 infants born
between 29 and 33 weeks’ gestational age were found in a recent study
to have a mean hospital stay of 33.3 days. Moderate and late preterm
infants are at increased risk of mortality as well. The increased risk
of mortality is modest, approximately 10-­fold for moderate preterm
infants and fourfold for late preterm infants compared to term infants
(22 and 8.2 per 1,000 live births, respectively), but because these infants
comprise close to 90% of preterm infants overall, this group as a whole
contributes significantly to infant mortality.

LATE PRETERM INFANT

As described previously, the overall rate of prematurity has increased
gradually since 2015. Most of the increase in overall preterm birthrate
can be contributed to infants born late preterm. These infants account
for approximately 7.5% of all births and almost three fourths of all preterm births in the United States. Historically, late preterm infants were
referred to as near-­term infants, and the approach to their care was
similar to that of term infants. It has been increasingly recognized that
late preterm infants have significantly increased morbidity, as well as
mortality, compared with their term counterparts. Overall, compared
to their term counterparts, late preterm infants have approximately a
sevenfold risk of morbidities and fourfold risk of mortality. There is
an increased incidence of congenital anomalies in preterm infants, but
even when these infants are excluded, late preterm infants continue to
have significantly more morbidities. Immediately after birth, there is an
increased risk of requiring resuscitation, as well as increased incidence
of hypoglycemia, respiratory distress due to respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) or transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) apnea, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 119 u The High-­Risk Infant 1047
difficulty with thermoregulation. Their average birth hospital length of
stay is approximately 9 days compared to 2 days for term infants. Additional concerns during this initial hospital stay include feeding difficulties and jaundice. They have a higher rehospitalization rate compared
to their term peers and an increased risk of long-­term morbidities and
even mortality (e.g., sudden infant death syndrome [SIDS]). Some
studies suggest a higher risk of lower school readiness at kindergarten
and increased risk of academic difficulties in childhood when comparing late preterm infants with term peers.
In addition to universal routine newborn care, the potential morbidities associated with preterm birth need to be addressed. This starts
before birth with possible interventions to prevent preterm birth or a
course of betamethasone for the pregnant women at risk for preterm
birth within 7 days as recommended by ACOG and continues in the
delivery room, where measures should be in place to prevent and treat
common preterm birth associated morbidities such as hypothermia
and hypoglycemia. Whether infants are taken care of in a NICU or
in a well-­baby nursery, continued vigilance is required to address the
potential consequences of physiologic immaturity, such as poor feeding, dehydration, and hyperbilirubinemia. Follow-­
up visits should
occur early and additional visits may be required to ensure the infant
thrives. Because of ongoing health risks that the preterm infant faces
in infancy and childhood, awareness and documentation of the child’s
birth history is important. It is paramount that all interventions are
implemented equitably, with particular attention to non-­
Hispanic
black and Hispanic women and children, who are currently disproportionally affected by preterm birth and account for the largest increase
in late preterm birth.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

119.4 Term and Postterm Infants
Andrea F. Duncan
The ACOG further divides term infants into subgroups: early term
(37-­38 6/7 weeks), full term (39-­40 6/7 weeks), and late term (41-­
41 6/7 weeks). Many risk factors for term infants put them at higher
risk for complications, such as meconium aspiration syndrome (see
Chapter 129.1), hemolytic disease of the newborn (see Chapter 140),
infant of a diabetic mother (see Chapter 147), and neonatal abstinence
syndrome (see Chapter 145). Both SGA and large-­for-­gestational-­age
(LGA) are associated with increased morbidities.

SMALL FOR GESTATIONAL AGE AND IUGR

There is an important distinction between the terms small for gestational age (SGA) and intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR).
SGA is based on physical evaluation of an infant at birth, usually by
a pediatrician or neonatologist. If the infant’s weight is <10th percentile, the infant is SGA. The diagnosis of SGA does not differentiate
between normal biologic growth potential and a pathologic or growth-­
restricted state in utero. In contrast, IUGR is a prenatal diagnosis to
describe a fetus who fails to reach in utero growth potential, often
diagnosed by the obstetrician using intrauterine growth curves and
measures of compromise (e.g., abnormal Doppler flow measurements)
(Fig. 119.10). This measure is independent of growth centile at birth.
Therefore not all infants with IUGR are SGA, and, similarly, not all
infants who are SGA have IUGR.
Although it is important to understand the difference between SGA
and IUGR, many studies evaluate postnatal outcomes based on a diagnosis of either SGA or IUGR.

Fig. 119.10 This is a 36-­week male

neonate with a birthweight of 1,600 g
who was born to a mother with severe
preeclampsia. This baby was noted to
have asymmetric intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Note the loss of fat over
the body, visible rib cage, excessive skin
folds noted over the whole body, and
relatively large head compared to the
body. (From Sharma D, Shastri S, Sharma P. Intrauterine growth restriction: antenatal and postnatal aspects. Clin Med
Insights Pediatr. 2016;10:67–83.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1048 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 119.6  Factors Often Associated with Intrauterine
Growth Restriction

Table 119.7  Characteristics of Symmetric vs Asymmetric
IUGR

FETAL
Chromosomal (trisomies, microdeletions, copy number variants) and
monogenetic disorders
Chronic fetal infections (cytomegalic inclusion disease, congenital
rubella, syphilis)
Congenital anomalies—syndrome complexes
Irradiation
Multiple gestation
Pancreatic hypoplasia
Insulin deficiency (production or action of insulin)
Insulin-­like growth factor type I deficiency
PLACENTAL
Decreased placental weight, cellularity, or both
Decrease in surface area
Villous placentitis (bacterial, viral, parasitic)
Infarction
Tumor (chorioangioma, hydatidiform mole)
Placental separation
Placental mesenchymal dysplasia
Twin transfusion syndrome
MATERNAL/PATERNAL
Preeclampsia
Hypertension or renal disease, or both
Hypoxemia (high altitude, cyanotic cardiac or pulmonary disease)
Malnutrition (micronutrient or macronutrient deficiencies)
Chronic illness
Sickle cell anemia
Drugs (opiates, alcohol, cigarettes, cocaine, prescribed medications,
antimetabolites)

CHARACTERISTICS

SYMMETRIC IUGR

ASYMMETRIC IUGR

Typical period
of insult and
presentation

Earlier gestation
(often second
trimester)

Later gestation
(often detected in
the third trimester)

Percentage of all
IUGR cases

20–30%

70–80%

Etiology

Genetic disorders
Congenital infections

Placental insufficiency

Antenatal scan

Proportionately
decreased head
circumference
(HC), abdominal
circumference (AC),
biparietal diameter,
and femur length

Only abdominal
circumference
decreased

Cell number

Decreased

Normal

Cell size

Normal

Decreased

Postnatal
anthropometry

All parameters (HC,
length, and weight)
reduced

Reduced weight, HC
normal, length low
to normal

Features of
malnutrition

Less pronounced

More pronounced

IUGR is indicative of compromise in utero and is associated with
medical conditions that interfere with the circulation and efficiency of
the placenta, with the development or growth of the fetus, or with the
general health and nutrition of the mother (Table 119.6). Many factors
are common to both prematurely born and LBW infants with IUGR.
IUGR is associated with decreased insulin production or insulin-­like
growth factor (IGF) action at the receptor level. Infants with IGF-­1 receptor defects, pancreatic hypoplasia, or transient neonatal diabetes have
IUGR. Genetic mutations affecting the glucose-­sensing mechanisms of
the pancreatic islet cells result in decreased insulin release (loss of function of the glucose-­sensing glucokinase gene) and give rise to IUGR.
IUGR may be a normal fetal response to nutritional or oxygen deprivation; therefore the issue is not the IUGR but rather the ongoing risk
of fetal malnutrition or hypoxia. IUGR is often classified as reduced
growth that is symmetric (head circumference, length, and weight
equally affected) or asymmetric (with relative sparing of head growth)
(Table 119.7). Symmetric IUGR often has an earlier onset in the first
trimester of pregnancy and is associated with diseases that seriously
affect fetal cell number, such as conditions with chromosomal, genetic,
malformation, teratogenic, infectious, or severe maternal hypertensive
etiologies. It is important to assess gestational age carefully in infants
suspected to have symmetric IUGR because incorrect overestimation
of gestational age may lead to the diagnosis of symmetric IUGR. It is
also important to assess carefully for dysmorphic features in infants
with symmetric IUGR. Asymmetric IUGR is often of late onset in the
second half of pregnancy, demonstrates preservation of Doppler waveform velocity to the carotid vessels, and is associated with poor maternal nutrition or with late onset or exacerbation of maternal vascular
disease (preeclampsia, chronic hypertension).
Table 119.8 lists common problems of infants with IUGR. In addition, in both preterm and term infants, IUGR is associated with
increased risk of cardiovascular disease across the life span, and both
SGA and IUGR are associated with an increased risk of neurodevelopmental impairment. To properly manage infants born IUGR and SGA,
clinicians must prepare for the possible perinatal morbidities (e.g.,
hypoglycemia, hypothermia, pulmonary hypertension, feeding intolerance), perform any diagnostic testing needed to determine the etiology,

IUGR, Intrauterine growth restriction.
Adapted from Sharma D, Shastri S, Sharma P. Intrauterine growth restriction: –part 2.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2016 Mar 15:1–12.

Table 119.8  Problems of Infants Small for Gestational Age
or with Intrauterine Growth Restriction*
PROBLEM

PATHOGENESIS

Intrauterine fetal demise

Hypoxia, acidosis, infection, lethal
anomaly

Perinatal asphyxia

↓ Uteroplacental perfusion during
labor ± chronic fetal hypoxia-­acidosis;
meconium aspiration syndrome

Hypoglycemia

↓ Tissue glycogen stores, ↓
gluconeogenesis, hyperinsulinism,
↑ glucose needs of hypoxia,
hypothermia, large brain

Polycythemia-­hyperviscosity

Fetal hypoxia with ↑ erythropoietin
production

Reduced oxygen
consumption/hypothermia

Hypoxia, hypoglycemia, starvation
effect, poor subcutaneous fat stores

Dysmorphology

Syndrome anomalads, chromosomal-­
genetic disorders, oligohydramnios-­
induced deformation, TORCH†

*Other problems include pulmonary hemorrhage and those common to the gestational
age–related risks of prematurity if born at <37 wk.
†TORCH, Toxoplasmosis, other agents, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex infection.
↓, Decreased; ↑, increased.

and monitor closely for long-­term deficits (e.g., growth, neurodevelopment, cardiovascular).

LARGE-­FOR-­GESTATIONAL-­AGE INFANTS

Infants with birthweight >90th percentile for gestational age are called
large for gestational age (LGA). Neonatal mortality rates decrease
with increasing birthweight until approximately 4,000 g, after which
they increase. These oversized infants are usually born at term, but

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 119 u The High-­Risk Infant 1049
preterm infants with high weights for gestational age also have a significantly higher mortality than infants of the same size born at term;
maternal diabetes and obesity are predisposing factors. Some infants
are constitutionally large because of large parental size. LGA infants,
regardless of their gestational age, have a higher incidence of shoulder
dystocia and birth injuries, such as cervical and brachial plexus injuries, phrenic nerve damage with paralysis of the diaphragm, fractured
clavicles, cephalohematomas, subdural hematomas, and ecchymoses of
the head and face. LGA infants are also at increased risk for hypoglycemia and polycythemia.
The incidence of congenital anomalies, particularly congenital heart
disease, is also higher in LGA infants than in term infants of normal
weight.

POSTTERM INFANTS

Postterm infants are those born after 42 weeks (294 days) of gestation,
as calculated from the mother’s LMP. Historically, approximately 12%
of pregnancies resulted in delivery after 42 weeks. However, with current evidence demonstrating significantly increased maternal, fetal
and neonatal risks after 42 weeks’ gestation, obstetric interventions to
induce labor often occur before 42 weeks, resulting in a decreasing rate
of postterm births. The cause of true postterm birth or postmaturity is
unknown, though some have been attributed to genetic influences and
defects in fetal production of parturition hormones. Postterm infants
are often dysmature, with normal length and head circumference but
may have decreased weight, indicating impaired nutritional supply
from placental insufficiency. Infants born postterm in association with
presumed placental insufficiency may have various physical signs. Desquamation, long nails, abundant hair, pale skin, alert faces, and loose
skin, especially around the thighs and buttocks, give them the appearance of having recently lost weight; meconium-­stained nails, skin,
vernix, umbilical cord, and placental membranes may also be noted.
Common complications of postmaturity include perinatal depression,
meconium aspiration syndrome, persistent pulmonary hypertension,
hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, and polycythemia.
Perinatal mortality is 5.8% for infants born at ≥42 weeks’ gestational
age, compared to 0.7% for those born at term. Mortality may be due
to placental insufficiency or umbilical cord compression resulting in
hypoxemia and asphyxia. Mortality has been greatly reduced through
improved obstetric management. Data suggest that elective delivery
between the 39th and 41st week of gestation for both nulliparous and
multiparous women is associated with decreased maternal and neonatal complications compared with those who were expectantly managed.
Careful obstetric monitoring, including nonstress testing (NST),
biophysical profile (BPP), or Doppler velocimetry, usually provides
a rational basis for choosing one of three courses: nonintervention,
induction of labor, or cesarean delivery. Induction of labor or cesarean
birth may be indicated in older primigravidas >2 weeks beyond term,
particularly if evidence of fetal distress is present. Medical problems in
the newborn are treated if they arise.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

119.5 Follow-­Up of High-­Risk Infants After
Discharge
Andrea F. Duncan

DISCHARGE FROM THE HOSPITAL

Numerous criteria need to be met before a high-­risk infant is ready
for discharge from the hospital (Table 119.9). Before discharge,
infants should be taking most or all nutrition by nipple, either bottle
or breast. Some medically fragile infants may require discharge while
receiving gavage feedings or after placement of a gastrostomy tube,
after the parents have received appropriate training and education.
Growth should be occurring at steady increments, with a goal weight
gain of approximately 30 g/day. Temperature should be stable and

Table 119.9  Readiness for Discharge of High-­Risk Infants
Criteria
Resolution of acute life-­threatening illnesses
Ongoing follow-­up for chronic but stable problems:
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Intraventricular hemorrhage
Necrotizing enterocolitis after surgery or recovery
Ventricular septal defect, other cardiac lesions
Anemia
Retinopathy of prematurity
Hearing problems
Apnea
Cholestasis
Stable temperature regulation
Gain of weight with enteral feedings:
Breastfeeding
Bottle feeding
Gastric tube feeding
Free of significant apnea
Appropriate immunizations and planning for respiratory syncytial
virus prophylaxis if indicated
Hearing screenings
Ophthalmologic examination if <30 wk of gestation or <1,500 g at
birth
Parental knowledge, skill, and confidence documented in:
Administration of medications (diuretics, methylxanthines,
aerosols, etc.)
Use of oxygen, apnea monitors, oximeters
Nutritional support:
Timing
Volume
Mixing concentrated formulas
Recognition of illness and deterioration
Basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Infant safety
Scheduling of referrals:
Primary care provider
Neonatal follow-­up clinic
Occupational therapy/physical therapy
Imaging (head ultrasound)
Assessment of and solution to social risks
Data from American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians:
Guidelines for Perinatal Care. 7th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2013.

normal in an open crib. Infants should have had no recent episodes
of apnea or bradycardia requiring intervention for at least 5-­7 days
before discharge. Stable infants recovering from BPD may be discharged on a regimen of home oxygen given by nasal cannula as long
as careful follow-­up is arranged with home pulse oximetry monitoring and outpatient visits. Some children may require discharge on
higher ventilatory support in partnership with pulmonology. All
infants with birthweight <1,500 g or gestational age <30 weeks at
birth should undergo an eye examination to screen for ROP. If born
preterm, hemoglobin or hematocrit should be determined to evaluate for possible anemia of prematurity. Every infant should have a
hearing test before discharge. Routine vaccinations should be given
based on chronological age before discharge. In addition, palivizumab (Synagis) should be given to eligible infants during respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) season immediately before discharge for
prophylaxis against RSV, with continued monthly doses arranged as
an outpatient as appropriate.
If all major medical problems have resolved and the home setting is
adequate, premature infants may then be discharged when their weight
approaches 1,800-­2,000 g, they are >34-­35 weeks postmenstrual age
(PMA), and all the above criteria are met. Parental education, close
follow-­up, and healthcare provider accessibility are all essential for early
discharge protocols. The primary caregivers for the infant should have a
chance to provide infant care in the hospital with nursing supervision and
support before discharge home. All high-­risk infants should follow up with
their primary care provider within a few days of discharge and should

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1050 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 119.10  Sequelae of Prematurity
IMMEDIATE

LATE

Hypoxia, ischemia

Intellectual disability, spastic diplegia,
microcephaly, seizures, poor school
performance

Intraventricular
hemorrhage

Intellectual disability, spasticity, seizures,
post hemorrhagic hydrocephalus

Sensorineural injury

Hearing and visual impairment, retinopathy
of prematurity, strabismus, myopia

Respiratory failure

Bronchopulmonary dysplasia, pulmonary
hypertension, bronchospasm,
malnutrition, subglottic stenosis

Necrotizing enterocolitis

Short-­bowel syndrome, malabsorption,
malnutrition

Cholestatic liver disease

Cirrhosis, hepatic failure, malnutrition

Nutrient deficiency

Osteopenia, fractures, anemia, growth
failure

Social stress

Child abuse or neglect, failure to thrive,
divorce

Other sequelae

Sudden infant death syndrome, infections,
inguinal hernia, cutaneous scars (chest
tube, patent ductus arteriosus ligation,
intravenous infiltration), gastroesophageal
reflux, hypertension, craniosynostosis,
cholelithiasis, nephrocalcinosis,
cutaneous hemangiomas

be followed in a follow-­up program that tracks medical and neurodevelopmental outcomes.

POSTDISCHARGE FOLLOW-­UP
Medical Follow-­Up

Even after discharge from the hospital, high-­risk infants need very
close medical follow-­up. They continue to be at increased risk for poor
weight gain and failure to thrive. In the setting of viral illness, premature infants are at increased risk for significant respiratory distress.
Infants who are sent home on oxygen need very close medical follow­up with frequent visits and assessments, often with pulmonology. Table
119.10 lists common sequelae of prematurity.
Medically complex infants can go home with a multitude of subspecialty appointments to help manage existing morbidities secondary to prematurity, for example, cardiology for management of a patent
ductus arteriosus or pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary for BPD,
nephrology for hypertension, ophthalmology for ROP, neurosurgery
for hydrocephalus, and neurology for history of seizures. The extensive
follow-­up requirements can be overwhelming and daunting for families. It is very important that these infants have a primary provider who
serves as their “medical home” to help coordinate and assimilate the
care from all these providers for families. This may be their primary
care provider or subspecialty program provider.

Developmental Follow-­Up

Premature infants are at much greater risk for neurodevelopmental
delays than their term counterparts; the more preterm, the greater the

risk of delay. In addition, certain postnatal morbidities (severe BPD,
grade III or IV intraventricular hemorrhage, severe ROP, seizures) are
associated with significantly increased risk of developmental delays. It
is very important that these infants, particularly those born preterm,
are followed and assessed for developmental delay, so that if delays are
detected targeted interventions can be instituted as early as possible.
It is recommended that developmental follow-­up be available for
infants born <32 weeks’ PMA, or at a minimum <28 weeks’ PMA and/
or <1 kg birthweight. Developmental follow-­up in the United States is
most often provided in a neonatal follow-­up program for the first 2-­3
years of life, and in some cases, until school age. Assessments focus
on five main developmental domains: cognitive development, language development, fine and gross motor skills, social development,
and emotional development. Although many assessments exist, the
most widely used assessment in the United States is the Bayley Scales of
Infant and Toddler Development, 4th Edition.
It is important to note that for at least the first 2 years of life, a child’s
corrected age should be used in determining whether a delay exists.
Corrected age is calculated by subtracting the weeks born premature
from a child’s chronological age. In doing so, a corrected age accounts
for a child’s prematurity. There is some debate whether corrected age
should continue to be used after age 2 years.
If it is determined that a delay exists, a child should be referred for
appropriate therapy immediately to help minimize the delay as the
child ages. Federal law under the Individuals with Disabilities Act
requires states to provide early intervention services to children <3
years old with developmental delay. States vary greatly in how delay is
defined and what services are offered. Early intervention is associated
with improved cognitive outcomes in infancy and preschool age, but
not lasting into school age. Motor outcomes are improved in infancy
for children who receive early intervention, but this has not been
shown to be a lasting effect into preschool and school age. However,
these findings are difficult to interpret, given the heterogeneity of early
interventions included in the reviews. With targeted interventions for
specific delays, functional outcomes are improved.
Premature infants, especially those with a history of grade III or IV
intraventricular hemorrhage or PVL seen on head imaging, are also
at increased risk of motor impairments. Cerebral palsy is a nonprogressive but permanent disorder of movement and posture caused by
disturbance to the developing immature brain. Historically, cerebral
palsy had not been diagnosed until 18-­24 months of age, but it can be
diagnosed within the first 6 months of life. Early detection is critical to
leveraging the neuroplasticity present in the very early years of life for
improved function. International guidelines for early assessment and
diagnosis of cerebral palsy and standardized assessments such as the
General Movements Assessment (GMA) and the Hammersmith Infant
Neurological Examination (HINE) are recommended in the guidelines
to help identify children at high risk for or with cerebral palsy within
the first few months to a year of life. This enables these children to
access early intervention services and therapy at an earlier age, as well
as undergo more frequent surveillance as needed.
Children with a history of prematurity who do not show significant
developmental delays in the first few years of life are still at risk of later
developing learning disabilities, attention problems, and decreased
school achievement. Continued screening by their primary care provider is needed as these children age. More subtle deficits may not be
recognized until school age; therefore continued surveillance is critical.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 120 u Transport of the Critically Ill Newborn 1051

Chapter 120

Transport of the Critically
Ill Newborn
David A. Munson
REGIONALIZED CARE OF NEWBORNS

The concept of regionalized care for neonates emphasizes the importance of providing regionalized care for infants in facilities with
adequate personnel and equipment for an infant’s severity of illness.
Ideally, pregnant people should give birth to infants at a facility with
the appropriate level of expertise and resources to care for the degree
of prematurity and illness of the infant. Very low birthweight (VLBW)
infants, or infants <1,500 g at birth, have decreased morbidity and
mortality when born at Level III hospitals. In a meta-­analysis, neonatal
or predischarge death occurred in 38% of VLBW infants receiving care
at a non–Level III hospital and 23% of those receiving care at a Level III
hospital. A main objective of Healthy People 2020 addresses this issue,
with a goal of increasing the proportion of VLBW infants born at Level
III hospitals or subspecialty perinatal centers to 83.7%. When possible
it is more preferable to transport the pregnant person to meet the goals
of regionalization.

LEVELS OF NEONATAL CARE

A Level I facility must be able to provide basic neonatal care. Appropriate equipment and staff must be available to perform neonatal resuscitation and care for healthy term and late preterm infants. In addition,
Level I facilities must have the capacity to work to stabilize ill or preterm infants before transport to a higher level of care. A Level I nursery
is the minimum requirement for a hospital providing inpatient maternity care. Providers at Level I facilities usually include pediatricians,
family physicians, and nurse practitioners.
In addition to the care provided at a Level I facility, Level II nurseries must also be capable of providing care to moderately ill term
infants with problems expected to resolve quickly. Level II centers also
care for infants born ≥32 weeks’ gestational age and >1,500 g at birth;
therefore they must be comfortable with treating conditions common
in this population, such as difficulty with oral feeds, apnea of prematurity, respiratory distress requiring continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), and temperature regulation. These centers must also be
capable of stabilizing infants born <32 weeks’ gestation and <1,500 g
until transfer to a higher-­level facility is feasible, including the ability
to intubate and provide mechanical ventilation for a brief duration if
necessary. In addition to providers in Level I facilities, Level II facilities
also typically have pediatric hospitalists, neonatologists, and neonatal
nurse practitioners.
Level III NICUs are equipped to care for extremely preterm and
critically ill neonates in addition to those infants cared for at Level I
and II units. Level III units must have continuously available personnel
and equipment to treat conditions commonly seen in this population,
such as respiratory distress syndrome, pulmonary hypertension, and
need for total parenteral nutrition. Resources should be available to
obtain and interpret urgent imaging needed (e.g., CT, echocardiography). Pediatric subspecialists and pediatric surgeons should be available either on-­site or through prearranged consultative agreements.
In addition to the care available at Level III neonatal intensive care
units (NICUs), Level IV NICUs are also capable of providing continuously available pediatric subspecialty consultation and pediatric surgical intervention. Many Level IV sites are located at regional
children’s hospitals and also serve to provide outreach education.
Level IV NICUs also have the capacity to provide extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation (ECMO), an intervention that requires surgeons for catheter placement and ECMO specialists who are typically

nurses or respiratory therapists with additional training in managing
the ECMO circuit.

TRANSPORT OF THE CRITICALLY ILL NEONATE

In the event that a neonate requires a higher level of care, transport
must be arranged to a unit with the appropriate level of care available.
Additional decisions that need to be made before transport include
composition of the transport team, equipment required for transport,
and mode of transportation.
The composition of the transport team varies depending on personnel available and the needs of the infant being transported. The
transport team often comprises at least two individuals, whether
two registered transport trained nurses (RNs), an RN and a respiratory therapist, or an RN and a paramedic. In addition, a neonatologist, neonatology fellow, or neonatal nurse practitioner will sometimes
accompany the transport team for critically ill neonates. A medical
command physician is also available and can communicate with the
transport team during the transport, as needed. The command physician is also able to communicate with the referring neonatologist to
discuss the case and offer advice while the transport team is en route.
Transport staff must be competent in the treatment of common
neonatal conditions and complications, as well as neonatal procedures.
Many Level IV facilities have specialized teams designed only for neonatal transports. However, a Cochrane review found no evidence to
support or to refute improved infant morbidity or mortality when
transport occurred with a specialized neonatal team versus those that
transported both neonatal as well as pediatric patients. Depending on
the volume of neonatal transports and composition of the team, staff
may have limited exposure to neonatal transports and procedures.
Simulation-­based learning is recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Section on Transport Medicine (SOTM) as a
method to help achieve and retain competency in rarely experienced
procedures, as well as improve team interactions for transport teams.
The transport vehicle should be equipped with appropriate medicines, intravenous (IV) fluids, oxygen tanks, catheters, chest tubes,
endotracheal tubes (ETTs), laryngoscopes, bag-­valve-­mask, and infant
warming device. It should be well illuminated and have ample room for
emergency procedures and monitoring equipment. Additional needs
for an individual transport should be anticipated. Specifically, inhaled
nitric oxide is not standard equipment for most transport teams and
will need to be requested if thought necessary for safe transport. For
neonates with hypoxemic ischemic encephalopathy who require hypothermia therapy, a servo-­controlled cooling device is recommended as
it will achieve the target temperature faster and there is less risk of overshooting the goal temperature. Prostaglandin E1 should be available
for suspected ductal dependent congenital heart disease.
Common modes of transport include ground transport by ambulance and air transport by helicopter or fixed-­wing aircraft. The stability
of the infant, travel distance, traffic, and weather must all be taken into
account when deciding the most appropriate mode of transportation.
Steps should be taken to stabilize the infant, as able, in a timely
fashion before the transport. Securing an airway, providing oxygen,
assisting with infant ventilation, providing antimicrobial therapy,
maintaining the circulation, providing a warmed environment, checking a glucose level, and placing IV or arterial lines or chest tubes should
be initiated, if indicated, before transport. Appropriate placement of
lines and ETT should be evaluated before transport.
Some hospitals and their associated level IV NICUs offer transport
of a patient on ECMO. Most commonly this is designed to transport a
patient who is already cannulated onto ECMO who needs subspecialized care such as evaluation for transplant, or assessment for longer-­term
mechanical cardiac support. In other situations, a hospital may have the
capacity to cannulate a patient onto ECMO, but do not have a program
in place to support the patient for the coming days. These patients may
therefore include more common patients who require ECMO such as
neonates with persistent pulmonary hypertension, severe hypoxemic
respiratory failure, sepsis, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, or hypoplastic left heart syndrome. In these circumstances, a transport team needs
to include an ECMO specialist or perfusionist, and commonly adds a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1052 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
critical care physician or surgeon. There are some programs that will
bring the necessary personnel and equipment to cannulate a patient
onto an ECMO circuit at the referring hospital before transport. There
are considerable logistical challenges and added risks for transporting a
patient on ECMO. These include inadvertent decannulation, problems
with sustaining flow on the circuit, and bleeding.
Risks of transport and consent for transportation should be
reviewed and obtained from parents before transport. Although transport teams attempt to anticipate and prepare for possible complications
that could occur during transport, there is an inherent risk of complications, including death, in the event of a decompensation during
transport resulting from the limited resources and personnel available.
It is intrinsically more difficult to perform procedures in the physically confined space of an ambulance or helicopter. Additionally, there
is the risk associated with the mode of transport itself including car
and helicopter crashes. Parents should be made aware of these risks.
Efforts should be made to allow parents to see their baby briefly before
transport.
Communication with the transport team as well as the receiving facility is paramount throughout the transport process. Available prenatal history, information on the infant’s resuscitation and
hospital course, laboratory data, and radiographic images should
be sent with the transport team to the receiving hospital to aid in
future care. Video-­assisted telecommunications can assist in giving
the medical command physician visual as well as audio information about what is happening on-­site before the patient is loaded
onto the ambulance.
Reverse transport of an infant back to a lower level of care should
be considered when infants are stabilized or have received and recovered from their subspecialist or surgical interventions, and no longer
require the higher-­level care available at the receiving hospital. Transport back to the hospital of birth aids in appropriate utilization of
resources, decreases costs of care, and may further promote parent–
infant bonding because of proximity to the mother’s home.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 121

Clinical Manifestations of
Diseases in the Newborn
Period
Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald

A variety of conditions that affect the newborn originate in utero,
during birth, or in the immediate postnatal period. These disorders
can be caused by prematurity, congenital malformations, disruption
of chromosome structure, or acquired diseases and injuries.

ABNORMAL MOVEMENTS

Neonatal seizures usually suggest a central nervous system (CNS) disorder, such as hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy (HIE), intracranial
hemorrhage, stroke, cerebral anomaly, subdural effusion, or meningitis
(see Chapter 633.7). In the neonate, seizures can also be secondary to
hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia, benign familial seizures, or rarely, pyridoxine dependence, hyponatremia, hypernatremia, inborn errors of
metabolism, or drug withdrawal.

Seizures in premature infants are often subtle and associated with
abnormal eye movement (fluttering, tonic horizontal deviation, sustained eye opening with ocular fixation) or facial movement (chewing, tongue thrusting); the motor component is often that of tonic
extension of the limbs, neck, and trunk. Autonomic phenomena
include hypertension and tachycardia. Term infants may have focal
or multifocal, clonic or myoclonic movements, but they may also
have subtler manifestations of seizure activity. Apnea may be the first
manifestation of seizure activity, particularly in a premature infant.
Seizures may adversely affect the subsequent neurodevelopmental
outcome and may even predispose an infant to seizures outside the
neonatal period. Electroencephalographic (EEG) evidence of seizures can occur without clinical manifestations, particularly in preterm infants. If seizures are suspected, video-­EEG monitoring will
improve the detection of both subtle and electrographic but clinically
silent seizures. Seizures contribute to brain injury and the impact
of treatment on neurodevelopmental outcomes is an active area of
research, particularly in patients with HIE. Although many medications used to treat seizures have side effects, it is recommended to
treat both clinical and subclinical seizures.
Seizures should be distinguished from the jitteriness, defined as
recurrent tremors, that may be present in healthy newborns, in infants
of diabetic mothers, in those who experienced birth asphyxia or drug
withdrawal, and in polycythemic neonates. An examiner can suppress the tremors by holding the infant’s extremity; jitteriness often
depends on sensory stimuli and occurs when the infant is active,
and it is not associated with abnormal eye movements. Tremors are
often more rapid with a smaller amplitude than those of tonic-­clonic
seizures.
After severe birth asphyxia, infants may exhibit motor automatisms characterized by recurrent oral-­
buccal-­
lingual movements,
rotary limb activities (rowing, pedaling, swimming), tonic posturing,
or myoclonus. These motor activities are not usually accompanied by
time-­synchronized EEG discharges, may not signify cortical epileptic activity, respond poorly to anticonvulsant therapy, and are associated with a poor prognosis. Such automatisms may represent cortical
depression that produces a brainstem release phenomenon or subcortical seizures.
Failure to move an extremity (pseudoparalysis) suggests fracture,
dislocation, or a paralytic brachial plexus injury, often following a traumatic delivery. It is also seen in neonatal stroke (paralytic) as well as
septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, and other infections that cause pain on
movement of the affected part.

ABNORMAL TONE

Hypotonia, or low tone in one or more extremities, may be due to
specific genetic etiologies or as a result of pathology in the peripheral
or central nervous system. Features in the history and physical examination can help narrow the differential diagnosis and guide further
diagnostic evaluations (see Chapter 647). A history of decreased fetal
movement in utero may be suggestive of a congenital myopathy, or spinal muscular atrophy. In a male infant with cryptorchidism, Prader-­
Willi syndrome can be considered. Hypotonia is a common finding in
an infant with trisomy 21. Hypertonia is less common and should be
distinguished from fixed joint contractures seen in arthrogryposis. If
present in the hours after birth and associated with the need for resuscitation after birth, a case of HIE should be considered.

ALTERED MENTAL STATUS

Lethargy may be a manifestation of infection, asphyxia, hypoglycemia, hypercapnia, sedation from maternal analgesia or anesthesia,
an inborn error of metabolism (IEM), or, almost any severe disease.
Shortly after birth, lethargy is most likely caused by maternal medications (opioids, magnesium, general anesthesia) or moderate to severe
HIE. Lethargy appearing after the second day should suggest infection
or an IEM manifesting with hyperammonemia, acidosis, or hypoglycemia. Lethargy with emesis may suggest increased intracranial pressure
or an IEM.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1052 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
critical care physician or surgeon. There are some programs that will
bring the necessary personnel and equipment to cannulate a patient
onto an ECMO circuit at the referring hospital before transport. There
are considerable logistical challenges and added risks for transporting a
patient on ECMO. These include inadvertent decannulation, problems
with sustaining flow on the circuit, and bleeding.
Risks of transport and consent for transportation should be
reviewed and obtained from parents before transport. Although transport teams attempt to anticipate and prepare for possible complications
that could occur during transport, there is an inherent risk of complications, including death, in the event of a decompensation during
transport resulting from the limited resources and personnel available.
It is intrinsically more difficult to perform procedures in the physically confined space of an ambulance or helicopter. Additionally, there
is the risk associated with the mode of transport itself including car
and helicopter crashes. Parents should be made aware of these risks.
Efforts should be made to allow parents to see their baby briefly before
transport.
Communication with the transport team as well as the receiving facility is paramount throughout the transport process. Available prenatal history, information on the infant’s resuscitation and
hospital course, laboratory data, and radiographic images should
be sent with the transport team to the receiving hospital to aid in
future care. Video-­assisted telecommunications can assist in giving
the medical command physician visual as well as audio information about what is happening on-­site before the patient is loaded
onto the ambulance.
Reverse transport of an infant back to a lower level of care should
be considered when infants are stabilized or have received and recovered from their subspecialist or surgical interventions, and no longer
require the higher-­level care available at the receiving hospital. Transport back to the hospital of birth aids in appropriate utilization of
resources, decreases costs of care, and may further promote parent–
infant bonding because of proximity to the mother’s home.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 121

Clinical Manifestations of
Diseases in the Newborn
Period
Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald

A variety of conditions that affect the newborn originate in utero,
during birth, or in the immediate postnatal period. These disorders
can be caused by prematurity, congenital malformations, disruption
of chromosome structure, or acquired diseases and injuries.

ABNORMAL MOVEMENTS

Neonatal seizures usually suggest a central nervous system (CNS) disorder, such as hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy (HIE), intracranial
hemorrhage, stroke, cerebral anomaly, subdural effusion, or meningitis
(see Chapter 633.7). In the neonate, seizures can also be secondary to
hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia, benign familial seizures, or rarely, pyridoxine dependence, hyponatremia, hypernatremia, inborn errors of
metabolism, or drug withdrawal.

Seizures in premature infants are often subtle and associated with
abnormal eye movement (fluttering, tonic horizontal deviation, sustained eye opening with ocular fixation) or facial movement (chewing, tongue thrusting); the motor component is often that of tonic
extension of the limbs, neck, and trunk. Autonomic phenomena
include hypertension and tachycardia. Term infants may have focal
or multifocal, clonic or myoclonic movements, but they may also
have subtler manifestations of seizure activity. Apnea may be the first
manifestation of seizure activity, particularly in a premature infant.
Seizures may adversely affect the subsequent neurodevelopmental
outcome and may even predispose an infant to seizures outside the
neonatal period. Electroencephalographic (EEG) evidence of seizures can occur without clinical manifestations, particularly in preterm infants. If seizures are suspected, video-­EEG monitoring will
improve the detection of both subtle and electrographic but clinically
silent seizures. Seizures contribute to brain injury and the impact
of treatment on neurodevelopmental outcomes is an active area of
research, particularly in patients with HIE. Although many medications used to treat seizures have side effects, it is recommended to
treat both clinical and subclinical seizures.
Seizures should be distinguished from the jitteriness, defined as
recurrent tremors, that may be present in healthy newborns, in infants
of diabetic mothers, in those who experienced birth asphyxia or drug
withdrawal, and in polycythemic neonates. An examiner can suppress the tremors by holding the infant’s extremity; jitteriness often
depends on sensory stimuli and occurs when the infant is active,
and it is not associated with abnormal eye movements. Tremors are
often more rapid with a smaller amplitude than those of tonic-­clonic
seizures.
After severe birth asphyxia, infants may exhibit motor automatisms characterized by recurrent oral-­
buccal-­
lingual movements,
rotary limb activities (rowing, pedaling, swimming), tonic posturing,
or myoclonus. These motor activities are not usually accompanied by
time-­synchronized EEG discharges, may not signify cortical epileptic activity, respond poorly to anticonvulsant therapy, and are associated with a poor prognosis. Such automatisms may represent cortical
depression that produces a brainstem release phenomenon or subcortical seizures.
Failure to move an extremity (pseudoparalysis) suggests fracture,
dislocation, or a paralytic brachial plexus injury, often following a traumatic delivery. It is also seen in neonatal stroke (paralytic) as well as
septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, and other infections that cause pain on
movement of the affected part.

ABNORMAL TONE

Hypotonia, or low tone in one or more extremities, may be due to
specific genetic etiologies or as a result of pathology in the peripheral
or central nervous system. Features in the history and physical examination can help narrow the differential diagnosis and guide further
diagnostic evaluations (see Chapter 647). A history of decreased fetal
movement in utero may be suggestive of a congenital myopathy, or spinal muscular atrophy. In a male infant with cryptorchidism, Prader-­
Willi syndrome can be considered. Hypotonia is a common finding in
an infant with trisomy 21. Hypertonia is less common and should be
distinguished from fixed joint contractures seen in arthrogryposis. If
present in the hours after birth and associated with the need for resuscitation after birth, a case of HIE should be considered.

ALTERED MENTAL STATUS

Lethargy may be a manifestation of infection, asphyxia, hypoglycemia, hypercapnia, sedation from maternal analgesia or anesthesia,
an inborn error of metabolism (IEM), or, almost any severe disease.
Shortly after birth, lethargy is most likely caused by maternal medications (opioids, magnesium, general anesthesia) or moderate to severe
HIE. Lethargy appearing after the second day should suggest infection
or an IEM manifesting with hyperammonemia, acidosis, or hypoglycemia. Lethargy with emesis may suggest increased intracranial pressure
or an IEM.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 121 u Clinical Manifestations of Diseases in the Newborn Period
Irritability may be a sign of discomfort accompanying intraabdominal conditions, meningeal irritation, drug withdrawal, infections,
trauma (birth or nonaccidental), or any condition producing pain. It
must be distinguished from normal crying behavior associated with
hunger or benign environmental stimuli.
The lack of an interest to feed may indicate a sick infant and should
prompt a careful search for infection, a CNS (brain or spine) or peripheral nervous system disorder, IEM, or intestinal obstruction.

APNEA

Periods of apnea, particularly in premature infants, can be attributed
to many different underlying causes (see Chapter 125). When apnea
occurs in a term infant, it should be considered pathologic until proven
otherwise, and an immediate diagnostic evaluation for the underlying
cause is imperative.

CONGENITAL ANOMALIES

Congenital anomalies are a common cause of neonatal morbidity
and mortality worldwide (see Chapters 98–100). Early recognition of
anomalies during fetal life is important to plan for delivery room management and subsequent neonatal care. Some malformations, including congenital heart disease, tracheoesophageal fistula, diaphragmatic
hernia, choanal atresia, and intestinal obstruction, require immediate
medical/surgical therapy for postnatal survival (Table 121.1). Prenatal and postnatal testing strategies, including advanced imaging techniques and genetic testing, have improved the specific diagnosis of
congenital anomalies (see Chapter 103.1). Historically, genetic testing
was performed by obtaining a karyotype with or without fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH). A karyotype can identify a large number
of chromosomal abnormalities; FISH can test for classic microdeletion
syndromes such as 22q11. Chromosomal microarray is also indicated
for genetic testing of infants with congenital anomalies because it can
identify microdeletions or microduplications that are too small to be
detected by more traditional techniques. In cases where a common
aneuploidy, such as trisomy 13, 18, or 21, is suspected, obtaining a
conventional karyotype and/or FISH may be the more appropriate test
as those results are available in a few days. Whole exome sequencing
(WES) uses next-­generation sequencing to identify variants in protein
coding genes that may be responsible for a disease phenotype. Rapid
WES can have results available in 1-­2 weeks. This can be used in a
critically ill infant with a suspected genetic disorder that lacks a unifying diagnosis, and it may lead to a specific treatment and prognosis.
Limitations of both microarray and WES include the identification of

1053

variants that may not be pathogenic in nature. Parents should receive
genetic counseling as part of any testing strategy. It is important that
healthcare providers are aware of the indication and limitations of the
type of genetic test being performed.

CYANOSIS

Central cyanosis generates a broad differential diagnosis encompassing respiratory, cardiac, CNS, infectious, hematologic, and metabolic
etiologies (Table 121.2). Typically, 5 g/dL of deoxyhemoglobin must
be present in the blood for central cyanosis to be clinically apparent. If
respiratory insufficiency is caused by pulmonary conditions, respirations tend to be rapid with increased work of breathing. If caused by
CNS depression, respirations tend to be irregular and weak and are
often slow. Cyanosis unaccompanied by obvious signs of respiratory
difficulty suggests cyanotic congenital heart disease or methemoglobinemia. Cyanosis resulting from congenital heart disease may be
difficult to distinguish clinically from cyanosis caused by respiratory
disease. Episodes of cyanosis may also be the initial sign of hypoglycemia, bacteremia, meningitis, shock, or pulmonary hypertension.
Peripheral acrocyanosis is common in neonates and thought to represent peripheral venous congestion associated with immature control
of peripheral vascular tone. It does not usually warrant concern unless
poor perfusion is suspected.

GASTROINTESTINAL DISTURBANCES

Vomiting during the first day of life can suggest obstruction in the
upper digestive tract, metabolic disease, or may be physiologic.
Abdominal distention with emesis, usually a sign of intestinal obstruction or an intraabdominal mass, may also be seen in infants with
enteritis, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), isolated intestinal perforation, ileus accompanying sepsis, respiratory distress, ascites, or hypokalemia. Imaging studies are indicated when obstruction is suspected;
proximal intestinal obstruction often occurs with a normal physical
examination, whereas distal obstruction will likely be accompanied by
distention. Vomiting may also be a nonspecific symptom of an illness
such as sepsis with associated abdominal distention and ileus. It is a
common manifestation of overfeeding, as well as gastroesophageal or
physiologic reflux. Rarely, vomiting is caused by pyloric stenosis, milk
protein allergy, duodenal ulcer, stress ulcer, an IEM (hyperammonemia, metabolic acidosis), or adrenal insufficiency. Vomitus containing
blood is usually a sign of a serious illness, but the benign possibility of
swallowed maternal blood associated with the delivery process should
also be considered. Tests for maternal vs fetal hemoglobin can help

Table 121.1  Common Life-­Threatening Congenital Anomalies
ANOMALY

MANIFESTATIONS

Choanal atresia

Respiratory distress in delivery room; nasogastric tube cannot be passed
through nares
Suspect CHARGE (coloboma of eye, heart anomaly, choanal atresia,
retardation, genital and ear anomalies) syndrome

Pierre Robin syndrome, Stickler syndrome

Micrognathia, cleft palate, airway obstruction

Diaphragmatic hernia

Scaphoid abdomen, bowel sounds present in chest, respiratory distress

Tracheoesophageal fistula

Polyhydramnios, aspiration pneumonia, excessive salivation; nasogastric tube
cannot be placed in stomach
Suspect VATER (vertebral defects, imperforate anus, tracheoesophageal
fistula, radial and renal dysplasia) syndrome

Intestinal obstruction: volvulus, duodenal atresia, ileal atresia

Polyhydramnios, bile-­stained emesis, abdominal distention
Suspect trisomy 21, cystic fibrosis, or cocaine use

Gastroschisis, omphalocele

Polyhydramnios, intestinal obstruction

Renal agenesis, Potter syndrome

Oligohydramnios, anuria, pulmonary hypoplasia, pneumothorax

Neural tube defects: anencephaly, meningomyelocele

Polyhydramnios, elevated α-­fetoprotein, decreased fetal activity

Ductus-­dependent congenital heart disease

Cyanosis, hypotension, murmur

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1054 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 121.2  Differential Diagnosis of Cyanosis in the Newborn
CENTRAL OR PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM HYPOVENTILATION
Birth asphyxia
Intracranial hypertension, hemorrhage
Oversedation (direct or through maternal route)
Diaphragm palsy
Neuromuscular diseases
Seizures
RESPIRATORY DISEASE
Airway
Choanal atresia/stenosis
Pierre Robin syndrome
Intrinsic airway obstruction (laryngeal/bronchial/tracheal stenosis)
Extrinsic airway obstruction (bronchogenic cyst, duplication cyst,
vascular compression)
Lung
Respiratory distress syndrome
Transient tachypnea
Meconium aspiration
Pneumonia (sepsis)
Pneumothorax
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
Pulmonary hypoplasia
CARDIAC RIGHT-­TO-­LEFT SHUNT
Abnormal Connections (Pulmonary Blood Flow Normal or
Increased)
Transposition of great vessels
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return
Truncus arteriosus
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
Single ventricle or tricuspid atresia with large ventricular septal
defect but without pulmonic stenosis

OBSTRUCTED PULMONARY BLOOD FLOW (PULMONARY
BLOOD FLOW DECREASED)
Pulmonic atresia with intact ventricular septum
Tetralogy of Fallot
Critical pulmonic stenosis with patent foramen ovale or atrial septal
defect
Tricuspid atresia
Single ventricle with pulmonic stenosis
Ebstein malformation of tricuspid valve
Persistent fetal circulation (persistent pulmonary hypertension of
newborn)
METHEMOGLOBINEMIA
Congenital (hemoglobin M, methemoglobin reductase deficiency)
Acquired (nitrates, nitrites)
INADEQUATE DELIVERY
Inadequate ambient O2 or less O2 delivered than expected (rare)
Disconnection of O2 supply to nasal cannula, head hood
Connection of air, rather than O2, to a mechanical ventilator
SPURIOUS/ARTIFACTUAL
Oximeter artifact (poor contact between probe and skin, poor pulse
searching)
Arterial blood gas artifact (contamination with venous blood)
OTHER
Hypoglycemia
Adrenogenital syndrome
Polycythemia
Blood loss

From Smith F: Cyanosis. In: Kliegman RM: Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1996.

discriminate between these possibilities. Bilious emesis in a term infant
should be considered a surgical emergency with a presumed diagnosis
of intestinal malrotation with or without volvulus until proven otherwise. This finding warrants urgent contrast radiography of the upper
gastrointestinal tract (see Chapter 376.3).
Diarrhea may be a symptom of overfeeding (especially high–caloric
density formula), acute gastroenteritis, congenital diarrhea syndromes,
or malabsorption, or it may be a nonspecific symptom of infection.
Diarrhea should be differentiated from the normal loose, seedy, yellow
stool seen typically in breastfed infants. Diarrhea may occur in conditions accompanied by compromised circulation of part of the intestinal
or genital tract, such as mesenteric thrombosis, NEC, strangulated hernia, intussusception, and torsion of the ovary or testis.

HYPOTENSION

Hypotension in term infants implies hypovolemic shock (hemorrhage,
dehydration), a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (bacterial
sepsis, intrauterine infection, NEC, cardiac dysfunction, myocarditis,
asphyxia-­induced myocardial stunning, anomalous coronary artery),
congenital heart disease with ductal-­dependent systemic blood flow
(hypoplastic left heart syndrome, congenital aortic stenosis), pneumothorax, pneumopericardium, pericardial effusion, or metabolic disorders (hypoglycemia, adrenal insufficiency).
Hypotension is a common problem in sick preterm infants and may
also be caused by any of the problems noted in a term infant. Some
extremely low gestational age infants do not respond to fluids or inotropic agents but may improve with administration of intravenous
hydrocortisone (Fig. 121.1). Sudden onset of hypotension in a very low
birthweight (VLBW) infant suggests pneumothorax, intraventricular
hemorrhage, or subcapsular hepatic hematoma. Strategies used to support blood pressure include volume expansion with crystalloid and/or
colloid, vasopressors (dopamine, dobutamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, vasopressin), or corticosteroids (hydrocortisone) (see Chapter 85).

JAUNDICE

Jaundice during the first 24 hours of life warrants diagnostic evaluation
and should be considered pathologic until proven otherwise. Hemolytic disease of the newborn due to rhesus blood group system (Rh)
isoimmunization or blood type compatibility are the most common
cause (see Chapter 140). Intrauterine infections (e.g., syphilis, cytomegalovirus, and toxoplasmosis), early-­onset sepsis, or gestational
alloimmune liver disease (formerly described as neonatal hemochromatosis) should be considered in infants with neonatal cholestasis,
identified by an increase in direct bilirubin value. Immediate evaluation includes obtaining total and direct bilirubin, infant blood type and
Coombs status, CBC, and reticulocyte count. There are nomograms
specific to the age (in hours) of the infant to guide the initiation of therapeutic interventions depending on the levels of serum bilirubin values
(see Chapter 137). Phototherapy is the standard first-­line therapy. In
the case of Coombs-­positive hemolysis, strong consideration should
be made to giving intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) if there is no
response to intensive phototherapy. Double volume exchange transfusion is recommended in situations with rapidly rising indirect bilirubin
levels, particularly in infants whose bilirubin levels rise over 20 mg/dL.
In these cases, obtaining a serum albumin is also recommended.
Jaundice that is identified after the first 24 hours of age may be physiologic or pathologic. Physiologic conditions include breast-­milk and
breast-­feeding jaundice. Pathologic conditions include bacterial sepsis,
congenital hypothyroidism, galactosemia, congenital atresia of the bile
ducts, or other conditions (see Chapter 137).

PAIN

Pain in neonates may be unrecognized and/or undertreated. The intensive care of neonates may involve several painful procedures, including
blood sampling (heelstick, venous or arterial puncture), endotracheal
intubation and suctioning, mechanical ventilation, and insertion of
chest tubes and intravascular catheters. Pain in neonates results in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 121 u Clinical Manifestations of Diseases in the Newborn Period

Table 121.3  Pain in the Neonate: General Considerations

Decision made to treat with hydrocortisone

Give a test dose of 1 mg/kg

Rise in blood pressure
within 2 – 4 hours

No rise in blood pressure
after 2 – 4 hours

<34 weeks

≥34 weeks

Dose at 0.5mg/kg
every 12 hours*

Dose at 0.5mg/kg
every 6 – 8 hours*

No further dosing

1055

Monitor cardiovascular status
and modify as needed*

• Pain in newborns is often unrecognized and/or undertreated.
• If a procedure is painful in adults, it should be considered painful
in newborns.
• Healthcare institutions should develop and implement patient
care policies to assess, prevent, and manage pain in neonates.
• Pharmacologic agents with known pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic properties and demonstrated efficacy
in neonates should be used. Agents known to compromise
cardiorespiratory function should be administered only by persons
experienced in neonatal airway management and in settings with
the capacity for continuous monitoring.
• Educational programs to increase the skills of healthcare
professionals in the assessment and management of stress and
pain in neonates should be provided.
• Further research is needed to develop and validate neonatal
pain assessment tools that are useful in the clinical setting; to
determine optimal behavioral and pharmacologic interventions;
and to study long-­term effects of pain and pain management.
Data from American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Fetus and Newborn,
Committee on Drugs, Section on Anesthesiology, Section on Surgery; Canadian
Paediatric Society, Fetus and Newborn Committee. Prevention and Management of
Pain and Stress in the Neonate: An Update. Pediatrics 2016;137:e20154271.

*Cortisol metabolism is highly variable between individuals. If an individual infant responds
to the test dose, but hypotension recurs using a dosing interval as short as 6 hours, the dose
can be increased to 1mg/kg, with the interval guided by cardiovascular status.

Fig. 121.1 Suggested treatment algorithm for hydrocortisone dosing
in the newborn. (From Watterberg KL. Hydrocortisone dosing for hypotension in newborn infants: less is more. J Pediatr. 2016;174:23–26.)

obvious distress and acute physiologic stress responses, which may
have developmental implications for pain in later life.
Pain and discomfort are potentially avoidable problems during the
treatment of sick infants. The most common painful stimuli for healthy
newborns include circumcision and phlebotomy while obtaining metabolic screening tests. There are pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic
options to both prevent and treat pain. Oral sucrose solutions are well
tolerated by most infants and have proven efficacy for procedural pain.
A dorsal penile nerve block is effective to prevent procedural-­related
pain during a circumcision. For neonatal intensive care unit (NICU)
infants, the most frequently used drugs are intermittent or continuous
doses of opioids. Although the specific long-­term effects of opioids and
sedatives are not well established, the first concern should be the treatment and/or prevention of acute pain (Table 121.3).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

121.2 Hypothermia and Cold Stress
Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald
Unexplained hypothermia may accompany infection or other
serious disturbances of the circulation or CNS. A sudden
servo-­
controlled increase in incubator ambient temperature to
maintain body temperature is a sign of temperature instability
and may be associated with sepsis or any of the conditions already
mentioned.
Cold stress can lead to profound decompensation, including
apnea, bradycardia, respiratory distress, hypoglycemia, and poor
feeding. For this reason, it is paramount for the neonate to maintain normothermia in the delivery room and afterward, especially
low birthweight and premature infants. For VLBW infants, a combination of occlusive plastic wrap, radiant warmers, and thermal
mattresses to maintain normothermia can be used to reduce cold
stress.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

121.1 Hyperthermia
Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald
Serious infection (pneumonia, bacteremia, meningitis, and viral infections, particularly herpes simplex or enteroviruses) may cause fever and
must be considered, although such infections often occur without provoking a febrile response in newborn infants (see Chapter 220). Providers should consider evaluation for bacterial infection in infants <28 days
old with a rectal temperature ≥38°C (100.5°F), including blood culture,
urine culture, and lumbar puncture (LP), although stepwise approaches
to identify low-­risk patients and limiting LP to a subset of higher-­risk
infants are gaining favor. Fever immediately after birth may be caused by
radiant warmers, maternal fever, or maternal epidural analgesia. Fever
may also be caused by elevated environmental temperatures because of
weather, overheated nurseries, incubators, or radiant warmers, or excessive clothing. It has also been attributed to dehydration, although dehydration fever is a diagnosis of exclusion in newborn infants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

121.3 Edema
Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald
Generalized edema noted in the delivery room can be caused by
hydrops fetalis secondary to several underlying causes (see Chapter
143). An infant with suspected hydrops in utero should be delivered
at a specialty perinatal center with capacity for neonatal intubation,
thoracentesis, paracentesis, and pericardiocentesis in the delivery
room. If noted after 24 hours of age, causes are similar to those
of older children and may be multifactorial and likely related to
the underlying disease state. Edema may be due to interstitial fluid
“third-­spacing” due to a systemic inflammatory response seen in
sepsis or NEC; or, in the immediate postoperative period, hypoalbuminemia may be due to low production in hepatic synthetic
dysfunction or increased losses in underlying renal disease such a
congenital nephrotic syndrome (see Chapter 567.3).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1056 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

121.4 Hypocalcemia
Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald
Hypocalcemia in a neonate can manifest as irritability, jitteriness,
clonus, or seizures. Electrocardiography can show a prolonged QT
interval. The cause may simply represent an exaggerated physiologic
decrease in serum calcium levels within the first 24 hours of life or
pathologic conditions such as genetic disorders (22q deletions), prematurity, growth restriction, perinatal hypoxia, hypomagnesemia, or
maternal diabetes. Hypocalcemia is more common in term infants
receiving formula than in those exclusively receiving breast milk.
Most infants remain asymptomatic and can be managed conservatively with early nutrition and close monitoring, whereas symptomatic neonates should receive intravenous or oral calcium replacement.

Caput
Cephalhematoma
Epicranial
aponeurosis

Skin

Periosteum

Subgaleal
hemorrhage
Extradural
hemorrhage

Skull
Dura mater
Arachnoid
Pia mater

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

121.5 Hypermagnesemia
Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald
Hypermagnesemia is most often caused by maternal administration of
magnesium in the perinatal period for treatment of conditions such
as preeclampsia and preterm labor, and as prophylaxis to mitigate
brain injury associated with preterm birth. Infants are usually present
with signs at birth and improve over the next 24-­48 hours. Symptoms
include respiratory depression, hypotonia, lethargy, and feeding intolerance. No treatment is indicated other than supportive measures.

Chapter 122

Nervous System Disorders
Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Krishna K. Acharya
Central nervous system (CNS) disorders are important causes of neonatal mortality and both short-­term and long-­term morbidity. The
CNS can be injured as a result of asphyxia, hemorrhage, trauma, infection, hypoglycemia, or direct cytotoxicity. The etiology of CNS injury
is often multifactorial and includes perinatal complications, postnatal
hemodynamic instability, and developmental abnormalities that may
be genetic and/or environmental. Predisposing factors for brain injury
include chronic and acute maternal illness resulting in uteroplacental
dysfunction, intrauterine infection, macrosomia/dystocia, malpresentation, prematurity, and intrauterine growth restriction. Acute and
often unavoidable emergencies during the delivery process may result
in mechanical and hypoxic-­ischemic brain injury.

122.1 The Cranium
Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Krishna K. Acharya
Erythema, abrasions, ecchymoses, and subcutaneous fat necrosis of facial
or scalp soft tissues may be noted after a normal delivery or after forceps
or vacuum-­assisted deliveries. The location depends on the area of contact with the pelvic bones or application of the forceps. Traumatic hemorrhage may involve any layer of the scalp as well as intracranial contents
(Fig. 122.1).

Fig. 122.1 Sites of extracranial (and extradural) hemorrhages in the

newborn. Schematic diagram of important tissue planes from skin to
dura. (From Volpe JJ. Injuries of extracranial, cranial, intracranial, spinal
cord, and peripheral nervous system structures. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE,
Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 36-­1.)

Caput succedaneum is a diffuse, sometimes ecchymotic, edematous swelling of the soft tissues of the scalp due to the increased
pressure of the vaginal and uterine walls on the fetal head during
labor. The pressure causes a serosanguinous/edematous infiltration
above the periosteum and below the skin or subcutaneous tissue. The
edema is soft and extends across the midline of the skull, crossing
suture lines and disappears within the first few days of life. Molding
of the head and overriding of the parietal bones are frequently associated with caput succedaneum and become more evident after the
caput has receded; they disappear during the first few weeks of life.
Rarely, a hemorrhagic caput may result in shock and require blood
transfusion. Analogous swelling, discoloration, and distortion of the
face are seen in face presentations. No specific treatment is needed,
but if extensive ecchymoses are present, hyperbilirubinemia may
develop.
Cephalohematoma is a unilateral subperiosteal hemorrhage that
does not cross the suture lines as it usually occurs within a single cranial plate (Fig. 122.2). Cephalohematomas occur in 1–2% of live births
regardless of the mode of delivery. No discoloration of the overlying
scalp occurs, and due to slow bleeding, the clinical presentation of
swelling is delayed for several hours to days. The lesion becomes a firm,
tense mass with a palpable rim localized over one area of the skull.
Most cephalohematomas are resorbed within 3 to 4 weeks, depending
on their size. They may begin to calcify by the end of the second week
of life. A few remain for years as bony protuberances and are detectable on radiographs as widening of the diploic space; cystlike defects
that may persist for months or years. An underlying skull fracture,
usually linear and not depressed, may be associated with 10–25% of
cases. A sensation of central depression suggesting but not indicative
of an underlying fracture or bony defect is usually encountered on palpation of the organized rim of a cephalohematoma. Osteomyelitis of
the skull is a rare complication of cephalohematoma; Escherichia coli
and Staphylococcus aureus are common agents. Cephalohematomas

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 122 u Nervous System Disorders

1057

or MRI. Radiographs of the skull can be done to identity accompanying
fractures. These lesions typically resolve over 2 to 3 weeks.
Fractures of the skull may be caused by pressure in the setting of
a forceps delivery, but they can occur rarely in uncomplicated vaginal
deliveries. Linear fractures, the most common, cause no symptoms and
require no treatment. Linear fractures should be followed up to demonstrate healing and to detect the possible complication of a leptomeningeal cyst. Depressed fractures often are referred to as “ping-­pong”
fractures because on x-­ray they resemble an indented ping-­pong ball.
Affected infants may be asymptomatic unless they have associated intracranial injury. Surgical management of such an injury may not be necessary due to the infants’ relatively thin and flexible skull bones rendering
them amenable to remodeling, and intervention could be reserved for
larger areas of depression. When intervention is required, the obstetric vacuum extractor is an ideal tool because it provides patent tubing
unlikely to collapse during the application of suction. No traction is
needed during the suction procedure, and the elevation of the depression can be ascertained by direct visualization, an audible “click” sound
or a “give” sensation accompanied by an instantaneous pressure release.
There is no clear recommendation for imaging in this population, but
with newer techniques of low-­dose CT imaging, current technology
allows axial imaging to be constructed in the coronal and sagittal planes
and into three-­dimensional reformats, thus increasing the likelihood of
detecting a fracture.
Subconjunctival and retinal hemorrhages are frequent; petechiae of the skin of the head and neck are also common. All are
probably secondary to a sudden increase in intrathoracic pressure
during passage of the chest through the birth canal. Parents should
be assured that these hemorrhages are temporary and the result of
normal events of delivery. The lesions resolve rapidly within the first
2 weeks of life.

A

122.2 Neonatal Traumatic Head Injuries

B
Fig. 122.2 Parietal cephalhematoma. Clinical appearance of 10-­day-­old

infant delivered with the aid of mid-­forceps. A, Posterior view. B, Right
lateral view. Note prominent swelling that extends medially to the sagittal
suture, posteriorly to the lambdoid suture, and laterally to the squamosal
suture. (From Volpe JJ. Injuries of extracranial, cranial, intracranial,
spinal cord, and peripheral nervous system structures. In: Volpe JJ, Inder
TE, Darras BT, et al. eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 36-­3.)

require no treatment, although phototherapy may be necessary to treat
hyperbilirubinemia.
A subgaleal hemorrhage is a collection of blood in the loose connective tissue of the subgaleal space, located between the epicranial
aponeurosis and the periosteum (see Fig. 122.1). There is often an
association with vacuum-­assisted delivery. A subgaleal hemorrhage
manifests as a fluctuant mass that straddles cranial sutures or fontanels
that increases in size after birth. The mechanism of injury is most likely
secondary to rupture of emissary veins connecting the dural sinuses
within the skull and the superficial veins of the scalp. Subgaleal hemorrhages are sometimes associated with skull fractures, suture diastasis, and fragmentation of the superior margin of the parietal bone.
Extensive subgaleal bleeding can result in sequestration of more than
40% of the newborn’s blood volume, which can potentially result in
hemorrhagic shock. The mortality can be up to 14% due to hemorrhagic shock and is occasionally secondary to a hereditary coagulopathy (hemophilia). In some cases, patients can develop a consumptive
coagulopathy from massive blood loss. Subgaleal hemorrhages can
present clinically with the triad of tachycardia, decreased hematocrit,
and increasing occipital frontal circumference. When subgaleal hemorrhage is suspected, hemoglobin measurements should be performed
as soon as possible and should be monitored every 4 to 8 hours, as
should coagulation studies. Although it is not necessary to make the
clinical diagnosis, optimal imaging for subgaleal hemorrhage is by CT

Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Krishna K. Acharya
Neonatal traumatic head injuries are estimated to affect ∼3% of pregnancies and represent approximately 2% of neonatal deaths. Infrequently, these injuries occur during normal birth but the incidence
rises in cases when the fetal head is large in proportion to the size
of the mother’s pelvic outlet, with prolonged labor, in breech or precipitous deliveries, or as a result of mechanical assistance with delivery. Massive subdural hemorrhage, often associated with tears in the
tentorium cerebelli or less frequently in the falx cerebri, is rare, but
is encountered more often in full-­term than in premature infants.
Patients with massive hemorrhage caused by tears of the tentorium
or falx cerebri rapidly deteriorate and may die soon after birth. Most
subdural and epidural hemorrhages resolve without intervention.
Consultation with a neurosurgeon is recommended. Asymptomatic
subdural hemorrhage may be noted within 48 hours of birth after
vaginal or cesarean delivery. These are typically small hemorrhages,
especially common in the posterior fossa, discovered incidentally in
term infants imaged in the neonatal period, and usually of no clinical significance. The diagnosis of large subdural hemorrhage may be
delayed until the chronic subdural fluid volume expands and produces
macrocephaly, frontal bossing, a bulging fontanel, anemia, and sometimes seizures. CT scan and MRI are useful imaging techniques to
confirm these diagnoses. Symptomatic subdural hemorrhage in term
infants can be treated by a neurosurgical evacuation of the subdural
fluid collection by a needle placed through the lateral margin of the
anterior fontanel, or in severe cases an operative burr hole or craniotomy. In addition to birth trauma, child abuse must be suspected in
all infants with subdural effusion after the immediate neonatal period.
Most asymptomatic subdural hemorrhages following labor should
resolve by 4 weeks of age.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage is often clinically silent in the neonate.
Anastomoses between the penetrating leptomeningeal arteries or the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1058 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
bridging veins are the most likely source of the bleeding. Most affected
infants have no clinical symptoms, but the subarachnoid hemorrhage
may be detected because of an elevated number of red blood cells in
a lumbar puncture sample. Some infants experience short, benign
seizures, which tend to occur on the second day of life. Rarely, an
infant has a catastrophic hemorrhage and dies. There are usually no
neurologic abnormalities during the acute episode or on follow-­up.
Significant neurologic findings should suggest an arteriovenous malformation, which can best be detected on CT or MRI.

122.3 Intracranial-­Intraventricular
Hemorrhage and Periventricular
Leukomalacia
Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Krishna K. Acharya
Intracranial hemorrhage in preterm infants usually develops spontaneously. Less frequently, it may be caused by trauma or asphyxia, and
rarely, it occurs from a primary hemorrhagic disturbance or congenital cerebrovascular anomaly. The very low birthweight infant (VLBW;
birthweight <1,500 g) is at high risk for intracranial hemorrhages, with
the risk for severe hemorrhage inversely related to gestational age.
Intracranial hemorrhage often involves the ventricles (intraventricular hemorrhage [IVH]) of premature infants delivered spontaneously
without apparent trauma. Primary hemorrhagic disturbances and vascular malformations are rare and usually give rise to subarachnoid or
intracerebral hemorrhage. In utero hemorrhage associated with maternal idiopathic or, more often, fetal alloimmune thrombocytopenia may
appear as severe cerebral hemorrhage or as a porencephalic cyst after
resolution of a fetal cortical hemorrhage. Intracranial bleeding may be
associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation, isoimmune
thrombocytopenia, and neonatal vitamin K deficiency, especially in
infants born to mothers receiving phenobarbital or phenytoin.
Periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) is a disorder of the periventricular cerebral white matter that may be cystic or diffuse in nature.
PVL may initially be observed during the first week of life in the VLBW
infant as increased echogenicity of the periventricular white matter,
sometime described as an echogenic “blush” or “flare.” These areas of
white matter abnormalities may become cystic on ultrasonography
within 2 to 5 weeks and/or lead to ventriculomegaly from white matter
volume loss, which can be visible on repeat ultrasonography at term
equivalent age. Clinical risk factors for PVL include gestational age at
birth and prenatal/postnatal factors including inflammation, hypoxia,
postnatal steroid exposure, and metabolic disturbances.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The overall incidence of IVH has decreased over the last few decades
as a result of improved perinatal care, increased use of antenatal corticosteroids, surfactant to treat respiratory distress syndrome (RDS),
and improved positive pressure mechanical ventilation strategies. The
global incidence of IVH among preterm infants ranges from 14.7–
44.7% with considerable variation across gestational age groups, neonatal intensive care units (NICUs), and countries. The risk for severe IVH
is associated with infants with a gestational age ≤30 weeks’ gestation,
with the highest risk in infants born at ≤24 weeks’ gestation. Infants
born at >30 weeks’ gestation have a low risk of severe IVH unless they
have additional clinical risk factors such as low Apgar scores, metabolic
acidosis, hypotension, or lack of antenatal steroids.
PVL can be described in three major pathologic forms: macroscopic
cystic white matter injury, microscopic cystic white matter injury, and
nonnecrotic diffuse white matter injury. Macroscopic cystic white
matter injury represents the most severe form of PVL and fortunately
affects <5% of very preterm infants born <32 weeks. With advances in
neonatal care, there has been a shift from large cystic injury to small
punctate injury. In microscopic cystic white matter injury, the necrotic
areas are small and result in focal areas of gliosis, which ultrasonography is not sensitive enough to detect. The most common form of PVL

in the preterm population is nonnecrotic diffuse PVL. Diffuse PVL is
estimated to affect nearly a third of infants born <32 weeks and is best
recognized on MRI.

PATHOGENESIS

The major neuropathologic lesions associated with VLBW infants
are IVH and PVL. IVH in premature infants occurs in the gelatinous
subependymal germinal matrix. This periventricular area is the site
of origin for embryonal neurons and fetal glial cells, which migrate
outwardly to the cortex. Immature and fragile blood vessels in this
highly vascular region of the developing brain combined with disturbances in cerebral blood flow and coagulation predispose premature
infants to hemorrhage. The germinal matrix involutes as the infant
approaches 34 to 36 weeks’ gestation, and the tissue’s vascular integrity
improves; therefore IVH is much less common in the late preterm and
term infant. The cerebellum also contains a germinal matrix and is susceptible to hemorrhagic injury. Periventricular hemorrhagic infarction (PVHI), previously known as grade IV IVH, often develops
after a large IVH because of venous congestion. PVHI is not an extension of the IVH into the parenchyma. Predisposing factors for IVH
include prematurity, RDS, hypoxia-­ischemia, exaggerated fluctuations
in cerebral blood flow (hypotensive injury, hypervolemia, hypertension), reperfusion injury of damaged vessels, reduced vascular integrity, increased venous pressure (pneumothorax, venous thrombus), or
thrombocytopenia.
The pathogenesis of PVL appears to involve both intrauterine and
postnatal events. A complex interaction exists between the development of the cerebral vasculature and the regulation of cerebral blood
flow (both of which depend on gestational age), disturbances in the
oligodendrocyte precursors required for myelination, and maternal/
fetal infection and inflammation. Postnatal hypoxia or hypotension, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) with its resultant inflammation, and severe neonatal infection may all result in white matter
injury. The risk for PVL increases in infants with severe IVH or
ventriculomegaly.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most infants with IVH, including some with moderate to severe hemorrhages, have no initial clinical signs (silent IVH). Some premature
infants with severe IVH may have an acute deterioration on the second
or third day of life (catastrophic IVH). Hypotension, apnea, pallor,
stupor or coma, seizures, decreased muscle tone, metabolic acidosis,
shock, and decreased hematocrit (or failure of hematocrit to increase
after transfusion) may be the first clinical indications. A saltatory progression may occur over several hours to days and manifest as intermittent or progressive alterations of levels of consciousness, abnormalities
of tone and movement, respiratory signs, and eventually other features
of the acute catastrophic IVH. Rarely, IVH may manifest at birth or
even prenatally; the majority of cases of IVH in the preterm infant
occur within the first 3 days of life. Of those, approximately 50% of
hemorrhages occur within the first 5 hours, 70% occur within the first
day of life, and by 7 days of life 95% of IVH will have occurred. A small
percentage of infants have late hemorrhage, between days 14 and 30.
IVH as a primary event is rare after the first month of life.
The severity of hemorrhage is defined by the location and degree of
bleeding and ventricular dilation on cranial imaging. In a grade I hemorrhage, bleeding is isolated to the subependymal area. In grade II hemorrhage, there is bleeding within the ventricle without evidence of ventricular
dilation. Grade III hemorrhage is IVH with ventricular dilation. In PVHI
hemorrhage (formerly called grade IV, see previously), there is intraventricular and parenchymal hemorrhage (Fig. 122.3). Another grading
system describes three levels of increasing severity of IVH detected on
ultrasound: In grade I, bleeding is confined to the germinal matrix–subependymal region or to <10% of the ventricle (approximately 35% of IVH
cases); grade II is defined as intraventricular bleeding with 10–50% filling
of the ventricle (40% of IVH cases); and in grade III, >50% of the ventricle
is involved, with dilated ventricles (see Fig. 122.3).
One of the major complications resulting from IVH is the development
of posthemorrhagic ventricular dilation (PHVD). Following a large
IVH, multiple small clots throughout the ventricular system may obstruct

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 122 u Nervous System Disorders
COR

LOGIQ
E9

SAG LT

LOGIQ
E9

A

COR

SAG RT

1059

LOGIQ
E9

LOGIQ
E9

C
LOGIQ
E9

LOGIQ
E9

COR

COR

SAG RIGHT

LOGIQ
E9

LOGIQ
E9

SAG RT

B

D

Fig. 122.3 Grading of the severity of germinal matrix–intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH): coronal (COR) and parasagittal (SAG) ultrasound scans. A,

Germinal matrix hemorrhage, grade I. B, IVH (filling <50% of ventricular area), grade II. C, IVH with ventricular dilatation, grade III. D, Large IVH with
associated parenchymal echogenicity (hemorrhagic infarct), grade IV. Note that the terminology has now changed for “grade IV” to periventricular
hemorrhagic infarction (PVHI). (From Inder TE, Perlman JM, Volpe JJ. Preterm intraventricular hemorrhage/posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. In:
Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 24-­2.)

cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow and resorption, all in the face of ongoing
production of CSF in the choroid plexus in the lateral ventricles and the
roof of the third ventricle. The progressive accumulation of CSF changes
the shape of the lateral ventricles from a slit to a balloon. The expanding
ventricles distort the developing brain and intracerebral pressure (ICP)
eventually starts to rise. As the preterm skull is very compliant, the ventricles can expand without pressure rising initially but eventually can result
in increased ICP. PHVD develops in 30–50% of infants with severe IVH
and is initially asymptomatic in most patients. Therefore sequential cranial
ultrasonography facilitates early detection. The term ventriculomegaly is
occasionally used for both infants with ventricular enlargement following IVH as well as those without hemorrhage. In infants without IVH,
ventricular enlargement is more likely due to white matter loss rather than
an accumulation of CSF. Therefore it is preferable to use the term PHVD
when ventricular enlargement follows IVH.
PVL is usually clinically asymptomatic until the neurologic sequelae
of white matter damage become apparent in later infancy as spasticity
and/or motor deficits. PVL may be present at birth but usually occurs
later, when the echodense phase is seen on ultrasound (3 to 10 days of
life), followed by the typical echolucent/cystic phase (14 to 20 days).

DIAGNOSIS

Intracranial hemorrhage is suspected on the basis of history, clinical
manifestations, and knowledge of the birthweight-­specific risks for IVH.
Associated clinical signs of IVH are typically nonspecific or absent. Neuroimaging recommendations that premature infants ≤30 weeks of gestation and selected infants with gestational age >30 weeks who are believed
to be at increased risk for brain injury on the basis of identified risk factors should be screened for IVH with cranial ultrasonography. Standard
ultrasonography screening includes views from the anterior and mastoid
fontanelles. Additional posterior fontanelle and vascular imaging can be
performed for additional information. Routine cranial ultrasonographic
screening is recommended by 7 to 10 days of age, but earlier imaging
may be warranted if clinical signs and symptoms are suggestive of significant injury. Repeat cranial ultrasonography screening is recommended
to be performed at 4 to 6 weeks of age and at term equivalent age or
before hospital discharge. CT is not considered a part of routine imaging techniques of the preterm brain. MRI for infants born ≤30 weeks
gestational age is not indicated as a routine procedure, although could
be offered to families of high-­risk infants after a conversation about the
limits of prognosticating long-­term outcomes using MRI.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1060 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Fig. 122.4 Severe cystic periventricular leukomalacia.

A

A, Parasagittal ultrasound image showing numerous
large cysts superolateral to the lateral ventricle (arrow).
B, Coronal T2 weighted MR image in which cysts are
present superolateral to the lateral ventricles (arrow).
(From Neil JJ, Volpe JJ. Encephalopathy of prematurity:
clinical-­neurological features, diagnosis, imaging, prognosis, therapy. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al.,
eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 16-­1.)

B

Table 122.1  Short-­Term Outcome of Germinal Matrix–Intraventricular Hemorrhage as a Function of Severity of Hemorrhage
and Birthweight*
DEATHS IN FIRST 14 DAYS

PVD (SURVIVORS >14 DAYS)

SEVERITY OF
HEMORRHAGE

<750 g
(n = 75)

751-­1500 g
(n = 173)

<750 g
(n = 56)

751-­1500 g
(n = 165)

Grade I

3/24 (12)

0/80 (0)

1/21 (5)

3/80 (4)

Grade II

5/21 (24)

1/44 (2)

1/16 (6)

6/43 (14)

Grade III

6/19 (32)

2/26 (8)

10/13 (77)

18/24 (75)

Grade III and apparent
PVHI

5/11 (45)

5/23 (22)

5/6 (83)

12/18 (66)

*Values are n (%). Deaths occurring later in the neonatal period are not shown; the total mortality rates (early and late deaths) are approximately 50–100% greater for each grade of
hemorrhage and birthweight than those shown in the table for early deaths alone.
PVHI, Periventricular hemorrhagic infarction; PVD, progressive ventricular dilation.
Adapted from Inder TE, Perlman JM, Volpe JJ. Preterm intraventricular hemorrhage/posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s Neurology
of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018. Table 24-­15; with data from Murphy BP, Inder TE, Rooks V, Taylor GA, et al. Posthemorrhagic ventricular dilatation in the
premature infant: natural history and predictors of outcome. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2002;87:F37–F41.

Table 122.2  Long-­Term Outcome: Neurologic Sequelae in
Survivors with Germinal Matrix–Intraventricular
Hemorrhage as a Function of Severity of
Hemorrhage*
SEVERITY OF HEMORRHAGE

INCIDENCE OF DEFINITE
NEUROLOGIC SEQUELAE† (%)

Grade I

15

Grade II

25

Grade III

50

Grade III and apparent PVHI

75

*Data are derived from reports published since 2002 and include personal published
and unpublished cases. Mean values (to nearest 5%) and considerable variability
among studies was apparent, especially for the severe lesions.
†Definite neurologic sequelae included principally cerebral palsy or mental retardation,
or both.
PVHI, Periventricular hemorrhagic infarction.
Adapted From Inder TE, Perlman JM, Volpe JJ. Preterm intraventricular hemorrhage/
posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al. eds. Volpe’s
Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 24-­16.

Sequential ultrasonography appears to have the best yield for identifying lesions associated with cerebral palsy. In one study, 29% of low
birthweight (LBW) infants who later experienced cerebral palsy did not
have radiographic evidence of PVL until after 28 days of age. Ultrasound also detects the precystic and cystic symmetric lesions of PVL
and the asymmetric intraparenchymal echogenic lesions of cortical
hemorrhagic infarction (Fig. 122.4). Cranial ultrasonography may be
useful in monitoring delayed development of cortical atrophy, porencephaly, and the severity, progression, or regression of posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus (PHH).
PHH of prematurity is a common form of pediatric hydrocephalus,
accounting for 20% of shunted hydrocephalus in the United States.

Under normal conditions, CSF is primarily secreted into the cerebral
ventricles by the choroid plexus and moves via bulk flow through the
ventricular system and subarachnoid space before being absorbed at
the arachnoid villi/granulations, which are fully developed after 35
weeks. An increase in CSF production or reduction in CSF absorption
may result in ventricular enlargement if the system cannot compensate for the changes. Secondary white matter injury resulting from
ventricular dilation is likely exacerbated by compression and ischemia
from increased ICP of symptomatic PHH. Orbitofrontal head circumference, fontanel fullness, and the splaying of sutures all show limited
reliability; therefore serial neuroimaging is highly valuable for clinical
decision-­making for neurosurgical intervention.

PROGNOSIS

The degree of IVH and presence of PVL are strongly linked to survival and neurodevelopmental impairment (Tables 122.1 and 122.2).
For infants with birthweight <1,000 g, the incidence of severe neurologic impairment (defined as Bayley Scales of Infant Development IV
mental developmental index <70, psychomotor development index
<70, cerebral palsy, blindness, or deafness) after IVH is highest with
grade IV hemorrhage and lower birthweight. PVL, cystic PVL, and
progressive hydrocephalus requiring shunt insertion are each independently associated with a poorer prognosis (Table 122.3). The risk
of a poor neurodevelopmental outcome is significantly higher when
severe IVH is complicated with PHVD (40–60%) and more so for
infants who eventually develop PHH (75–88%). In the pre-­surfactant
era, up to 82% of infants with PHH who survived developed significant
neurologic impairments with cerebral palsy being the most common
clinical sequelae (74%). The Drainage, Irrigation, Fibrinolytic Therapy
(DRIFT) trial performed neurocognitive assessments at both 2 years
and 10 years after birth and demonstrated improved cognitive ability when considering birthweight, IVH grade, and sex. Infants who
received DRIFT were almost twice as likely to survive without severe
cognitive disability than those who received standard treatment. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 122 u Nervous System Disorders

1061

Table 122.3  Ultrasound Diagnosis of Periventricular Leukomalacia
US APPEARANCE

TEMPORAL FEATURES

NEUROPATHOLOGIC CORRELATION

Echogenic foci, bilateral, posterior > anterior

First week

Necrosis with congestion and/or hemorrhage
(size >1 cm)

Echolucent foci (“cysts”)

1-­3 weeks

Cyst formation secondary to tissue dissolution
(size >3 mm)

Ventricular enlargement, often with
disappearance of “cysts”

≥2-­3 months

Deficient myelin formation; gliosis, often with
collapse of cyst

From Neil JJ, Volpe JJ. Encephalopathy of prematurity: Clinical-­neurological features, diagnosis, imaging, prognosis, therapy. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s
Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 16-­6.

Table 122.4  Proposed Risk Stratification and Management of Infants with PHVD
Green Zone
Key criteria:
Ventricular size with the following
• VI ≤97th percentile
and
• AHW ≤6 mm

Yellow Zone
Key criteria:
Ventricular size with the following
• VI >97th percentile
and
• AHW >6 mm and/or TOD >25 mm

Red Zone
Key criteria:
Ventricular size with the following
• VI >97th percentile + 4mm
and
• AHW >10 mm and/or TOD >25 mm

And
Absence of the following clinical
criteria:
• HC growth >2 cm per week
• Separated sutures
• Bulging fontanelles

And
Absence of the following clinical
criteria:
• HC growth >2 cm per week
• Separated sutures
• Bulging fontanelles

Or
Any of the following clinical
criteria:
• HC growth >2 cm per week
• Separated sutures
• Bulging fontanelles

Management:
• Observation in NICU
• cUS twice a week until stable for
2 weeks then every 1-2 weeks
until 34 weeks PMA
• MRI at term equivalent

Management:
• Referral to a regional center for
neurosurgical review
• Consider LP 2-3 times
• cUS 2-3X a week until stable for
2 weeks then every 1-2 weeks
until 34 weeks PMA
• Neurosurgical intervention when
no stabilization occurs
• MRI at term equivalent

Management:
• Consider LP 2-3 times
• Neurosurgical intervention
including either temporizing
measures or VP shunt
• MRI at term equivalent

Consider alterations in NIRS (i.e., decrease cerebral oxygenation) or Doppler US (i.e., increase in Resistive Index) as
additional information that may suggest impairment in cerebral perfusion and more urgent need for intervention.
VI, ventricular index; AHW, anterior horn width; cUS, cranial ultrasound; TOD, thalamo-occipital distance; LP, lumbar puncture; HC, head circumference; NIRS, near-­infrared spectroscopy;
NICU, neonatal intensive care unit; PMA, postmenstrual age.
From El-­Dib M, Limbrick DD, Inder T, et al. Management of post-­hemorrhagic ventricular dilation in the infant born preterm. J Pediatr. 2020;226:16–26. Fig. 5.

Early versus Late Ventricular Intervention Study (ELVIS) trial demonstrated the effectiveness of intervention at a low threshold of ventricular dilation on the outcomes of death and severe neurodevelopmental
disability in preterm infants with PHVD. Post hoc analysis of this study
demonstrated that infants who went on to having a shunt had better
neurodevelopmental outcome scores if interventions were done at a
lower threshold.

TREATMENT

No treatment is available for IVH once it has occurred, and the management is largely symptomatic. Seizures should be treated with anticonvulsant drugs. Anemia and coagulopathy require transfusion with
packed red blood cells or fresh-­frozen plasma. Shock and acidosis are
treated with fluid resuscitation.
Insertion of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt is the preferred method
to treat progressive and symptomatic PHH. Some infants require temporary CSF diversion before a permanent shunt can be safety inserted.
Diuretics and acetazolamide are not effective. Ventricular access
devices (reservoirs) and externalized ventricular drains are potential temporizing interventions, although there is an associated risk of

infection and puncture porencephaly from injury to the surrounding
parenchyma. A ventriculosubgaleal shunt inserted from the ventricle
into a surgically created subgaleal pocket provides a closed system for
constant ventricular decompression without these additional risk factors. Decompression is regulated by the pressure gradient between the
ventricle and the subgaleal pocket.
One approach to therapeutic interventions is based on the severity of ultrasonographic dimensions of ventricular size (Table 122.4 and
Fig. 122.5)

PREVENTION

Improved perinatal care is imperative to minimize traumatic brain
injury and decrease the risk of preterm delivery. The incidence of
traumatic intracranial hemorrhage may be reduced by judicious management of cephalopelvic disproportion and operative delivery. Fetal
or neonatal hemorrhage caused by maternal idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura or alloimmune thrombocytopenia may be reduced
by maternal treatment with corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), fetal platelet transfusion, or cesarean birth. Meticulous care of the VLBW infant’s respiratory status and fluid-­electrolyte

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1062 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

VH
VI*

VA

HW*
AHW

A *FHR = VI/HW

TOD

B

Fig. 122.5 Ventricular parameters measured in the (A) coronal and (B) sagittal planes by cranial ultrasonography. AHW, anterior horn width; FHR,
frontal horn ratio; HW, hemispheric width; TOD, thalamo-occipital distance; VA, ventricular axis; VH, ventricular height; VI, ventricular index.
(From Brouwer MJ, de Vries LS, Pistorius L, et al. Ultrasound measurements of the lateral ventricles in neonates: why, how, and when? A systematic
review. Acta Paediatr. 2010;99:1298–306.)

management—avoidance of acidosis, hypocarbia, hypoxia, hypotension, wide fluctuations in neonatal blood pressure or Pco2 (and
secondarily fluctuation in cerebral perfusion pressure), and pneumothorax—are important factors that may affect the risk for development
of IVH and PVL.
The most important protective factor against the development of IVH
is antenatal administration of corticosteroids. A single course of antenatal corticosteroids is recommended for pregnant people between 24 0/7
weeks and 36 6/7 weeks of gestation who are at risk for preterm delivery
within 7 days. It also may be considered for pregnant people starting at
23 weeks of gestion who are at risk for preterm delivery within 7 days,
based on the family’s decision regarding resuscitation. A rescue course of
corticosteroids could be provided as early as 7 days from the prior dose,
if indicated by the clinical scenario. Antenatal administration of magnesium sulfate was not associated with a reduction in the incidence of IVH,
although it has been associated with a reduction in the risk of cerebral
palsy. Prophylactic indomethacin showed a significant reduction in the
incidence of severe IVH; however, this reduction in severe IVH was not
associated with a reduction in severe neurosensory impairment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 122.5  Multiorgan Systemic Effects of Asphyxia
SYSTEM
Central nervous

Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy,
infarction, intracranial
hemorrhage, seizures, cerebral
edema, hypotonia, hypertonia

Cardiovascular

Myocardial ischemia, poor
contractility, cardiac stunning,
tricuspid insufficiency,
hypotension

Pulmonary

Pulmonary hypertension,
pulmonary hemorrhage,
respiratory distress syndrome

Renal

Acute tubular or cortical necrosis

Adrenal

Adrenal hemorrhage

Gastrointestinal

Perforation, ulceration with
hemorrhage, necrosis

Metabolic

Inappropriate secretion of
antidiuretic hormone,
hyponatremia, hypoglycemia,
hypocalcemia, myoglobinuria

Integumentary

Subcutaneous fat necrosis

Hematologic

Disseminated intravascular
coagulation

122.4 Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy
Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Krishna K. Acharya
Hypoxemia, a decreased arterial concentration of oxygen, frequently
results in hypoxia, or decreased oxygenation to cells or organs. Ischemia refers to blood flow to cells or organs that is inadequate to maintain physiologic function. Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) is a
leading cause of neonatal brain injury, morbidity, and mortality globally. In the developed world, incidence is estimated at 1-­8 per 1,000 live
births, and in the developing world, estimates are as high as 26 per 1,000.
Approximately 20–30% of infants with HIE (depending on the severity) die in the neonatal period, and 33–50% of survivors are left with permanent neurodevelopmental abnormalities (cerebral palsy, decreased
intelligence quotient [IQ], learning/cognitive impairment). The greatest risk of adverse outcome is seen in infants with severe fetal acidosis
(pH <6.7) (90% death/impairment) and a base deficit >25 mmol/L (72%
mortality). Multiorgan failure and insult can occur (Table 122.5).

ETIOLOGY

Neonatal encephalopathy and seizures, in the absence of major congenital malformations or metabolic or genetic syndromes, appear to be

EFFECTS

caused by perinatal events. Brain MRI or autopsy findings in full-­term
neonates with encephalopathy demonstrate that 80% have acute injuries, <1% have prenatal injuries, and 3% have non–hypoxic-­ischemic
diagnoses. Fetal hypoxia may be caused by various disorders in the
mother, including (1) inadequate oxygenation of maternal blood from
hypoventilation during anesthesia, cyanotic heart disease, respiratory
failure, or carbon monoxide poisoning; (2) low maternal blood pressure from acute blood loss, spinal anesthesia, or compression of the
vena cava and aorta by the gravid uterus; (3) inadequate relaxation of
the uterus to permit placental filling as a result of uterine tetany caused
by the administration of excessive oxytocin; (4) premature separation
of the placenta; (5) impedance to the circulation of blood through the
umbilical cord as a result of compression or knotting of the cord; and
(6) placental insufficiency from maternal infections, exposures, diabetes, toxemia or post­maturity.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 122 u Nervous System Disorders

1063

Table 122.6  Topography of Brain Injury in Term Infants with Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy and Clinical Correlates
AREA OF INJURY

LOCATION OF INJURY

CLINICAL CORRELATES

LONG-­TERM SEQUELAE

Selective neuronal necrosis

Entire neuraxis, deep cortical area,
brainstem and pontosubicular

• Stupor or coma
• Seizures
• Hypotonia
• Oculomotor abnormalities
• Suck/swallow abnormalities

• Cognitive delay
• Cerebral palsy
• Dystonia
• Seizure disorder
• Ataxia
• Bulbar and pseudobulbar palsy

Parasagittal injury

Cortex and subcortical white
matter
Parasagittal regions, especially
posterior

• Proximal-­limb weakness
• Upper extremities affected
> lower extremities

• Spastic quadriparesis
• Cognitive delay
• Visual and auditory processing
difficulty

Focal ischemic necrosis

Cortex and subcortical white
matter
Vascular injury (usually middle
cerebral artery distribution)

• Unilateral findings
• Seizures common and typically
focal

• Hemiparesis
• Seizures
• Cognitive delays

Periventricular injury

Injury to motor tracts, especially
lower extremity

• Bilateral and symmetric
weakness in lower extremities
• More common in preterm
infants

• Spastic diplegia

Adapted from Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001.

Placental insufficiency often remains undetected on clinical assessment. Intrauterine growth restriction may develop in chronically
hypoxic fetuses without the traditional signs of fetal distress. Doppler umbilical waveform velocimetry (demonstrating increased fetal
vascular resistance) and cordocentesis (demonstrating fetal hypoxia
and lactic acidosis) identify a chronically hypoxic infant (see Chapter
117). Uterine contractions may further reduce umbilical oxygenation,
depressing the fetal cardiovascular system and CNS and resulting in
low Apgar scores and respiratory depression at birth.
After birth, hypoxia may be caused by (1) failure of oxygenation as
a result of severe forms of cyanotic congenital heart disease or severe
pulmonary disease; (2) severe anemia (severe hemorrhage, hemolytic
disease); (3) shock severe enough to interfere with the transport of oxygen to vital organs from overwhelming sepsis, massive blood loss, and
intracranial or adrenal hemorrhage; or (4) failure to breathe after birth
because of in utero CNS injury or drug-­induced suppression.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY

The topography of cerebral injury typically correlates with areas of
decreased cerebral blood flow and areas of relatively higher metabolic
demand, although regional vulnerabilities are impacted by gestational age
and severity of insult (Table 122.6). After an episode of hypoxia and ischemia, anaerobic metabolism occurs and generates increased amounts of
lactate and inorganic phosphates. Excitatory and toxic amino acids, particularly glutamatergic mechanism has a role in neurotoxicity. Whether
this mechanism involves tissue accumulation of an abnormal amount of
glutamate or altered sensitivity to the interaction between glutamate and
its endogenous family of receptors (i.e., N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate [NMDA],
amino-­3-­hydroxy-­5-­methyl-­4-­isoxazole propionate [AMPA], and kainite)
is unknown. However, receptor activation results in a cascade of events
that leads to cell death by swelling (oncosis) or apoptosis. Along with these
changes in the CNS, there are also potentially exacerbating bioenergetic
changes as a result of the circulatory response with increased shunting
through the ductus venosus, ductus arteriosus, and foramen ovale, at first
trying to maintain perfusion of the brain, heart, and adrenal glands in
preference to the lungs, liver, kidneys, and intestine.
The pathology of hypoxia-­
ischemia in tissues outside the CNS
depends on the affected organ and the severity of the injury. Early
congestion, fluid leak from increased capillary permeability, and endothelial cell swelling may lead to signs of coagulation necrosis and cell
death. Congestion and petechiae are seen in the pericardium, pleura,
thymus, heart, adrenals, and meninges. Prolonged intrauterine hypoxia
may result in inadequate perfusion of the periventricular white matter,
resulting in PVL. Pulmonary arteriole smooth muscle hyperplasia may

Table 122.7  Poor Predictive Variables for Death/Disability
After Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy
• Low (0-­3) 10 min Apgar score
• Need for CPR in the delivery room
• Delayed onset (≥20 min) of spontaneous breathing
• Severe neurologic signs (coma, hypotonia, hypertonia)
• Seizures onset ≤12 hr or difficult to treat
• Severe, prolonged (∼7 days) EEG findings including burst suppression
pattern
• Prominent MRI basal ganglia/thalamic lesions
• Oliguria/anuria >24 hr
• Abnormal neurologic exam ≥14 days
CPR, Cardiopulmonary resuscitation; EEG, electroencephalogram.

develop, which predisposes the infant to pulmonary hypertension (see
Chapter 130). If fetal distress produces gasping, amniotic fluid contents
(i.e., meconium, desquamation products, lanugo) may be aspirated
into the trachea or lungs with subsequent complications, including
pulmonary hypertension and pneumothoraces.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

At delivery, the presence of meconium-­stained amniotic fluid indicates
that fetal distress may have occurred. At birth, affected infants may
have neurologic impairment and may fail to breathe spontaneously.
Pallor, cyanosis, apnea, a slow heart rate, and unresponsiveness to
stimulation are also nonspecific initial signs of potential HIE. During
the ensuing hours, infants may be hypotonic, may change from a hypotonic to a hypertonic state, or their tone may appear normal (Tables
122.7 and 122.8). Cerebral edema may develop during the next 24
hours and result in profound brainstem depression. During this time,
seizure activity may occur; seizures may be severe and refractory to
standard doses of anticonvulsants. Although most often a result of the
HIE, seizures in asphyxiated newborns may also be caused by vascular
events (hemorrhage, arterial ischemic stroke, or sinus venous thrombosis), metabolic derangements (hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia), CNS
infection, and cerebral dysgenesis or genetic disorders (nonketotic
hyperglycinemia, vitamin-­
dependent epilepsies, channelopathies).
Congenital conditions that result in neuromuscular weakness and poor
respiratory effort may also result secondarily in neonatal hypoxic brain
injury and seizure. Such conditions might include congenital myopathies, congenital myotonic dystrophy, or spinal muscular atrophy.
In addition to CNS dysfunction, systemic organ dysfunction is
noted in up to 80% of affected neonates. Myocardial dysfunction and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1064 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 122.8  Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy in Term Infants
SIGNS

STAGE 1 (MILD)

STAGE 2 (MODERATE)

STAGE 3 (SEVERE)

Level of consciousness

Hyperalert, responds to minimal
stimuli

Lethargic

Stuporous, coma

Spontaneous activity

Normal or decreased

Decreased

None

Posture

Mild flexion of distal joints
(fingers, wrist)

Distal flexion or complete extension

Decerebrated

Tone

Normal

Hypotonia (focal or general) or
hypertonia

Flaccid or rigid

PRIMITIVE REFLEXES

1

2

3

Suck

Weak or incomplete

Weak or bite

Absent

Moro reflex

Intact, low threshold

Incomplete

Absent

AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM

1

2

3

Pupils

Mydriasis

Miosis

Variable or nonreactive

Heart rate

Tachycardia

Bradycardia

Variable heart rate

Respirations

Hyperventilation

Periodic breathing

Apnea or requiring ventilation

Seizures

None

Common

Decerebration

Electroencephalographic findings

Normal

Low voltage changing to seizure
activity

Burst suppression to isoelectric

Duration

<24 hr if progresses; otherwise,
may remain normal

24 hr to 14 days

Days to weeks

Outcome

Good

Variable

Death, severe deficits

Adapted from Chalak L, Latremouille S, Mir I, Sánchez PJ, Sant’Anna G. A review of the conundrum of mild hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy: current challenges and moving
forward. Early Hum Dev. 2018;120:88–94.

cardiogenic shock, persistent pulmonary hypertension, RDS, gastrointestinal perforation, and acute kidney and liver injury are associated
with perinatal asphyxia secondary to inadequate perfusion (see Table
122.5).
The severity of neonatal encephalopathy depends on the duration and
timing of injury. The need to define severity is rooted in the need to determine eligibility for therapeutic hypothermia, a treatment that decreases
death and disability in moderate to severe HIE. A clinical grading score first
proposed by Sarnat and colleagues continues to be a useful tool. Symptoms
develop over hours and days, making it important to perform serial neurologic examinations (see Tables 122.7 and 122.8). Infants with moderate
to severe HIE are characterized by disturbed neurologic function, altered
level of consciousness, depressed tone, abnormal reflexes, and difficulty
maintaining spontaneous respirations, and seizures. An empirically validated definition of mild HIE within 6 hours uses two steps: the first step
is screening for fetal acidosis and acute perinatal events, and the second
step has an examiner use a modified Sarnat scoring, which is expanded to
include mild in addition to moderate and severe abnormalities.

DIAGNOSIS

MRI is the most sensitive imaging modality for detecting hypoxic
brain injury in the neonate. Although such injury can be detected at
various times and with varying pulse sequences, diffusion-­weighted
sequences obtained in the first 3-5 days following a presumed sentinel event are optimal for identifying acute injury (Figs. 122.6-­122.9
and Table 122.9). Severe HIE is characterized on MRI by a central
pattern injury that includes the thalamus, posterior limb of the internal capsule, and hippocampus with the most severe HIE resulting in
involvement of the entire cortex. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy
performed within first 24 hours after birth in a full-­term infant is
very sensitive to the severity of HIE-­related brain injury. Elevated
lactate/creatine ratio on day 1 of life is a predictor of adverse neurologic outcome, whereas absence of lactate predicts a normal outcome.
Where MRI is unavailable or prevented by clinical instability, brain
CT scans may be helpful in ruling out focal hemorrhagic lesions or

A

B

Fig. 122.6 MR images of selective neuronal injury. The infant experi-

enced intrapartum asphyxia and had seizures on the first postnatal day.
MRI was performed on the fifth postnatal day. A, Axial, fluid-­attenuated,
inversion recovery image shows increased signal in the putamen bilaterally (arrows) but no definite abnormality in the cerebral cortex. B,
By contrast, a diffusion-­weighted image shows striking increased signal
intensity (i.e., decreased diffusion) in the frontal cortex (in addition to a
more pronounced basal ganglia abnormality). (From Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008. p. 420.)

large arterial ischemic strokes. Loss of gray-­white differentiation and
injury to the basal ganglia in more severe HIE can be detected on
CT by experienced readers, but CT often misses more subtle forms
of neonatal hypoxic brain injury and results in significant radiation
exposure. Ultrasound has limited utility in evaluation of hypoxic
injury in the term infant, but it too can be useful for excluding hemorrhagic lesions or hydrocephalus. Because of factors of size and clinical stability, ultrasound is the initial preferred (and sometimes only
feasible) modality in evaluation of the preterm infant.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 122 u Nervous System Disorders

1065

Fig. 122.7 MR images of basal ganglia/thalamic

(BG/T) injury and signal intensity. Top row, Axial T1
weighted MR images showing mild BG/T lesions (arrow)
(A), moderate BG/T injury (arrows) (B), and severe BG/T
abnormalities (circled) (C). Bottom row, Axial T1 weighted MR images showing normal signal intensity (SI) in the
posterior limb of the internal capsule (PLIC) (arrow) (A),
equivocal, asymmetric, and slightly reduced SI in the
PLIC (arrow) (B), and abnormal, absent SI in the PLIC
(arrow) (C). (From Martinez-­
Biarge M, Diez-­
Sebastian
J, Rutherford MA, Cowan FM. Outcomes after central
grey matter injury in term perinatal hypoxic-­ischaemic
encephalopathy. Early Hum Dev. 2010;86:675–682.)

A

B

C

newborn brain function; at least 24-­hour monitoring is recommended for
infants at risk for seizures. The neonatal EEG contains complex spatiotemporal information and can be difficult to interpret, requiring many years
in neurophysiology training. As a result, in many NICUs, EEG signal processing of a limited number of channels, with a more accessible method
of data presentation, has been adopted (aEEG). Even in the absence of
obvious seizures, a 24-­hour multichannel EEG recording is recommended
and, in infants undergoing hypothermia therapy, 72 hours is optimal to
cover duration of intervention. It is known that EEG in HIE evolves following the primary HIE injury and that EEG monitoring is essential to assess
this evolution and recovery. Description of EEG background grades and
seizures in HIE include normal trace, which is a normal amplitude with
sleep–wake cycling; mildly abnormal trace, which is a period of low amplitude and lack of sleep–wake cycling; moderately abnormal trace, which is
periods of discontinuity <10 seconds; and severely abnormal trace with
burst suppression pattern and discontinuity of activity for 10-­60 seconds
(Fig. 122.10). An aEEG is a good option if multichannel EEG is not available. The signal from biparietal electrodes is smoothed and the amplitude
integrated and shows the baseline background electrical activity. A voltage
classification scheme for aEEG use in HIE has been developed as follows:
normal voltage (5-­10 μV) and abnormal voltage (lower margin <5 μV and
upper margin >10 μV).

TREATMENT

Fig. 122.8 MR image of a parasagittal cerebral injury. Coronal T1

weighted image, obtained on the fifth postnatal day in an asphyxiated
term infant, shows striking triangular lesions in the parasagittal areas bilaterally; increased signal intensity is also apparent in the basal ganglia
and thalamus bilaterally. (From Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008. p. 421.)

Neurophysiology Studies

Monitoring the brain of the sick newborn infant in the NICU using either
multichannel electroencephalography (EEG) or limited channel amplitude
integrated EEG (aEEG) may help to determine which infants are at highest
risk for developmental sequelae of neonatal brain injury (Tables 122.10 and
122.11). Multichannel EEG with video is the gold standard for monitoring

Therapeutic hypothermia, whether head cooling or systemic cooling
(by servo-­control to a core rectal or esophageal temperature of 33.5°C
[92.3°F] within the first 6 hours after birth and maintained for 72 hours)
has been shown to reduce mortality and major neurodevelopmental
impairment at 18 months of age. Infants treated with systemic hypothermia have a lower incidence of cortical neuronal injury on MRI,
suggesting systemic hypothermia may result in more uniform cooling
of the brain and deeper CNS structures than selective head cooling.
The therapeutic effect of hypothermia likely results from decreased
secondary neuronal injury achieved by reducing rates of apoptosis and
production of mediators related to neurotoxicity. There is also benefit
in seizure reduction. The therapeutic benefit of hypothermia noted
at 18-­22 months of age is maintained later in childhood. Once established, hypothermia may not alter the prognostic findings on MRI.
Numerous studies seeking ways to extend the benefits of therapeutic
hypothermia have been attempted. The foundational clinical trials of
therapeutic hypothermia had strict treatment protocols and excluded
infants born before 35 or 36 weeks completed gestational weeks, those
weighing <1,800 g, and infants with major congenital abnormality.
Practice variation exists for offering therapeutic hypothermia to infants

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1066 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

A

Fig. 122.9 MR images of focal ischemic cerebral injury. MRI was performed on the third postnatal day. A,
Axial T2 weighted image shows a lesion in the distribution of the main
branch of the left middle cerebral
artery. B, Diffusion-­
weighted image
demonstrates the lesion more strikingly. (From Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology
of the Newborn. 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2008. p. 422.)

B

µV
100

CNV

DNV

BS

LV

FT

aEEG 10
0

Fig. 122.10 Amplitude EEG patterns. Patterns are highlighted with
pattern classification (continuous normal voltage [CNV], discontinuous normal voltage [DNV], burst suppression [BS], low voltage [LV], flat
tracings [FT]). (From Chalak L. New horizons in mild hypoxic-­ischemic
encephalopathy: A standardized algorithm to move past conundrum of
care. Clin Perinatol. 2022;49:279–294. Fig. 3.)

Table 122.9  Major Aspects of MRI in Diagnosis of
Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy in the
Term Infant
MAJOR CONVENTIONAL MR FINDINGS IN FIRST WEEK
• Cerebral cortical gray-­white differentiation lost (on T1W or T2W)
• Cerebral cortical high signal (T1W and FLAIR), especially in
parasagittal peri-­rolandic cortex
• Basal ganglia/thalamus, high signal (T1W and FLAIR), usually
associated with the cerebral cortical changes but possibly alone
with increased signal in brainstem tegmentum in cases of acute
severe insult
• Parasagittal cerebral cortex, subcortical white matter, high signal
(T1W and FLAIR)
• Periventricular white matter, decreased signal (T1W) or increased
signal (T2W)
• Posterior limb of internal capsule, decreased signal (T1W or
FLAIR)
• Cerebrum in a vascular distribution, decreased signal (T1W), but
much better visualized as decreased diffusion (increased signal)
on diffusion-­weighted MRI
• Diffusion-­weighted MRI more sensitive than conventional sequences
in MRI, especially in first days after birth, when former shows
decreased diffusion (increased signal) in injured areas
FLAIR, Fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery; T1W and T2W, T1 weighted and T2
weighted images.
From Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008:
Table 9-­16.

who do not meet the original study criteria, although debate for these
practices also exist. A multicenter randomized clinical trial investigating the benefit of use of therapeutic hypothermia beyond 6 hours
after birth reported a modest and “nonconclusive” effect. Importantly,
this study extended the duration of hypothermia from 72 to 96 hours
based on preclinical data suggesting that a longer period of treatment
was needed at later initiation times. Assessment of deeper or longer
cooling failed to show benefit in short-­term outcomes, and its use is

Table 122.10  Value of Electroencephalography in
Assessment of Asphyxiated Term Infants
• Detection of severe abnormalities (i.e., CLV, FT, BSP) in first hours
of life has a positive predictive value of an unfavorable outcome
of 80–90%.
• Severe abnormalities may improve within 24 hr (∼50% of BSP and
10% of CLV/FT).
• Rapid recovery of severe abnormalities is associated with a
favorable outcome in 60% of cases.
• The combination of early neonatal neurologic examination and
early aEEG enhances the positive predictive value and specificity.
aEEG, Amplitude integrated encephalography; BSP, burst suppression pattern; CLV,
continuous low voltage; FT, flat trace.
From Inder TE, Volpe JJ. Hypoxic-­ischemic injury in the term infant: clinical-­neurological
features, diagnosis, imaging, prognosis, therapy. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al.,
eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table
20-­28.

not supported by evidence nor clinically justifiable. Multicenter clinical trials are underway to assess the use of therapeutic hypothermia
in preterm infants born between 33 and 35 weeks’ gestation. The term
“major congenital anomalies” in the original trials lead to the exclusion of numerous conditions with a favorable prognosis for survival
and neurodevelopment, including trisomy 21. Unless the identified
anomaly specifically imparts a medical contraindication to therapeutic hypothermia, the infant is moribund, or treatment does not align
with the broader goals of care for the infant, categorical exclusion of
the infant from therapeutic hypothermia solely based on the presence of one or more major congenital anomalies is likely not ethically
justifiable. There have been few studies to investigate the use of therapeutic hypothermia in neonates who are beyond the perinatal period.
Presently, clinical research on “targeted temperature management” in
infants has been done in the pediatric intensive care setting and has
little applicability to NICUs.
Complications of induced hypothermia include thrombocytopenia (usually without bleeding), reduced heart rate, and subcutaneous
fat necrosis (sometimes with associated hypercalcemia) as well as the
potential for overcooling and the cold injury syndrome. The latter is
usually avoided with a servo-­controlled cooling system. Therapeutic
hypothermia may theoretically alter drug metabolism, prolong the QT
interval, and affect the interpretation of blood gases. In clinical practice, these concerns have not been observed.
For treating seizures associated with HIE, phenobarbital continues
to be used in many instances. It is typically given by intravenous loading dose (20 mg/kg). Additional doses of 5-­10 mg/kg (up to 40-­50
mg/kg total) may be needed. Phenobarbital levels should be monitored 24 hours after the loading dose has been given and maintenance
therapy (5 mg/kg/24 hr) begun. Therapeutic phenobarbital levels are
20-­40 μg/mL.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 122 u Nervous System Disorders
For refractory seizures, there is a high degree of variability regarding
choice of a second agent. Historically, phenytoin (20 mg/kg loading
dose) or lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg) have been preferred, but currently the
use of levetiracetam is preferred (at times even as a first-­line agent)
as a second-­line agent. Pharmacokinetic data suggest that due to the
higher volume of distribution created by higher relative body water
content in neonates, loading doses should be higher than in older children or adults. Suggested appropriate loading doses may be closer to 60
mg/kg. In addition to levetiracetam and phenytoin, other second-­or
third-­line agents commonly used include midazolam, topiramate, and
lidocaine. Pyridoxine should also be attempted, particularly in ongoing refractory seizures with highly abnormal EEG background. Status
epilepticus, multifocal seizures, and need for multiple anticonvulsant
medications during therapeutic hypothermia are associated with a
poor prognosis.
Additional therapy for infants with HIE includes supportive care
directed at management of organ system dysfunction. Hyperthermia
has been associated with impaired neurodevelopment and should
be prevented, particularly in the interval between initial resuscitation and initiation of hypothermia. Careful attention to ventilatory
status and adequate oxygenation, blood pressure, hemodynamic
status, acid-­base balance, and possible infection is important. Secondary hypoxia or hypotension from complications of HIE must
be prevented. Aggressive treatment of seizures is critical and may
necessitate continuous EEG monitoring. In addition, hyperoxia,
hypocarbia, and hypoglycemia are associated with poor outcomes,
so careful attention to resuscitation, ventilation, and blood glucose
homeostasis is essential.

highest risk are likely to die or have severe disability despite aggressive treatment, including hypothermia. Those with intermediate scores
are likely to benefit from treatment. In general, severe encephalopathy, characterized by flaccid coma, apnea, absence of oculocephalic
reflexes, and refractory seizures, is associated with a poor prognosis
(see Table 122.8). Apgar scores alone in patients with HIE can also be
associated with subsequent risk of neurodevelopmental impairment.
At 10 minutes, each point decrease in Apgar score increases odds of
death or disability by 45%. Death or disability occurs in 76–82% of
infants with HIE with Apgar scores of 0-­2 at 10 minutes. Absence of
spontaneous respirations at 20 minutes of age and persistence of abnormal neurologic signs at 2 weeks of age also predict death or severe cognitive and motor deficits.
The combined use of early multichannel EEG or aEEG and MRI
offers additional insight in predicting outcome in term infants with
HIE (see Table 122.11). EEG or aEEG background characteristics such
as pattern, voltage, reactivity, state change, and evolution after acute
injury are important predictors of outcome. MRI markers include location of injury, identification of injury by certain pulse sequences, measurement of diffusivity and/or fractional anisotropy, and presence of
abnormal metabolite ratios on MR spectroscopy, and all have shown

Table 122.11  Electroencephalographic Patterns of
Prognostic Significance in Asphyxiated
Term Infants*
ASSOCIATED WITH FAVORABLE OUTCOME
Mild depression (or less) on day 1
Normal background by day 7

PROGNOSIS

The outcome of HIE ranges from complete recovery to death. The
prognosis varies depending on the severity of the insult and the treatment. Infants with initial cord or initial (∼1 hour of age) blood pH
<6.7 have a 90% risk for death or severe neurodevelopmental impairment at 18 months of age. In addition, infants with Apgar scores of 0-­3
at 5 minutes, high base deficit (>20-­25 mmol/L), decerebrate posture,
severe basal ganglia/thalamic (BG/T) lesions (Fig. 122.11; see also Fig.
122.7), persistence of severe HIE by clinical examination at 72 hours,
and lack of spontaneous activity are also at increased risk for death or
impairment. These predictor variables can be combined to determine
a score that helps with prognosis (see Table 122.7). Infants with the

1067

ASSOCIATED WITH UNFAVORABLE OUTCOME
Predominant interburst interval >20 sec on any day
Burst suppression pattern on any day
Isoelectric tracing on any day
Mild (or greater) depression after day 12
*Associations with favorable or unfavorable outcome are generally ≥90%, but the
clinical context must be considered.
From Inder TE, Volpe JJ. Hypoxic-­ischemic injury in the term infant: clinical-­neurological
features, diagnosis, imaging, prognosis, therapy. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al.,
eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table
20-­26.

Severe BG/T

Cerebral palsy 98%
Mostly severe (95%)

Feeding

Speech and language

Vision

DQ

Seizures

90% will have some
feeding problems.

95% will have some
speech problems,
severe in most

50%–75% will have some
grade of visual
impairment, especially
with moderate-severe
white matter and
brain stem injury

Children are in
general difficult to
assess because
of their motor
impairment at this
age

Look at the cortex

Gastrostomy

Look at the pons

Normal: 25%–30%
Mild: 45%–50%
Moderate: 60%
Severe: 75%

Normal: 35%
Moderate: 50%
Severe: 90%

Fig. 122.11 Flow chart showing patterns of outcome with severe basal ganglia/thalamic (BG/T) injury. DQ, Developmental quotient. (From
Martinez-­Biarge M, Diez-­Sebastian J, Rutherford MA, Cowan FM. Outcomes after central grey matter injury in term perinatal hypoxic-­ischaemic
encephalopathy. Early Hum Dev. 2010;86:675–682.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1068 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
correlation with outcome. Severe BG/T lesions with abnormal signal
in the posterior limb of the internal capsule are highly predictive of the
poorest cognitive and motor prognosis (see Fig. 122.11). Normal MRI
and EEG findings are associated with a good recovery.
Microcephaly and poor head growth during the first year of life
also correlate with injury to the BG/T and white matter and adverse
developmental outcome at 12 months. All survivors of moderate to
severe encephalopathy require comprehensive high-­risk medical and
developmental follow-­up. Early identification of neurodevelopmental
problems allows prompt referral for developmental, rehabilitative, and
neurologic early intervention services so that the best possible outcomes can be achieved.
Brain death (death by neurologic criteria) after neonatal HIE is
diagnosed from the clinical findings of coma unresponsive to pain,
auditory, or visual stimulation; apnea with Pco2 rising from 40 to >60
mm Hg without ventilatory support; and absence of brainstem reflexes
(pupillary, oculocephalic, oculovestibular, corneal, gag, sucking) (see
Chapter 83). These findings must occur in the absence of hypothermia, hypotension, and elevations of depressant drugs (phenobarbital),
which may take days to be metabolized and cleared completely from
the blood. In the term infant, the national guideline for determination
should be followed. There is no agreement on such criteria in the preterm infants. Consideration of withdrawal of life support must include
discussions with the family and the healthcare team, and, if there is disagreement, an ethics committee. The best interest of the infant involves
judgments about the benefits and harm of continuing therapy or avoiding ongoing futile therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

122.5 Spine and Spinal Cord
Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Krishna K. Acharya
See also Chapter 751.
Injury to the spine/spinal cord during birth is rare but can be devastating. Strong traction exerted when the spine is hyperextended or
when the direction of pull is lateral, or forceful longitudinal traction
on the trunk while the head is still firmly engaged in the pelvis, especially when combined with flexion and torsion of the vertical axis,
may produce fracture and separation of the vertebrae. Such injuries
are most likely to occur when difficulty is encountered in delivering
the shoulders in cephalic presentations and the head in breech presentations. The injury occurs most often at the level of the 4th cervical vertebra with cephalic presentations and the lower cervical–upper
thoracic vertebrae with breech presentations. Transection of the cord
may occur with or without vertebral fractures; hemorrhage and edema
may produce neurologic signs that are indistinguishable from those of
transection, except that they may not be permanent. Areflexia, loss of
sensation, and complete paralysis of voluntary motion occur below the
level of injury, although the persistence of a withdrawal reflex mediated
through spinal centers distal to the area of injury is frequently misinterpreted as representing voluntary motion.
If the injury is severe, the infant, who from birth may be in poor condition because of respiratory depression, shock, or hypothermia, may deteriorate rapidly to death within several hours before any neurologic signs
are obvious. Alternatively, the course may be protracted, with symptoms
and signs appearing at birth or later in the first week; Horner syndrome,
immobility, flaccidity, and associated brachial plexus injuries may not
be recognized for several days. Constipation may also be present. Some
infants survive for prolonged periods, their initial flaccidity, immobility, and areflexia being replaced after several weeks or months by rigid
flexion of the extremities, increased muscle tone, and spasms. Apnea on
day 1 and poor motor recovery by 3 months are poor prognostic signs.
The differential diagnosis of neonatal spine/spinal cord injury
includes amyotonia congenita and myelodysplasia associated with
spina bifida occulta, spinal muscular atrophy (type 0), spinal vascular
malformations (e.g., arteriovenous malformation causing hemorrhage

or stroke), and congenital structural anomalies (syringomyelia, hemangioblastoma). Ultrasound or MRI confirms the diagnosis. Treatment of
the survivors is supportive, including home ventilation; patients often
remain permanently disabled. When a fracture or dislocation is causing spinal compression, the prognosis is related to the time elapsed
before the compression is relieved.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

122.6 Peripheral Nerve Injuries
Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Krishna K. Acharya
See also Chapter 753.

BRACHIAL PALSY

Brachial plexus injury is a common problem, with an incidence of 0.6-­
4.6 per 1,000 live births. Injury to the brachial plexus may cause paralysis of the upper part of the arm with or without paralysis of the forearm
or hand or, more often, paralysis of the entire arm. These injuries occur
in macrosomic infants and when lateral traction is exerted on the head
and neck during delivery of the shoulder in a vertex presentation, when
the arms are extended over the head in a breech presentation, or when
excessive traction is placed on the shoulders. The primary risk factor
for brachial plexus injuries are shoulder dystocia and macrosomia
(birthweight >4,000 g).
Erb-­Duchenne paralysis results from injury to the nerve roots of the
5th and 6th cervical nerves, with the 7th affected in 50% of instances.
The infant loses the power to abduct the arm from the shoulder, rotate
the arm externally, and supinate the forearm. The characteristic position consists of adduction and internal rotation of the arm with pronation of the forearm, often described as the “waiter’s tip hand.” Power
to extend the forearm is retained, but the biceps reflex is absent; the
Moro reflex is absent on the affected side (Fig. 122.12). The outer aspect
of the arm may have some sensory impairment. Power in the forearm
and hand grasps is preserved unless the lower part of the plexus is
also injured; the presence of hand grasp is a favorable prognostic sign.
When the injury includes the phrenic nerve (in about 5% of patients),
alteration in diaphragmatic excursion may be observed with ultrasound, fluoroscopy, or as asymmetric elevation of the diaphragm on
chest radiograph.
Klumpke paralysis is a rare form of brachial palsy in which injury
to the 7th and 8th cervical nerves and the 1st thoracic nerve produces
a paralyzed hand and ipsilateral ptosis and miosis (Horner syndrome)
if the sympathetic fibers of the first thoracic root are also injured. The
incidence is as low as 0.6%, and some suggest the reason for this is modern obstetric practice and a sharp decline in the vaginal breech deliveries where there is a risk of hyperabduction of the arms. Mild cases may
not be detected immediately after birth. Differentiation must be made
from cerebral injury; from fracture, dislocation, or epiphyseal separation of the humerus; and from fracture of the clavicle. MRI demonstrates nerve root rupture or avulsion.
Most patients have full recovery. If the paralysis was a result of
edema and hemorrhage around the nerve fibers, function should
return within a few months; if it resulted from laceration, permanent
damage may result. Involvement of the deltoid is usually the most serious problem and may result in shoulder drop secondary to muscle
atrophy. In general, paralysis of the upper part of the arm has a better
prognosis than paralysis of the lower part.
Treatment for peripheral nerve injuries consists of initial conservative management with monthly follow-­up and a decision for surgical intervention by 3 months if function has not improved. Partial
immobilization and appropriate positioning are used to prevent the
development of contractures. In upper arm paralysis, the arm should
be abducted 90 degrees with external rotation at the shoulder, full
supination of the forearm, and slight extension at the wrist with the
palm turned toward the face. This position may be achieved with a
brace or splint during the first 1-­2 weeks. Immobilization should be
intermittent throughout the day while the infant is asleep and between

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 122 u Nervous System Disorders
Injuries of C4 root may cause
phrenic nerve paralysis
and respiratory distress

phrenic nerve

1069

C3
C4

Injuries of upper brachial plexus or its
nerve roots (C5, C6) cause Erb’s palsy

C5
C6
Injuries of lower brachial plexus or its
nerve roots (C7, C8; T1) cause Klumpke’s
palsy and often Horner’s syndrome

C7

Musculocutaneous n.

C8

Axillary n.

T1

Radial n.
White ramus communicans
(fibers to cervical sympathetic
trunk)

Median n.
Ulnar n.

Infant with Erb’s palsy on
right side. Muscles of
shoulder and upper arm
chiefly affected. Elbow
extended and wrist flexed,
but grasp normal

Fig. 122.12 Schematic representation of the brachial
plexus with its terminal branches. The major sites of brachial plexus injury are shown. (Courtesy Netter Images,
Image ID 19943. www.netterimages.com.)

feedings. In lower arm or hand paralysis, the wrist should be splinted
in a neutral position and padding placed in the fist. When the entire
arm is paralyzed, the same treatment principles should be followed.
Gentle massage and range-­of-­motion exercises may be started by 7-­10
days of age. Infants should be closely monitored with active and passive
corrective exercises. If the paralysis persists without improvement for
3 months, neuroplasty, neurolysis, end-­to-­end anastomosis, and nerve
grafting offer hope for partial recovery.
The type of treatment and the prognosis depend on the mechanism of injury and the number of nerve roots involved. The mildest
injury to a peripheral nerve (neurapraxia) is caused by edema and
heals spontaneously within a few weeks. Axonotmesis is more severe
and is a consequence of nerve fiber disruption with an intact myelin
sheath; function usually returns in a few months. Total disruption of
nerves (neurotmesis) or root avulsion is the most severe, especially if
it involves C5-­T1; microsurgical repair may be indicated. Fortunately,
most (75%) injuries are at the root level C5-­C6, involve neurapraxia
and axonotmesis, and should heal spontaneously. Botulism toxin may
be used to treat biceps-­triceps co-­contractions.

PHRENIC NERVE PARALYSIS

Phrenic nerve injury (3rd, 4th, 5th cervical nerves) with diaphragmatic
paralysis must be considered when cyanosis and irregular and labored
respirations develop. Such injuries, usually unilateral, are associated
with ipsilateral upper brachial plexus palsies in 75% of cases. Because
breathing is thoracic in type, the abdomen does not bulge with inspiration. Breath sounds are diminished on the affected side. The thrust of
the diaphragm, which may often be felt just under the costal margin on
the normal side, is absent on the affected side. The diagnosis is established by ultrasound or fluoroscopic examination, which reveals elevation of the diaphragm on the paralyzed side and seesaw movements
of the two sides of the diaphragm during respiration. It may also be
apparent on chest or abdominal radiograph.
Infants with phrenic nerve injury should be placed on the involved
side and given oxygen if necessary. Some may benefit from pressure

Young girl with Klumpke’s
palsy on right side.
Muscles of forearm and
hand chiefly affected.
Grasp weak and affected
limb small. Horner’s
syndrome present, due to
interruption of fibers to
cervical sympathetic trunk

introduced by continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) to expand
the paralyzed hemidiaphragm. In extreme cases, mechanical ventilation may be needed. Initially, intravenous feedings may be needed;
later, progressive gavage or oral feeding may be started, depending on
the infant’s condition. Pulmonary infections are a serious complication. If the infant fails to demonstrate spontaneous recovery in 1-­2
months, surgical plication of the diaphragm may be indicated.

FACIAL NERVE PALSY

Facial palsy is usually a peripheral paralysis that results from pressure
over the facial nerve in utero, during labor, or from forceps use during
delivery. Rarely, it may result from nuclear agenesis of the facial nerve.
Peripheral facial paralysis is flaccid and, when complete, involves the
entire side of the face, including the forehead. The main reported risk
factors associated with traumatic facial paralysis are primigravida, birthweight >3,500 g, forceps usage, cesarean birth, and prematurity. When
the infant cries, movement occurs only on the nonparalyzed side of the
face, and the mouth is drawn to that side. On the affected side the forehead is smooth, the eye cannot be closed, the nasolabial fold is absent,
and the corner of the mouth droops. Central facial paralysis spares the
forehead (e.g., forehead wrinkles will still be apparent on the affected
side) because the nucleus that innervates the upper face has overlapping
dual innervation by corticobulbar fibers originating in bilateral cerebral
hemispheres. The infant with central facial paralysis usually has other
manifestations of intracranial injury, most often 6th nerve palsy from
the proximity of the 6th and 7th cranial nerve nuclei in the brainstem.
Prognosis depends on whether the nerve was injured by pressure or the
nerve fibers were torn; improvement occurs within a few weeks in the
former case. The majority of infants with traumatic facial nerve palsy will
recover within the first 2 months of life. Care of the exposed eye is essential. Neuroplasty may be indicated when the paralysis is persistent. Facial
palsy may be confused with absence of the depressor muscles of the
mouth, which is a benign problem or with variants of Möbius syndrome.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1070 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Chapter 123

Neonatal Resuscitation
­and Delivery Room
Emergencies
Heidi M. Herrick and Elizabeth E. Foglia
Most infants complete the transition to extrauterine life without
difficulty; however, a small proportion require resuscitation after
birth (Fig. 123.1). For a newborn infant, the need for resuscitation is often caused by a respiratory problem leading to inadequate
ventilation. This is in contrast to an adult cardiac arrest, which is
usually caused by inadequate circulation. The goals of neonatal
resuscitation are to establish adequate spontaneous respirations,
obtain adequate cardiac output, and prevent the morbidity and
mortality associated with hypoxic-­ischemic tissue (brain, heart,
kidney) injury (see Chapter 122). High-­risk situations should be
anticipated from pregnancy history and labor. Improved perinatal
care and prenatal diagnosis of fetal anomalies allow for appropriate
maternal transports for high-­risk deliveries. Infants who are born
limp, cyanotic, apneic, or pulseless require immediate resuscitation
before assignment of the 1 minute Apgar score. Rapid and appropriate resuscitative efforts improve the likelihood of preventing brain
damage and achieving a successful outcome.

NEONATAL RESUSCITATION

See also Chapter 79.
Recommendations for the Neonatal Resuscitation Program (NRP)
propose an integrated assessment/response approach for the initial
evaluation of an infant, consisting of simultaneous assessment of
infant general appearance and risk factors. The fundamental principles
include evaluation of the airway and establishing effective respirations
and adequate circulation. The guidelines also highlight the importance
of the neonatal heart rate as a primary indicator of the need for and
response to resuscitation.

<1.4 million
babies

Approx 6
million babies
Approx 10
million babies

136 million
babies born

<1%
of babies
require advanced
resuscitation
(endotracheal
intubation, chest
compressions and drugs)

Approx 3-6%
of babies require basic
resuscitation (bag-and-mask ventilation)

Approx 5-10%
of babies require simple stimulation
at birth to help them breathe
(drying and rubbing)

All babies require immediate assessment at birth
and simple newborn care
(assess breathing, dry, and put the baby skin-to-skin with mother)

Fig. 123.1 Estimates of infants requiring resuscitation at birth. (From

Wall SN, Lee ACC, Niermeyer S, et al. Neonatal resuscitation in low-­
resource settings: what, who, and how to overcome challenges to scale
up? Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2009;107:S47–S64. Fig. 1.)

Before the birth of a baby, sufficient preparation for the birth should
occur. At least one individual capable of initiating neonatal resuscitation should be present at the delivery. If advanced resuscitation is
anticipated, more providers should be available. Necessary equipment
should be available, which routinely includes a warmer bed, blankets,
infant hat, stethoscope, bulb suction, suction catheter with wall suction, bag-­mask device, oxygen source with blender, pulse oximeter,
laryngoscope with blade, endotracheal tubes (ETTs), laryngeal mask
airway, pulse oximeter, and electrocardiogram (ECG) leads. Based on
the specific details of the pregnancy, further equipment may be needed
and should be readily available. The equipment should be checked to
make sure it is functioning appropriately. Team members should introduce themselves, define a team leader, assign roles for the resuscitation,
and discuss what actions they will take during the resuscitation. For
complex resuscitations, there may be one individual whose sole job is
to document the resuscitation by keeping track of time and recording interventions performed. This can help ensure the correct steps are
performed in a timely manner and inform the team debriefing after
resuscitation.
The umbilical cord management plan should be established
before delivery. Delayed cord clamping after birth can be performed in both preterm and term infants. Benefits to term infants
include higher hemoglobin levels at birth with improved iron
stores in infancy. Benefits for preterm infants include improved
hemodynamic stability, decreased need for inotropic support, and
decreased red blood cell transfusions. The 2020 Neonatal Resuscitation Guidelines call for at least 30-­60 seconds of delayed cord
clamping after birth for vigorous term and preterm infants unless
contraindications are present. It is unclear whether delayed cord
clamping should be continued when an infant requires resuscitation; this is an area of active research. Umbilical cord milking
should not be performed for extremely preterm infants <28 weeks’
gestation because this has been associated with an increased risk of
intraventricular hemorrhage.
Failure to initiate or sustain respiratory effort at birth is fairly common, with 5–10% of newborns requiring some intervention. Infants
with primary apnea respond to stimulation by establishing normal
breathing. Infants with secondary apnea require ventilatory assistance
to establish spontaneous respiratory effort. Secondary apnea usually
originates as a result of prolonged interruption of adequate oxygen
delivery in the perinatal period.
Immediately after birth, all term infants should be dried, warmed,
and stimulated. If the infant does not need resuscitation, these steps
can occur on the mother’s abdomen while delayed cord clamping is
taking place. Simultaneously, the infant’s tone, respiratory effort, and
heart rate should be assessed (Fig. 123.2). If the infant remains apneic
or bradycardic (heart rate is <100 beats/min) after stimulation, positive pressure ventilation (PPV) should be given via face mask. PPV
should be initiated at peak inspiratory pressures of approximately 20
cm H2O, positive end-­expiratory pressures of 5 cm H2O at a rate of
40-­60 breaths/min.
At the same time PPV is initiated, a pulse oximeter should be
placed on the right hand (preductal). Resuscitation with room air
in term infants is effective and may reduce the risk of hyperoxia,
which is associated with decreased cerebral blood flow and generation of oxygen free radicals. Room air, which is 21% fraction
of inspired oxygen (Fio2), is the preferred initial gas for neonatal
resuscitation in infants ≥35 weeks. O2 concentration should then be
titrated as needed to meet targeted peripheral oxygen saturations
(>80% by 5 minutes), as defined by normal reference range by minute of life (see Fig. 123.2; see the following section on “Resuscitation
of the Preterm Infant”).
The most important sign of effective ventilation is a rise in heart rate.
Additional signs include adequate chest rise, symmetric breath sounds,
increasing O2 saturation, spontaneous respirations, and improved
tone. If after 30 seconds of providing PPV there is no response in heart
rate, corrective steps should be performed to improve ventilation. The six

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 123 u Neonatal Resuscitation ­and Delivery Room Emergencies

1071

confirm accurate ETT position is exhaled CO2 detection. A laryngeal
mask airway is an alternative method to establish an airway, especially
if face mask PPV is ineffective or providers skilled in intubation are
unavailable.
For most infants, the underlying cause for a persistently low heart
rate (<60 beats/min) is not a primary cardiac cause, but instead the
result of ineffective ventilation. Therefore if the heart rate remains
<60 beats/min after 60 seconds of PPV with corrective MRSOPA
steps, the infant should be intubated (if not already done) to achieve
effective ventilation. Once the infant is intubated, if the heart rate
remains <60 beats/min, chest compressions should be initiated with
continued ventilation, and Fio2 should be increased to 100%. Chest
compressions should be initiated over the lower third of the sternum at a rate of 90 per minute. A provider, separate from the person
providing ventilation, is needed to administer chest compressions.
The thumb technique should be used for chest compressions; the
tips of both thumbs are used to depress the sternum, with the fingers on each side encircling the chest; this is the preferred method
to administer chest compressions, because it has been shown to
achieve a higher blood pressure, increase coronary perfusion, and
result in less fatigue. In infants, regardless of whether an alternative airway has been secured, chest compressions are always coordinated with PPV. The ratio of compressions to ventilation is 3:1
(90 compressions:30 breaths). Chest compressions should continue
uninterrupted for 60 seconds before reassessing heart rate to determine next steps.
Medications are rarely required, but epinephrine should be administered when the heart rate is <60 beats/min after 60 seconds of combined ventilation and chest compressions or during asystole. An
intravenous route is recommended for epinephrine administration.
The umbilical vein can generally be readily cannulated and is the preferred method for administration of medications and volume expanders during neonatal resuscitation (Fig. 123.3). An intraosseous route is
another option if umbilical venous access is not obtained. Epinephrine
(initial dose recommendation of 0.02 mg/kg intravenously/intraosseously followed by a 3-­mL flush) is given for asystole or for continued
heart rate <60 beats/min after 60 seconds of combined resuscitation.
The dose may be repeated every 3-­5 minutes. Epinephrine may also be
given through the ETT (0.1 mg/kg). If adequate resuscitation continues for 20 minutes without a detectable heart rate, it is reasonable to
discuss redirection of care with the team and family and to stop resuscitative efforts.

*

© 2020 American Heart Association

Fig. 123.2 Newborn resuscitation algorithm. CPAP, Continuous

positive airway pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; ETT, endotracheal
tube; HR, heart rate; IV, intravenous; PPV, positive pressure ventilation;
UVC, umbilical venous catheter. (From Aziz K, Lee HC, Escobedo MB,
et al. Part 5: Neonatal Resuscitation: 2020 American Heart Association
Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation 2020;142[16_suppl_2]:S524–S550. Fig. 1.)

ventilation corrective steps can be remembered with the mnemonic
MRSOPA: mask readjustment, reposition the head, suction mouth and
nose, open the mouth, pressure increase, and alternative airway.
Causes of poor response to ventilation are mask leak, airway
obstruction, insufficient pressure, pleural effusions, pneumothorax,
excessive air in the stomach leading to abdominal competition, hypovolemia, diaphragmatic hernia, or prolonged intrauterine asphyxia.
For infants who do not respond to noninvasive PPV after corrective
steps have been taken, endotracheal intubation should be performed.
For infants with an otherwise normal airway weighing <1,000 g, ETT
size is usually 2.5 mm; for infants 1,000-­2,000 g, 3 mm; and for infants
>2,000 g, 3.5 mm. A general rule for depth of insertion from upper lip
in centimeters is 6 + infant’s weight in kilograms. The best method to

RESUSCITATION OF THE PRETERM INFANT

Resuscitation of the preterm infant should follow the same steps as a
term infant, with some special considerations. Whereas resuscitation
of term infants should start with room air, resuscitation of preterm
infants <35 weeks’ gestation should be initiated with Fio2 between
21% and 30%. Pulse oximetry of the preductal (right) hand should be
used to titrate O2 concentrations for targeted saturations per the NRP
algorithm (see Fig. 123.2). Most very low birthweight infants will need
more than 30% once titration begins.
Special attention should be paid to keeping the preterm infant warm
in the delivery room. Quality improvement projects have initiated bundles to improve admission temperatures of preterm infants to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and have included such interventions
as higher ambient temperatures in the delivery room, immediate placement of preterm infants into a plastic bag or under plastic wrap rather
than drying, and exothermic mattress for resuscitation and transport
of the preterm infant.

SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES IN THE DELIVERY ROOM
Meconium
Meconium staining of the amniotic fluid may be an indication of fetal
stress. All infants born through meconium-­stained amniotic fluid
(regardless if the infant is vigorous or nonvigorous) should receive
the same initial steps of neonatal resuscitation as infants without

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1072 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
infant meets formal criteria for moderate to severe encephalopathy and
qualifies for therapeutic hypothermia (see Chapter 122.4).

Airway Anomalies

Hypoplasia of the mandible with posterior displacement of the
tongue may result in upper airway obstruction (Pierre Robin, Stickler, DiGeorge, and other syndromes; see Chapters 118 and 357).
Symptoms may sometimes be temporarily relieved by pulling the
tongue or mandible forward or placing the infant in the prone
position. Other rare anatomic causes of upper airway obstruction
at birth include laryngeal atresia or stenosis, teratomas, hygromas,
and oral tumors. Critical fetal and then neonatal airway obstruction
represents an emergency in the delivery room. High-­risk perinatal
care has led to the more frequent prenatal diagnosis of these disorders. When diagnosed prenatally, planning can identify the location of delivery and interventions available at delivery. The ex utero
intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure allows time to secure
the airway in an infant known prenatally to have critical airway
obstruction, before the infant is separated from the placenta (Fig.
123.4; see Chapter 118). Uteroplacental gas exchange is maintained
throughout the procedure.

Pulmonary Disorders

Fig. 123.3 Emergently placed umbilical venous catheter suitable for
neonatal resuscitation.

meconium-­stained fluid and should be assessed as any other infant.
Tracheal intubation for meconium aspiration may delay the initiation
of effective PPV and ultimately delay effective gas exchange and is not
indicated.

Placental Abruption

Placental abruption (abruptio placentae) or uterine rupture at
birth can lead to acute fetal blood loss and a hypovolemic, anemic
infant at delivery. Infants can present pale and apneic with poor
tone, decreased perfusion, and bradycardia. In addition to performing routine neonatal resuscitation, when an infant is suspected to
be symptomatic from acute blood loss, an emergency low-­lying
umbilical venous catheter (UVC) or interosseous needle should be
placed and emergent type O Rh-­negative blood should be obtained.
In acute blood loss, the blood should be administered as quickly as
possible in 10 mL/kg aliquots in the delivery room. Adequate communication between obstetrics and pediatrics regarding suspected
acute blood loss is crucial to early recognition and treatment of the
infant.

Neonatal Encephalopathy

Infants with neonatal encephalopathy are born with abnormal neurologic function, including level of consciousness, muscle tone, apnea,
and reflexes. Although there are many possible etiologies, when
symptoms are accompanied by a defined perinatal event such as cord
prolapse or placental abruption, hypoxic-­ischemic brain injury is the
presumed cause. These infants are often born with impaired respiratory drive. Immediately after initial resuscitation and stabilization, a
thorough neurologic examination should be performed to assess if the

Both congenital and acquired abnormalities can contribute to respiratory failure in the neonate. A scaphoid abdomen suggests a diaphragmatic hernia, as does asymmetry in contour or movement of the chest.
An infant with a known diaphragmatic hernia should be immediately
intubated in the delivery room and an orogastric tube placed to avoid
gaseous distention of the bowel from crying or PPV. The infant should
then be transferred to a tertiary referral center for surgical evaluation
and treatment (see Chapter 124.1).
In infants with a prenatal diagnosis of hydrops, pleural effusions
may be present at delivery, preventing adequate lung expansion and
gas exchange. Similarly, infants requiring PPV in the delivery room
are at risk for pneumothorax. Infants with pulmonary hypoplasia
or meconium-­stained fluid are at increased risk of this complication. Clinically, infants with a pleural effusion or pneumothorax
present with respiratory distress and hypoxia, with diminished
breath sounds on the affected side. Transillumination may be helpful to confirm the diagnosis. Emergency evacuation of a pneumothorax or pleural effusion without radiographic confirmation is
indicated in an infant who is unresponsive to resuscitation efforts
and has asymmetric breath sounds, bradycardia, and cyanosis. An
angiocatheter attached to a stopcock and syringe should be used
for evacuation. For a pleural effusion, with the infant in the supine
position, the angiocatheter should be inserted in the fourth or fifth
intercostal space in the anterior axillary line and directed posteriorly to evacuate the fluid. For a pneumothorax, an angiocatheter
can be inserted in the fourth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line or the second intercostal space in the midclavicular line
and air evacuated (see Chapter 124).

Abdominal Wall and Neural Tube Defects

Appropriate management of patients with abdominal wall defects
(omphalocele, gastroschisis) in the delivery room prevents excessive fluid loss and minimizes the risk for injury to the exposed
viscera. Gastroschisis is the more common defect, and typically
the intestines are not covered by a membrane. The infant’s lower
body, including exposed intestines, should be gently placed in a
sterile clear plastic bag after delivery. A membrane often covers an
omphalocele, and care should be taken to prevent its rupture. The
omphalocele should either be wrapped in a sterile dressing or the
infant’s lower body, including the omphalocele, which should be
placed within a sterile bag. With both defects, a nasogastric tube
should be placed, and the infant transferred to a tertiary referral
center for surgical consultation and evaluation for associated anomalies (see Chapter 144).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 123 u Neonatal Resuscitation ­and Delivery Room Emergencies

1073

Fig. 123.4 Ex utero intrapartum ther-

apy (EXIT) procedure. Baby with teratoma and critical high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS). Trachea is
displaced to the lateral neck. (Courtesy
Dr. Mark Wulkan, Pediatric Surgery,
Emory University.)

Similarly, infants born with neural tube defects such as a myelomeningocele need special care at delivery to protect the exposed neural
tube tissue from trauma and infection; infants should be placed on
their side or abdomen for resuscitation. The site of the neural tube
defect should be covered with a moist sterile dressing to prevent drying
and infection. The infant should then be transferred to a tertiary referral center for surgical evaluation and treatment.

Brachial Plexus Injuries

INJURY DURING DELIVERY
Central Nervous System

The “golden hour” after a baby’s birth should emphasize effective neonatal resuscitation, postresuscitation care, prevention of hypothermia
(including maternal skin-­to-­skin contact), immediate breastfeeding
if able, prevention of hypoglycemia, and therapeutic hypothermia for
cases of moderate to severe neonatal encephalopathy (birth asphyxia).
After supportive measures have stabilized the infant’s condition, a specific diagnosis should be established and appropriate continuing treatment instituted.
For infants who receive more intensive resuscitation, a plan for
ongoing monitoring and treatment should be established. These
infants may experience ongoing acidosis, electrolyte abnormalities,
hypo-­or hyperglycemia, impaired thermoregulation, and respiratory insufficiency. If infection is suspected, appropriate antibiotics
should be started as soon as possible. Severe neonatal encephalopathy may also depress myocardial function and cause cardiogenic
shock despite the recovery of heart and respiratory rates. Fluids
and dopamine or epinephrine as a continuous infusion should be
started after initial resuscitation efforts, to improve cardiac output
in an infant with poor peripheral perfusion, weak pulses, hypotension, tachycardia, or poor urine output. Regardless of the severity of
neonatal encephalopathy or the response to resuscitation, asphyxiated infants should be monitored closely for signs of multiorgan
hypoxic-­ischemic tissue injury (see Chapter 122.4).

Both extracranial and intracranial birth injuries can be seen in
infants after birth. Extracranial lesions include cephalohematoma,
caput succedaneum, and subgaleal hemorrhage. Intracranial birth
injuries include subdural hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage,
and epidural hematoma. The most common intracranial injury
experienced at birth is subdural hemorrhage, with increasing incidence seen with instrument-­assisted vaginal deliveries (see Chapters 122.1 and 122.2).

Fractures

The clavicle is the most frequently fractured bone during labor and
delivery. It is particularly vulnerable to injury with difficult delivery
of the shoulder in the setting of shoulder dystocia, as well as with
extended arms in breech deliveries. In the treatment of shoulder
dystocia, the obstetrician may intentionally fracture the clavicle so
that delivery can proceed. Symptoms of a clavicular fracture include
an infant not moving the arm freely on the affected side, palpable crepitus or bony irregularity, and asymmetric or absent Moro
reflex on the affected side. The prognosis for this fracture is excellent. Often, no specific treatment is needed, although in some cases
the arm and shoulder on the affected side are immobilized for
comfort.
Fractures of the long bones are fairly rare. Injuries often present
with absent spontaneous movement of the extremity. Associated nerve
involvement may also occur. Treatment involves immobilization of the
affected extremity with a splint and orthopedic follow-­up.

Brachial plexus injuries result from stretching and tearing of
the brachial plexus (spinal roots C5-­
T1) at delivery. Although
shoulder dystocia is associated with an increased risk of brachial
plexus injury, it can also occur during a routine delivery (see
Chapter 122.6).

ONGOING CARE AFTER RESUSCITATION

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1074 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
100

Chapter 124

Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and
Susan S. Cohen
Successful establishment of adequate lung function at birth depends on
airway patency, functional lung development, and maturity of respiratory control. Fetal lung fluid must be removed and replaced with gas.
Functional residual capacity (FRC) must be established and maintained to develop a ventilation-­perfusion relationship that will provide
optimal exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between alveoli and
blood. Pulmonary blood flow increases dramatically, and the newborn
must establish and maintain breathing patterns that are distinct from
fetal breathing movements.

CLEARANCE OF FETAL LUNG FLUID

In utero, lung fluid is actively secreted by epithelial cells into air spaces.
This fluid is essential for normal lung development and severe pulmonary hypoplasia results in infants who are unable to maintain appropriate fetal lung fluid. During birth, fluid must be cleared from the airways
to allow for gas exchange. During birth, the lung epithelial cells must
transition from fluid secreting to fluid absorbing.
Increased intrathoracic pressure from uterine squeeze and flexion of
the infant during delivery likely contribute to movement of fluid out
of the infant’s nose and mouth at delivery. Additionally, inspiration
decreases intrapleural pressure forming a pressure gradient that leads
to the movement of fluid toward the smaller airways and ultimately out
of the air spaces. As fluid moves out of the airways there is an increased
interstitial hydrostatic pressure that contributes to fluid reentering the
airway during each expiration until it is eventually cleared from the
interstitial tissues over the course of hours.

ESTABLISHMENT OF A FUNCTIONAL RESIDUAL
CAPACITY

FRC represents a balance point between collapsing and distending
forces on the lung at end-­expiration. Lung recoil comes from a combination of the intrinsic elasticity of the lung tissue and the surface tension within the lung. Surfactant plays an important role in reducing
surface tension in the newborn. Premature infants and those infants
with insufficient surfactant have an increased tendency toward lung
collapse as observed in respiratory distress syndrome (see Chapter
126). Although the chest wall provides resistance to collapse in older
children and adults, the highly compliant chest wall of the newborn
and particularly the preterm newborn provides little resistance to lung
recoil. Instead, resistance to lung collapse comes from a combination
of lung tissue hydrostatic, osmotic, and oncotic pressures in addition
to expiratory braking maneuvers. The neonate’s expiratory braking
maneuvers include adduction of the glottis and engagement of the diaphragm during expiration. Additional activities such as grunting and
crying further support establishment of FRC.

INCREASED PULMONARY BLOOD FLOW

In utero, the placenta is the source of gas exchange, and blood is
diverted away from the developing lungs by way of the foramen ovale
and ductus arteriosus. Only 10% of the cardiac output passes through
the fetal lung circulation. Following birth, blood flow to the pulmonary
circulation increases due to decreasing pulmonary vascular resistance
and closure of in utero shunts. The decline in pulmonary vascular
resistance is driven by clearance of fetal lung fluid, oxygen-­stimulated

90

SpO2 (%)

Transition to Newborn
Pulmonary Respiration

80

Preductal
Postductal

70

60

50
1

2

3

4

5

6

7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Minutes after birth

Fig. 124.1 Pre-­and postductal Spo2 levels during the first 15 minutes

after birth (median; IQR). Postductal Spo2 levels were significantly lower
than preductal Spo2 levels at 3, 4, 5, 10, and 15 minutes. (Modified from
Mariani G, Dik PB, Ezquer A, et al. Pre-­ductal and post-­ductal O2 saturation in healthy term neonates after birth. J Pediatr. 2007;150:418–421.)

smooth muscle relaxation, and release of nitric oxide. Pulmonary vascular resistance decreases 50% over the first 24 hours and continues
to decline over the first weeks of life. The foramen ovale is functionally closed after birth due to increased systemic vascular resistance
and increased pressures in the left ventricle and left atrium. The ductus arteriosus is slower to close and ductal constriction is driven by a
loss of prostaglandins from the placenta, increased oxygen exposure,
and decreased local nitric oxide. Increasing pulmonary blood flow and
decreasing mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood after birth
contributes to changing saturations in the newborn, which rise from
60% immediately after birth to over 90% by approximately 10 minutes
of life (Fig. 124.1)

BREATHING PATTERNS IN NEWBORNS

Fetal breathing movements can be observed before birth. They are
generally discontinuous and generate only small tidal volumes. Following delivery, the infant must establish a regular breathing pattern
with increased tidal volumes. Triggers driving this change include
increased Paco2, activation of chemoreceptors, and a loss of placental
prostaglandins, which suppress respiratory drive. Within the fetus, low
oxygen tension has an inhibitory effect on breathing. Following birth,
hypoxia will eventually become a driver of respiratory effort, but in the
immediate postpartum period and in the premature infant, hypoxia
may depress respiratory drive.

DISORDERED TRANSITION TO PULMONARY
RESPIRATION

The successful transition from placental derived oxygen delivery to
pulmonary respiration requires timely completion of fetal lung fluid
clearance, creation of FRC, increased pulmonary blood flow, and establishment of normal breathing patterns. Failures in any of these tasks
are associated with respiratory disorders in the neonate. Failure in the
timely clearance of fetal lung fluid is associated with transient tachypnea of the newborn (see Chapter 128). An inability to establish FRC
is a feature of respiratory distress syndrome (see Chapter 126). A failure in decreasing pulmonary vascular resistance causes persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (see Chapter 130) and in infants
without appropriate respiratory patterns, apnea (see Chapter 125) is a
presenting concern.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 125 u Apnea

Chapter 125

Apnea
Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and
Susan S. Cohen
Apnea is a prolonged cessation of respiration and must be distinguished from periodic breathing because apnea is often associated
with serious illness. Although there is no universal agreement, apnea
is usually defined as cessation of breathing for a period of ≥20 seconds, or a period <20 seconds that is associated with a change in
tone, pallor, cyanosis, or bradycardia (<80-­100 beats/min). Based
on the absence of respiratory effort and/or airflow, apnea can be
obstructive, central, or mixed. Obstructive apnea is characterized
by absence of airflow but persistent chest wall motion. Pharyngeal
collapse may follow the negative airway pressures generated during
inspiration, or it may result from incoordination of the tongue and
other upper airway muscles involved in maintaining airway patency.
Central apnea is caused by decreased central nervous system (CNS)
stimuli to respiratory muscles and results in both airflow and chest
wall motion being absent. Gestational age (GA) is the most important determinant of respiratory control, with the frequency of central
apnea being inversely related to GA. The immaturity of the brainstem
respiratory centers is manifest by an attenuated response to CO2 and
a paradoxical response to hypoxia that results in central apnea rather
than hyperventilation. Mixed apnea is most often observed in apnea
of prematurity with obstructive apnea preceding central apnea. Short
episodes of apnea are usually central, whereas prolonged ones are
often mixed.

OBSTRUCTIVE APNEA

Obstructive apnea derives from interrupted upper airway flow. Causes
of obstructive apnea can largely be divided into anatomic abnormalities and neuromuscular abnormalities.
Craniofacial disorders are a common cause of obstructive apnea of
the newborn. Micrognathia, retrognathia, or Pierre Robin sequence all
cause upper airway obstruction due to backward dislodgement of the
tongue into the airway. This obstruction may be improved by prone
positioning of the neonate. Although cleft lip and palate are not always
associated with obstructive apnea, infants with these conditions are
at risk for apnea related to abnormal narrowing of the upper airway
structures. Additional anatomic abnormalities that can contribute to
obstructive apnea include narrowing or occlusion of the nasal passages
(i.e., choanal atresia) or narrowing of the airways (i.e., laryngomalacia). Many causes of anatomic obstruction are syndromic and include
skeletal dysplasia, VACTERL association, Joubert syndrome, CHARGE
syndrome, DiGeorge syndrome, and Stickler syndrome.
Neuromuscular weakness can contribute to obstructive apnea via
airway collapse in the setting of low tone. Additionally, respiratory
muscle weakness may impede the infant from overcoming normal airway resistance.

CENTRAL APNEA

Central apnea has a wide range of etiologies and should always
lead to a diagnostic evaluation as it can often be an early warning
sign of clinical decompensation. Table 125.1 provides a framework
for the disease processes that can contribute to apnea. Infection or
metabolic derangements should always be considered as an etiology
for infants with new or worsening apnea. Abnormal CNS control
of breathing can be related to prematurity, but other CNS abnormalities including injury or malformation can contribute to central
apnea. Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome is a rare permanent genetic cause of central apnea that begins in the neonatal
period (see Chapter 468.2).

1075

APNEA OF PREMATURITY

Apnea in preterm infants is defined as cessation of breathing for ≥20
seconds or for any duration if accompanied by cyanosis and bradycardia (<80-­100 beats/min). The incidence of associated bradycardia
increases with the length of the preceding apnea and correlates with
the severity of hypoxia. Short apnea episodes (10 seconds) are rarely
associated with bradycardia, whereas longer episodes (>20 seconds)
have a higher incidence of bradycardia. Bradycardia follows the apnea
by 1-­2 seconds in >95% of cases and is most often sinus. Vagal
responses and rarely heart block are causes of bradycardia without
apnea. Short, self-­resolving oxygen desaturation episodes noted with
continuous monitoring are normal in neonates, and treatment is not
necessary.
Apnea of prematurity results from immature respiratory control,
most frequently occurs in infants <34 weeks of GA, and occurs in the
absence of identifiable predisposing diseases. The incidence of apnea of
prematurity varies inversely with GA. Apnea of prematurity is almost
universal in infants born at <28 weeks of GA, and the incidence rapidly decreases from 85% of infants <30 weeks of GA to 20% of infants
<34 weeks of GA. The onset of apnea of prematurity can be during the
initial days to weeks of age but is often delayed if there is respiratory
distress syndrome (RDS) or other causes of respiratory distress. In premature infants without respiratory disease, apneic episodes can occur
throughout the first 7 postnatal days with equal frequency. In infants
with apnea of prematurity, the events decline significantly by 34 weeks
corrected GA. Resolution may be delayed in infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia (see Chapter 127) because of poorer reserves and an
increased incidence of subglottic stenosis, laryngomalacia, or tracheomalacia, which can contribute to obstructive apneas.

Table 125.1  Potential Causes of Neonatal Apnea and
Bradycardia
Central nervous system

Intraventricular hemorrhage,
drugs, seizures, hypoxic injury,
herniation, neuromuscular
disorders, Leigh syndrome,
brainstem infarction or anomalies
(e.g., olivopontocerebellar
atrophy), transient following
general anesthesia, congenital
central hypoventilation
syndrome

Respiratory

Pneumonia, obstructive airway
lesions, upper airway collapse,
atelectasis, extreme prematurity,
laryngeal reflex, phrenic nerve
paralysis, pneumothorax,
paradoxical response to
hypoxia

Infectious

Sepsis, meningitis (bacterial, fungal,
viral), respiratory syncytial virus,
pertussis

Gastrointestinal

Oral feeding, bowel movement,
necrotizing enterocolitis,
intestinal perforation

Metabolic

↓ Glucose, ↓ calcium, ↓/↑ sodium,
↑ ammonia, ↑ organic acids,
↑ ambient temperature,
hypothermia

Cardiovascular

Hypotension, hypertension, heart
failure, anemia, hypovolemia,
vagal tone

Other

Immaturity of respiratory center
(prematurity); sleep state;
sudden unexpected postnatal
collapse

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1076 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Preterm infants born at <35 weeks of GA are at risk for apnea of
prematurity and therefore should receive cardiorespiratory monitoring. Apnea that occurs in the absence of other clinical signs of illness
in the first 2 weeks in a preterm infant is likely apnea of prematurity;
therefore additional evaluation for other etiologies is often unwarranted. However, the onset of apnea in a previously well preterm neonate
after the second week of life is a critical event that may be associated with
serious underlying pathology. Prompt investigation for sepsis/meningitis, medication side effects, metabolic derangements, structural CNS
anomalies, intracranial hemorrhage, or seizures is warranted.

TREATMENT

Observation is the most common treatment strategy for infants with
obstructive apnea, and temporizing measures including prone positioning can help to minimize symptoms until sufficient patient growth
alleviates the obstruction. The use of supplemental oxygen, nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP), or bilevel positive airway
pressure may facilitate stenting of airways and limit obstructive events.
Surgical interventions depend on the underlying cause and include
supraglottoplasty, palatoplasty, tongue-­
lip adhesion, tongue base
reduction, nasal stent, mandibular distraction, and in severe cases, tracheostomy to bypass areas of obstruction.
For apnea of prematurity, gentle tactile stimulation, or provision of
flow and/or supplemental oxygen by nasal cannula, is often adequate
therapy for mild and intermittent episodes. nCPAP (3-­5 cm H2O) and
high-­flow nasal cannula (HFNC; 1-­4 L/min) are appropriate therapies for mixed or obstructive apnea. The efficacy of both nCPAP and
HFNC is related to their ability to splint the upper airway to prevent
airway obstruction. Additionally, the maintenance of a higher functional residual capacity can decrease the duration of central apnea.
Both are used widely, but nCPAP may be preferred in extremely preterm infants because of its proven efficacy and safety.
Recurrent or persistent apnea of prematurity is effectively treated
with methylxanthines. Methylxanthines increase central respiratory
drive by lowering the threshold of response to hypercapnia as well
as enhancing contractility of the diaphragm. Caffeine and theophylline are similarly effective methylxanthines, but caffeine is preferred
because of its longer half-­life and lower potential for side effects (less
tachycardia and feeding intolerance). In preterm infants, caffeine
reduces the incidence and severity of apnea of prematurity, facilitates
successful extubation from mechanical ventilation, reduces the rate of
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (see Chapter 127), and improves neurodevelopmental outcomes. Caffeine therapy can be safely administered
orally (PO) or intravenously (IV). Generally, infants are given an initial
loading dose of 20 mg/kg of caffeine citrate followed 24 hours later by
once-­daily maintenance doses of 5-­10 mg/kg. Because the therapeutic window is wide and serious side effects associated with caffeine are
rare, monitoring of serum drug concentrations is usually unnecessary.
Monitoring is primarily through observation of vital signs (tachycardia) and clinical response. Higher doses of caffeine may be more effective without serious adverse events, but additional studies are needed
to ensure safety. Studies suggest that early initiation of caffeine, in the
first 3 days of life, in extremely preterm infants improves outcomes.
However, it is reasonable to delay caffeine therapy until apnea occurs
in older infants. Caffeine therapy is usually continued until an infant is
free of clinically significant apnea or bradycardia for 5-­7 days without
positive pressure respiratory support, or at 34 weeks’ postmenstrual age
(PMA).
In an infant with significant anemia, transfusion of packed red blood
cells (RBCs) increases blood O2-­carrying capacity, improves tissue oxygenation, and may be associated with a short-­term reduction in apnea.
However, a long-­term benefit with regard to apnea appears unlikely.
Gastroesophageal reflux (GER) is common in neonates, but despite
being associated with apnea anecdotally, data do not support a causal
relationship between GER and apneic events. In preterm infants, medications that inhibit gastric acid production have potentially harmful
side effects (increased incidence of sepsis, necrotizing enterocolitis,

death) and may increase the incidence of apnea and bradycardia. Therefore the routine use of medications that inhibit gastric acid synthesis
or promote gastrointestinal motility to reduce the frequency of apnea
in preterm infants should be discouraged. Antireflux treatment does
correlate with decreased rates of obstructive apnea; however, this does
not seem to be a causal relationship. Feeding strategies including more
frequent or slower/longer feedings may be considered. Thickening
feedings with xanthan gum is linked to late-­onset necrotizing enterocolitis and should not be attempted. Other thickeners (i.e., rice) are not
nutritionally appropriate for the preterm infant. The use of elemental
or extensively hydrolyzed formulas can decrease transit time and may
decrease symptoms of GER and can be considered in age-­appropriate
populations.

PROGNOSIS

In 92% of infants by 37 weeks’ PMA and in 98% of infants by 40 weeks’
PMA, apnea of prematurity resolves spontaneously. However, infants
born well before 28 weeks’ GA may experience apnea and bradycardic
events until 44 weeks’ PMA. Beyond 44 weeks’ PMA, extreme events
(apnea >30 seconds and/or bradycardia <60 beats/min for >10 seconds)
are very rare. The period that an infant should be observed to ensure
resolution of apnea and bradycardia is not defined and among institutions is highly variable. However, many experts would recommend
that an infant demonstrate an event-­free period of 5-­7 days before
discharge. Although the nature and severity of events should dictate
the length of observation, sufficiently large retrospective cohort studies suggest that a 1–3-­day (infants born at ≥30 weeks’ GA), 9–10-­day
(27-­28 weeks’ GA), or 13–14-­day (<26 weeks’ GA) event-­free period
predicts resolution of apnea in up to 95% of infants successfully. Brief,
isolated bradycardic episodes associated with oral feeding are common
in preterm infants and are generally not considered significant during
the event-­free period.
Despite its high frequency in preterm infants, the harm associated
with apnea of prematurity is unknown. However, apnea of prematurity
does not appear to alter an infant’s prognosis unless it is severe, recurrent, and refractory to therapy. Prompt, effective therapy and careful
monitoring are vital to avoid prolonged, severe hypoxia, which may
increase the risk of death and neurodevelopmental impairment.

Sudden Infant Death Syndrome and Home
Monitoring

Although preterm infants are at higher risk for sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS), apnea of prematurity does not further increase that
risk. The epidemiologic evidence that placing babies supine during
sleep reduces the rate of SIDS deaths by >50% suggests that positioning, and not prematurity, primarily influences the incidence of SIDS.
Supine positioning on a firm sleep surface separate from the parents’
bed, promotion of breastfeeding, and pacifier use during sleep reduce
the incidence of SIDS. Avoidance of cigarette smoke exposure and no
parental use of alcohol or illicit drugs during pregnancy and after birth
are also important in the prevention of SIDS.
In-­home monitoring is an area that has received significant interest in prevention of SIDS. In a large cohort study, episodes of apnea
and bradycardia were not uncommon (severe events detected in 10%
of infants monitored and 2.3% of healthy term infants). Preterm infants
remained at risk for apnea until approximately 43 weeks’ PMA; however, most SIDS deaths occurred after apnea has resolved occurring at
an average of 45.8 weeks’ PMA for premature infants and 52.3 weeks’
PMA for term infants. There was no evidence that home monitoring
impacted the incidence of SIDS. The role for home monitors is likely
limited to premature infants with prolonged or extreme episodes of
apnea (and should be discontinued after 44 weeks’ PMA in this population), infants with specific risk factors for obstructive apnea, or requiring supplemental oxygen or mechanical ventilation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 126 u Respiratory Distress Syndrome (Hyaline Membrane Disease)

Chapter 126

Respiratory Distress
S­ yndrome (Hyaline
­ embrane Disease)
M
Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and
Susan S. Cohen
INCIDENCE

Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) occurs primarily in premature
infants; its incidence is inversely related to gestational age (GA) and
birthweight. It occurs in 60–80% of infants <28 weeks’ GA, in 15–30%
of those between 32 and 36 weeks’ GA, and rarely in those >37 weeks’
GA. The risk for development of RDS increases with maternal diabetes,
multiple births, cesarean delivery, precipitous delivery, asphyxia, cold
stress, and a maternal history of previously affected infants. The risk of
RDS is reduced in pregnancies with chronic or pregnancy-­associated
hypertension, maternal opiate use, prolonged rupture of membranes,
and antenatal corticosteroid prophylaxis.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Surfactant deficiency (decreased production and secretion) is the
primary cause of RDS. In the absence of pulmonary surfactant, significantly increased alveolar surface tension leads to atelectasis, and
the ability to attain an adequate functional residual capacity (FRC) is
impaired. Additionally, insufficient surfactant contributes to heterogenous lung expansion with atelectatic areas remaining unventilated and
progressive overdistension of ventilated regions according to Laplace’s
law (Fig. 126.1).
Although surfactant is present in high concentrations in fetal lung
by 20 weeks of gestation, it does not reach the surface of the lungs until
later. It appears in amniotic fluid between 28 and 32 weeks. Mature
levels of pulmonary surfactant are present usually after 35 weeks of
gestation. The major constituents of surfactant are dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine (lecithin), phosphatidylglycerol, apoproteins (surfactant proteins SP-­A, SP-­B, SP-­C, and SP-­D), and cholesterol (Fig.
126.2). With advancing GA, increasing amounts of phospholipids

A

Surface tension = T
Radius = 2
P=T

P = 2T/r
P = Inward pressure
T = Surface tension
r = Radius

Surface tension = T
Radius = 1
P = 2T

Surface tension = T
Radius = 2
P=T

B

are synthesized and stored in type II alveolar cells (Fig. 126.3). These
surface-­active agents are released into the alveoli, where they reduce
surface tension and help maintain alveolar stability at end-­expiration.
Synthesis of surfactant depends in part on normal pH, temperature,
and perfusion. Asphyxia, hypoxemia, and pulmonary ischemia, particularly in association with hypovolemia, hypotension, and cold stress,
may suppress surfactant synthesis. The epithelial lining of the lungs
may also be injured by high O2 concentrations and mechanical ventilation, thereby further reducing secretion of surfactant.
Atelectasis results in perfused but not ventilated alveoli, causing
hypoxia. Decreased lung compliance, small tidal volumes, increased
physiologic dead space, and insufficient alveolar ventilation eventually
result in hypercapnia. The combination of hypercapnia, hypoxia, and
acidosis produces pulmonary arterial vasoconstriction with increased
right-­to-­left shunting through the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus
and within the lung itself. Progressive injury to epithelial and endothelial cells results from atelectasis (atelectrauma), volutrauma, ischemic
injury, and oxygen toxicity. This injury leads to effusion of proteinaceous material and cellular debris into the alveolar spaces (forming
the classic hyaline membranes) further impairing oxygenation. RDS
represents a vicious cycle of diminished surfactant production, worsening atelectasis, lung injury, and severe hypoxia (Fig. 126.4).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Signs of RDS usually appear within minutes of birth, although they
may not be recognized for several hours in larger premature infants,
until rapid, shallow respirations and cyanosis become more obvious.
A later onset of tachypnea should suggest other conditions. Some
patients require resuscitation at birth because of intrapartum asphyxia
or initial severe respiratory distress (especially with birthweight <1,000
g). Characteristically, tachypnea, prominent (often audible) expiratory
grunting, intercostal and subcostal retractions, nasal flaring, and cyanosis are noted. Breath sounds may be normal or diminished with a
harsh tubular quality, and on deep inspiration, fine crackles may be
heard. The natural course of untreated RDS is characterized by progressive worsening of cyanosis and dyspnea. If the condition is inadequately
treated, blood pressure may fall; cyanosis and pallor increase, and
grunting decreases or disappears, as the condition worsens. Apnea and
irregular respirations are ominous signs requiring immediate intervention. Untreated patients develop a mixed respiratory-­metabolic acidosis with hypoxia and the potential to progress to respiratory failure with
multisystem organ dysfunction due to inadequate oxygen delivery. In
most cases, the signs reach a peak within 3 days, after which improvement is gradual. Improvement is often heralded by spontaneous diuresis and improved blood gas values at lower inspired O2 levels and/or
lower ventilator support. Death can result from severe impairment of
gas exchange, pulmonary air leaks (pulmonary interstitial emphysema,
pneumothorax; see Chapter 132), pulmonary hemorrhage (see Chapter 133), or intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH).

DIAGNOSIS

Surface tension = 1/2T
Radius = 1
P=T

Fig. 126.1 Laplace’s law as it applies to alveolar distension. Laplace’s

law states that the collapsing pressure in the alveolus is directly related
to surface tension and inversely related to alveolar radius. In A the collapsing pressure is higher in the smaller alveoli thus the smaller alveolus
further collapses, and larger alveolus distends leading to asymmetry
in ventilation. In B with surfactant present, the particles become more
densely spaced as the alveolus collapses, which decreases surface tension, and the resulting collapsing pressure is equalized between the
two alveoli.

1077

The clinical course, chest x-­ray findings, and blood gas values help
establish the clinical diagnosis. On chest radiograph, the lungs may
have a characteristic but not pathognomonic appearance that includes
low lung volumes, a diffuse, fine reticular granularity of the parenchyma
(ground-­glass appearance), and air bronchograms (Fig. 126.5). The initial x-­ray appearance is occasionally normal, with the typical pattern
developing during the first day. Considerable variation in radiographic
findings may be seen, especially in infants who have already received
treatment with surfactant replacement and/or positive pressure respiratory support; this variation often results in poor correlation between
radiographic findings and the clinical course. Blood gas findings are
characterized initially by hypoxemia and later by progressive hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and variable metabolic acidosis.
In the differential diagnosis, early-­onset sepsis may be indistinguishable from RDS. In neonates with pneumonia, the chest radiograph may
be identical to that for RDS. Clinical factors such as maternal group B
streptococcal colonization with inadequate intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis, maternal fever (>38.5°C) or chorioamnionitis, or prolonged

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1078 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Phosphatidylglycerol
Other
phospholipids

Neutral
lipids
8%

8%
8%

SP-A

Unsaturated
phosphatidylcholine
20%

6%
SP-B
SP-C
SP-D

Saturated
phosphatidylcholine
50%

Fig. 126.2 Composition of surfactant. SP-­A, Surfactant-­associated

protein A; SP-­
B, surfactant-­
associated protein B; SP-­
C, surfactant-­
associated protein C; SP-­D, surfactant-­associated protein D. (From Jobe
AH, Ikegami M. Biology of surfactant. Clin Perinatol. 2001;28:655–669.)

rupture of membranes (>18 hours) are associated with an increased
risk of early-­onset sepsis. Although complete blood counts are neither
sensitive nor specific in the diagnosis of early-­onset sepsis, the presence
of marked neutropenia has been associated with increased risk. Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN; see Chapter 128) is a common
consideration that may be distinguished from RDS by its shorter and
milder clinical course and is characterized by low or no need for O2
supplementation. Cyanotic congenital heart disease (in particular, total
anomalous pulmonary venous return) can also mimic RDS both clinically and radiographically. Echocardiography with color-­flow imaging can be performed in infants who show no response to surfactant
replacement, to rule out cyanotic congenital heart disease as well as
ascertain patency of the ductus arteriosus and assess pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR). Persistent pulmonary hypertension, aspiration
(meconium, amniotic fluid) syndromes, spontaneous pneumothorax,
pleural effusions, and congenital anomalies (pulmonary congenital airway malformations, pulmonary lymphangiectasia, diaphragmatic hernia, lobar emphysema) must be considered in patients with an atypical
clinical course but can generally be differentiated from RDS through
radiographic and other evaluations (Fig. 126.6).

TYPE II CELL
Golgi
ABCA3
SFTPB
NKX2-1 SFTPC
FOXA2 SFTPD

SP-A
SP-D
SLC34a2

MACROPHAGES
CSF2R

Pr

GM-CSF

n

atio

ABCA3
SP-B
SP-C

rad

Nucleus

Deg

in

ote

SREB
SLC34a2
CEBPa

ER
Gpr116

SCL34a2

pid

pholi

Phos

Recycling

Lysosome

ABCA3
SP-B
SP-C
Immature
lamellar body

Phosphate

Surface film

PC, PG
Cholesterol
SP-B, SP-C, SP-A

ion

ret

c
Se

Aqueous hypophase

Air

Fig. 126.3 Biosynthesis of surfactant involves distinct pathways for surfactant proteins and lipids. SP-­B and SP-­C are trafficked from the endoplasmic

reticulum (ER) to lamellar bodies via the Golgi complex and multivesicular body (MVB); in contrast, surfactant phospholipids are likely directly transported
from the ER to specific lipid importers (ABCA3) in the lamellar body–limiting membrane. Surfactant proteins and lipids are assembled into bilayer membranes that are secreted into the alveolar airspace, where they form a surface film at the air–liquid interface. Cyclical expansion and compression of the
bioactive film results in the incorporation and loss of lipids and proteins from the multilayered surface film. Surfactant components removed from the film
are degraded in alveolar macrophages or are taken up by type II epithelial cells for recycling or degradation in the lysosome. The MVB plays a key part in
the integration of pathways for surfactant synthesis, recycling, and degradation. NKX2-­1, FOXA2, SREBP, and CEBPα are transcription factors regulating
surfactant protein and lipid synthesis. SLC34a2 is a phosphate transporter. Gpr116 is a membrane receptor regulating surfactant secretion. ABCA3, ATP-­
binding cassette transporter A3; GM-­CSF, granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PG, phosphatidylglycerol; SP, surfactant proteins. (From Polin RA, Abman SH, Rowitch DH, Benits WE, eds. Fetal and Neonatal Physiology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 75.3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 126 u Respiratory Distress Syndrome (Hyaline Membrane Disease)
Although rare, genetic disorders may contribute to respiratory distress. Abnormalities in surfactant protein B and C genes as well as a
gene responsible for transporting surfactant across membranes, ABC
transporter 3 (ABCA3), are associated with severe and often lethal
familial respiratory disease. Congenital alveolar proteinosis (congenital surfactant protein B deficiency) is a rare familial disease that
manifests as severe and lethal RDS in predominantly term and near-­
term infants (see Chapter 434). In atypical cases of RDS, a lung profile
(lecithin:sphingomyelin ratio and phosphatidylglycerol determination) performed on a tracheal aspirate can be helpful in establishing
a diagnosis of surfactant deficiency. Other familial causes of neonatal
Prematurity
C-section
Intrapartum asphyxia

Familial predisposition
Acidosis
Diminished
surfactant

Impaired
cellular
metabolism

1079

respiratory distress (not RDS) include mucopolysaccharidosis, acinar
dysplasia, pulmonary lymphangiectasia, and alveolocapillary dysplasia.
Evaluation for these disorders should be pursued with the assistance of
pediatric pulmonologists and geneticists. Evaluation may include lung
imaging, fluid sampling, tissue biopsy, and genetic testing.

PREVENTION

Avoidance of unnecessary or poorly timed early (<39 weeks’ GA)
cesarean delivery or induction of labor and appropriate management
of high-­risk pregnancy and labor (including administration of antenatal corticosteroids) are important preventive strategies. Strategies to
prevent preterm birth include antenatal use of progesterone; measurement of cervical length and cerclage placement as indicated; and use of
antibiotics, tocolytics, and magnesium for threatened preterm labor. In
cases where premature delivery cannot be avoided, the transfer of the
mother to an institution with appropriate neonatal care capabilities can
improve early management of RDS. Antenatal and intrapartum fetal

Progressive
atelectasis

Alveolar
hypoperfusion

Hypoventilation
(disturbed V/Q)

Pulmonary
vasoconstriction

pCO2’ pO2’ pH

Neonatal asphyxia
Hypothermia
Apnea

Hypotension
“shock”

Hypovolemia

Fig. 126.4 Contributing factors in the pathogenesis of hyaline membrane disease. The potential “vicious circle” perpetuates hypoxia and
pulmonary insufficiency. V/Q, Ventilation-­perfusion ratio. (From Farrell
P, Zachman R. Pulmonary surfactant and the respiratory distress syndrome. In Quilligan EJ, Kretchmer N, eds. Fetal and Maternal Medicine.
New York: Wiley; 1980.)

Fig. 126.5 Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) of the newborn (hyaline membrane disease [HMD]). There is a diffuse ground-­glass or finely
granular appearance (circle) in a bilateral and symmetric distribution.
Hypoaeration is seen in nonventilated lungs (double arrow). (From Herring W. Learning Radiology: recognizing the Basics, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 28.2.)

Neonate with acute respiratory distress
Yes

Abnormal
lungs by chest
radiograph

No
Abnormalities in

Common
Respiratory distress
syndrome
Transient
tachypnea
Pneumonia
Aspiration syndromes
Pneumothorax and
air leaks
Pulmonary edema
Pleural effusion
Pulmonary hemorrhage

Uncommon
Diaphragmatic hernia
Perfusion
NeuroDiaphragm
Tracheoesophageal
BP
muscular
or chest
fistula
HCT
findings
wall
Cysts and tumors
Congenital lobar
emphysema
Asphyxia
Chest wall
Anemia
Pulmonary hypoplasia
Intracranial
disorders
Polycythemia
Accessory or sequestered lobes
hemorrhage
Diaphragmatic
Hypotension
Pulmonary
Neuromuscular
disorders
Hypovolemia
lymphangiectasia
disorders
Pulmonary
Drugs
arteriovenous fistula
Pulmonary alveolar
capillary dysplasia
CVS
Other
Primary ciliary
Airway
Abdominal
dyskinesia
findings
or mixed

findings

Upper airway
obstructing
lesions
Laryngeal
Lower airway

or echo
Persistent fetal
circulation
Cyanotic congenital
heart disease
Congestive heart
failure

findings

Ascites
Necrotizing
enterocolitis
Abdominal mass
Omphalocele
Gastroschisis

findings
Sepsis
Congenital lactic
acidosis
Hypothermia,
cold stress
Hyperthermia
Hypoglycemia
Methemoglobinemia

Fig. 126.6 Neonate with acute res-

piratory distress. BP, Blood pressure;
CVS, chorionic villus sampling; HCT,
hematopoietic cell transplant. (From
Battista MA, Carlo WA. Differential diagnosis of acute respiratory distress
in the neonate. In Frantz ID, ed. Tufts
University of School of Medicine and
Floating Hospital for Children Reports
on Neonatal Respiratory Diseases. Vol.
2. Issue 3. Newtown, PA: Associates in
Medical Marketing Co.; 1992.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1080 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
monitoring may decrease the risk of fetal asphyxia; asphyxia is associated with an increased incidence and severity of RDS.
Administration of antenatal corticosteroids to women before 37
weeks of gestation significantly reduces the incidence and mortality
of RDS as well as overall neonatal mortality. Antenatal corticosteroids
also reduce (1) overall mortality, (2) admission to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and need for/duration of ventilatory support,
and (3) incidence of severe IVH, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), and
neurodevelopmental impairment. Betamethasone and dexamethasone
have both been used antenatally. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends antenatal corticosteroids for all women presenting between 24-­and 34-­weeks’ gestation
in preterm labor. Antenatal corticosteroid use before 24 weeks’ gestation for preterm labor or rupture of membranes should be driven by
the family’s preferences for intervention. ACOG recommends a single
course of antenatal corticosteroid for mothers presenting between 34-­
and 36-­weeks’ gestation in preterm labor if no previous steroids have
been given during the pregnancy. One repeat course of antenatal corticosteroids may be considered for mothers at risk of preterm delivery
more than 14 days from the prior course of steroids and with a GA less
than 34 weeks. Additional repeat courses of antenatal corticosteroids
are not recommended due to impact on birthweight, cerebral myelination, and lung growth. Antenatal corticosteroids do not increase the
risk of maternal death, chorioamnionitis, or puerperal sepsis.

TREATMENT

The basic defect requiring treatment in RDS is inadequate pulmonary
O2-­CO2 exchange. Basic supportive care (thermoregulatory, circulatory, fluid, electrolyte, and respiratory) is essential while FRC is established and maintained. Because most cases of RDS are self-­limited, the
goal of treatment is to minimize abnormal physiologic variations and
superimposed iatrogenic problems. Treatment of infants with RDS is
best carried out in the NICU.
Continuous monitoring of vital signs, review of chest radiography,
and monitoring of blood gas values guides therapy in RDS. Oxygenation (So2) should be assessed by continuous pulse oximetry. Capillary
blood samples are of limited value for determining Po2 but may be useful for Pco2 and pH monitoring. Arterial blood gas samples provide
the most accurate assessment of oxygenation. Monitoring of blood gas
parameters and mean arterial blood pressure through an umbilical or
peripheral arterial catheter is useful in managing the shocklike state
that may occur during the initial hours in premature infants who have
been asphyxiated or have severe RDS. Because of the difficulty in distinguishing group B streptococcal or other bacterial infections from
RDS, empirical antibiotic therapy should be indicated until the results
of blood cultures are available. Penicillin or ampicillin with an aminoglycoside is suggested, although the choice of antibiotics should be
based on the recent pattern of bacterial sensitivity in the hospital where
the infant is being treated (see Chapter 129).

Nasal Continuous Positive Airway Pressure

Warm, humidified oxygen should be provided at a concentration
sufficient to keep Pao2 between 50 and 70 mm Hg (91–95% Sao2) to
maintain normal tissue oxygenation while minimizing the risk of O2
toxicity. If there is significant respiratory distress (severe retractions
and expiratory grunting) or if Sao2 cannot be kept >90% at an Fio2 of
≥40, applying nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) at
5-­8 cm H2O is indicated and usually produces a rapid improvement
in oxygenation. Nasal CPAP reduces collapse of surfactant-­deficient
alveoli and improves both FRC and ventilation-­perfusion matching.
Early use of nCPAP for stabilization of at-­risk preterm infants beginning early (in the delivery room) reduces the need for mechanical ventilation. Alternatives to nCPAP include noninvasive positive pressure
ventilation (NIPPV) and high-­flow nasal cannula (HFNC). NIPPV is
generally unsynchronized, but intermittent higher pressures do appear
to improve oxygenation and ventilation over several hours. Additionally, NIPPV may limit apnea as a cause of respiratory failure. HFNC
used heated and humidified oxygen flow generally upward of 2 L/min
to provide distending pressures to the airways. The distending pressure

is variable, which may contribute to HFNC failure. The amount of
nCPAP required usually decreases after approximately 72 hours of age,
and most infants can be weaned from nCPAP shortly thereafter.

Surfactant Replacement Therapy

Surfactant deficiency is the primary pathophysiology of RDS. Immediate effects of surfactant replacement therapy include improved alveolar-­
arterial oxygen gradients, reduced ventilatory support, increased
pulmonary compliance, and improved chest radiograph appearance. In
the past, intratracheal surfactant replacement for symptomatic premature infants immediately after birth (prophylactic) or during the first
few hours of life (early rescue) showed reduced air leak and mortality from RDS. However, substantial evidence supports the feasibility
and efficacy of nCPAP as the primary means of respiratory support for
preterm infants with RDS with addition of surfactant based on clinical
indication. Nasal CPAP started at birth is as effective as prophylactic or
early surfactant and is associated with a reduction in bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). Nasal CPAP is therefore the approach of choice
for the delivery room management of a preterm neonate at risk for RDS.
In neonates with RDS who fail nCPAP and require intubation
and mechanical ventilation, treatment with endotracheal surfactant
should be initiated immediately to avoid lung injury. Assisted ventilation and surfactant are indicated for infants with RDS who cannot
keep oxygen saturation >90% while breathing 40% oxygen and receiving nCPAP. Delays in delivering surfactant once clinical criteria are
met is associated with poorer outcomes including increased mortality, increased incidence of pulmonary air leak, and increased risk for
BPD. Repeated dosing is given every 6-­12 hours for a total of two
to four doses, depending on the preparation. Exogenous surfactant
should be given by a physician who is qualified in neonatal resuscitation and respiratory management. Additional required on-­site staff
support includes nurses and respiratory therapists experienced in the
ventilatory management of preterm infants. Bolus delivery of surfactant is generally associated with better distribution throughout the
lungs and faster improvement. Lung recruitment strategies include
modest increase in tidal volume or positive end-­expiratory pressure
(PEEP) before surfactant administration, which may improve distribution. Appropriate monitoring equipment (radiology, blood gas
laboratory, pulse oximetry) must also be available. Complications
of surfactant replacement therapy include transient hypoxia, hypercapnia, bradycardia and hypotension, blockage of endotracheal tube
(ETT), and pulmonary hemorrhage.
A number of surfactant preparations are available, including synthetic surfactants and natural surfactants derived from animal sources.
There do not appear to be significant, consistent benefits to one preparation over another. Infants requiring ventilator support after 1 week of
age may experience transient episodes of surfactant dysfunction temporally associated with episodes of infection and respiratory deterioration. Surfactant treatment may be beneficial in these infants.
Recognizing the benefits of surfactant replacement therapy, in addition to the potential protective effects of prophylactic nCPAP, some
experts recommend intubation for prophylactic or early rescue surfactant replacement therapy, followed by extubation back to nCPAP
immediately once the infant is stable (usually within minutes). This
method is commonly referred to as intubate, surfactant, and extubate
(INSURE). A variation of the INSURE method has evolved known as
MIST (minimally invasive surfactant therapy) or LISA (less invasive
surfactant administration), in which a small feeding tube, rather than
an ETT, is used to deliver intratracheal surfactant to a spontaneously
breathing infant on nCPAP. LISA and/or MIST are increasingly being
utilized as the preferred method for delivering surfactant in infants
who are not anticipated to require prolonged invasive ventilation. The
combination of LISA, antenatal corticosteroids, nCPAP, and limitation
of positive pressure ventilation in the delivery room was associated
with decreased rates of BPD when compared to INSURE. Other methods of surfactant delivery are under investigation including the use of
laryngeal mask airway and the use of nebulized surfactant to avoid airway manipulation altogether. In two studies of aerosolized surfactant,
the need for intubation was reduced by ∼50%.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 126 u Respiratory Distress Syndrome (Hyaline Membrane Disease)
Mechanical Ventilation

Infants with respiratory failure or persistent apnea require assisted
mechanical ventilation. Strict definitions for respiratory failure in
extremely preterm infants with RDS are not agreed on universally,
but reasonable measures of respiratory failure are (1) arterial blood
pH <7.20, (2) Paco2 ≥60 mm Hg, (3) Sao2 <90% at O2 concentration of 40% and nCPAP of 5-­8 cm H2O, and (4) persistent or severe
apnea. The goal of mechanical ventilation is to improve oxygenation
and ventilation without causing pulmonary injury or oxygen toxicity.
Acceptable ranges of arterial blood gas (ABG) values vary significantly
among institutions but generally range from Pao2 50-­70 mm Hg (Spo2
>90%), Paco2 45-­65 mm Hg (and higher after the first few days when
risk of IVH is less), and pH 7.20-­7.35. During mechanical ventilation,
oxygenation is improved by increasing either Fio2 or the mean airway pressure. The mean airway pressure can be increased by raising
the peak inspiratory pressure (PIP), inspiratory time, ventilator rate, or
PEEP. Adjustment in PEEP is usually most effective; however, excessive
PEEP may impede venous return, thereby reducing cardiac output and
O2 delivery (see Chapter 89.1). PEEP levels of 4-­6 cm H2O are usually
safe and effective and assist in establishing FRC. CO2 elimination is
determined by the minute ventilation, which is a product of the tidal
volume (dependent on the inspiratory time and PIP) and ventilator
rate. Ventilator settings typically include a tidal volume of 4-­6 mL/kg
and a starting rate of approximately 40 breaths/min. With use of high
ventilatory rates, relatively short inspiratory time and sufficient expiratory time should be allowed to avoid air trapping and inadvertent
PEEP.
Synchronized intermittent mechanical ventilation (SIMV) delivered by time-­cycled pressure-­limited, continuous flow ventilators is
a common method of conventional ventilation for newborns. With
pressure-­limited SIMV, a set PIP is delivered in synchrony with the
patient’s own breaths for a specified rate per minute. For breaths above
the set rate, pressure support breaths (8-­10 cm H2O above PEEP) are
provided to help overcome the resistance associated with spontaneous
breathing through the ETT. In pressure-­limited ventilation, the delivered tidal volume is directly proportional to the respiratory compliance. Rapid changes in compliance occur with surfactant replacement
therapy, requiring careful attention to tidal volumes and appropriate
adjustments in PIP. In volume-­targeted ventilation a specific tidal volume is set, and the PIP required to deliver it varies inversely with the
respiratory compliance. Studies indicate that lung damage is related
to recurrent lung collapse and overdistension rather than high pressures, thus volume-­targeted ventilation may represent the most lung
protective strategy of conventional ventilation. Evidence suggests that
volume-­targeted ventilation results in fewer pulmonary air leaks and
may improve survival without BPD.
Neurally adjusted ventilatory assist (NAVA) is a ventilator strategy
that integrates electrical signals from the diaphragm to synchronize
ventilator breaths with the patient. Increased diaphragmatic electrical signal indicates the impending onset of a breath. The strength of
electrical signal indicates the size of breath intended by the patient.
Using this strategy, the timing and tidal volume can be customized to
the patient on a breath-­by-­breath basis, and this is believed to decrease
overall pressures required and limit lung damage. NAVA technology can also be used to synchronize noninvasive ventilation. To date
there is insufficient evidence to compare the outcomes of infants with
RDS initially managed on NAVA ventilation to those managed with
pressure-­limited or volume-­limited SIMV.
High-­frequency ventilation (HFV) achieves desired alveolar ventilation by using smaller tidal volumes and higher rates (300-­1,200
breaths/min or 5-­20 Hz). This ventilation strategy maintains sustained
alveolar expansion and therefore limits injury associated with recurrent atelectasis. HFV may improve elimination of CO2 and improve
oxygenation in patients who show no response to conventional ventilators, as well as those who have severe RDS, interstitial emphysema,
recurrent pneumothoraces, or meconium aspiration pneumonia.
High-­frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) and high-­frequency
jet ventilation (HFJV) are the most frequently used methods. There is
not strong evidence to favor HFOV over HFJV or vice versa. Many

1081

investigators have examined the use of HFV as a primary mode of ventilation in infants with RDS. There is some evidence that HFV may
result in decreased rates of BPD and pulmonary air leak when compared to pressure-­limited SIMV; however, superiority over volume-­
targeted SIMV has not been consistently demonstrated.

Permissive Hypercapnia and Avoidance of Hyperoxia

Permissive hypercapnia is a strategy for management of patients
receiving ventilatory support in whom priority is given to limiting
ventilator-­associated lung injury by tolerating relatively high levels of
Paco2 (>60-­70 mm Hg). Permissive hypercapnia can be implemented
during nCPAP and mechanical ventilation but has not been shown to
significantly impact outcomes. Hypocarbia is associated with poorer
outcomes; therefore careful monitoring of Pco2 should be undertaken
and moderate hypercapnia (>40-­50 mmHg) can be tolerated. Hyperoxia may also contribute to lung injury in preterm infants. However,
a lower target range of oxygenation (85–89%) compared with a higher
range (91–95%) increases mortality and does not alter rates of BPD,
BPD/death, blindness, or neurodevelopmental impairment. Therefore the currently recommended range of oxygen saturation targets is
91–95%.

Discontinuation of Mechanical Ventilation

Strategies for weaning infants from ventilators vary widely and are
influenced by lung mechanics as well as the availability of ventilatory
modes. Extubation to nCPAP prevents postextubation atelectasis and
reduces the need for reintubation. NIPPV may further decrease the
need for reintubation in premature infants, particularly when combined with NAVA technology to allow synchronization. HFNC (1-­8 L/
min) oxygen is often used to support term and near-­term infants following extubation and appears to be comparable to nCPAP in preventing postextubation failure. It is not clear whether nCPAP, NIPPV, or
HFNC is more efficacious for promoting normal lung development and
preventing BPD, but there is more evidence associated with nCPAP in
extremely preterm infants. Preloading with methylxanthines enhances
the success of extubation.

Other Pharmacologic Therapies

There are no pharmacologic therapies superior or equal to the efficacy of maintaining FRC (through noninvasive respiratory support
and mechanical ventilation when necessary) and providing surfactant
replacement therapy in the treatment of RDS. Systemic corticosteroids
(predominantly dexamethasone), although effective in improving
respiratory mechanics and reducing the incidence of BPD and death,
are associated with increased risk of cerebral palsy and neurodevelopmental impairment when used indiscriminately (see Chapter 127).
Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) has been evaluated in preterm infants
following the observation of its effectiveness in term and near-­term
infants with hypoxemic respiratory failure. Although iNO improves
oxygenation in term and near-­term infants with hypoxic respiratory
failure or persistent pulmonary hypertension of the neonate, trials in
preterm infants have not shown significant benefit.

PROGNOSIS

Early provision of intensive observation and care of high-­risk newborn
infants can significantly reduce the morbidity and mortality associated
with RDS and other acute neonatal illnesses. Antenatal corticosteroids,
postnatal surfactant use, and improved modes of ventilation have
resulted in low mortality from RDS (approximately 10%). Mortality
increases with decreasing GA. Optimal results depend on the availability of experienced and skilled personnel, care in specially designed
and organized regional hospital units, proper equipment, and lack of
complications such as severe asphyxia, intracranial hemorrhage, or
irremediable congenital malformation. Premature infants with RDS
may go on to develop chronic lung disease and ultimately BPD (see
Chapter 127).
Pulmonary air leaks (pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, pulmonary interstitial emphysema) are observed in 3–9% of extremely
preterm infants with RDS (see Chapter 132). PPV with excessive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1082 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
inspiratory pressures (and therefore excessive tidal volumes), either
during resuscitation at delivery or in the initial hours of mechanical ventilation, is a common risk factor, but air leaks can also occur
in infants breathing spontaneously. Although the risk of air leak was
increased in infants receiving a higher level of nCPAP (up to 8 cm
H2O) in the CPAP or Intubation at Birth (COIN) trial, subsequent trials have not demonstrated a similar effect.
Additional complications of RDS may result from intubation procedures during the treatment of this disorder. Airway injury may occur
at the time of intubation and adequate training is essential. Complications of intubation including ventilator-­associated pneumonias and
transient obstruction of the artificial airway are possible. With prolonged or recurrent intubation local pressure injury can lead to the
development of subglottic stenosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 126.1  Summary of Essential Parameters Used for
Echocardiographic Assessment and
Hemodynamic Evaluation of PDA

PDA EVALUATION CRITERIA
Ductal characteristics

PDA size (small 2 mm) and flow
direction (left to right, right
to left, or bidirectional) and
Doppler assessment with
maximum velocity (Vmax) in
systole and end-­diastole

Assessment of pulmonary over
circulation

Dilated left side of the heart on
visual inspection “eyeballing”
and LA/Ao ratio (mild 1.6) OR
LVEDD (correlate with z scores)
OR LPA diastolic velocity,
mean velocity >0.42 m/sec,
end-­diastolic velocity >0.2 m/
sec OR reversal of mitral E/A
ratio *Document presence or
absence and magnitude of
intraatrial shunt

Assessment of systemic
hypoperfusion

Retrograde or absent blood flow
during diastole in descending
aorta OR celiac trunk or SMA
OR anterior or middle cerebral
artery

126.1 Patent Ductus Arteriosus
Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Susan S.
Cohen

INCIDENCE AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The ductus arteriosus is a fetal vascular shunt connecting the aorta to
the pulmonary artery that allows oxygenated blood to bypass the uninflated fetal lungs and enter the systemic circulation. Following term
birth, the ductus arteriosus constricts and is usually closed in the first
few days of life. Although ductal closure occurs by 72 hours after birth
in almost all term infants, the ductus remains patent in 65% of preterm
infants born at <30 weeks’ GA and in 85% of infants born at 24 weeks’
GA. Risk factors for delayed closure of the PDA include hypoxia, acidosis, increased pulmonary pressure secondary to pulmonary vasoconstriction, systemic hypotension, immaturity, and local release of
prostaglandins (which dilate the ductus). Shunting through the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) may initially be bidirectional or right to
left. As RDS resolves, PVR decreases, and predominantly left-­to-­right
shunting may occur, leading to left ventricular (LV) volume overload
and pulmonary edema.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Manifestations of PDA may include (1) a hyperdynamic precordium,
bounding peripheral pulses, wide pulse pressure, and a machine-­like
continuous or systolic murmur; (2) radiographic evidence of cardiomegaly and increased pulmonary vascular markings; (3) hepatomegaly; (4) increasing oxygen dependence; (5) carbon dioxide retention;
and (6) less often renal failure. Infants with a hemodynamically significant PDA often require escalation of ventilator and oxygen support. The diagnosis is confirmed by echocardiographic visualization
of a PDA with Doppler flow imaging that demonstrates left-­to-­right
shunting. A hemodynamically significant PDA by echocardiogram has
a PDA ≥1.5 mm, unrestricted pulsatile transductal flow, left atrial to
aortic root ratio ≥1.5, and absent (end) diastolic flow in the descending
aorta (Table 126.1).

TREATMENT

Interventions to encourage ductal closure include fluid restriction,
cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors (indomethacin or ibuprofen), acetaminophen, and surgical ligation. Short-­term benefits of any therapy
must be balanced against adverse effects, such as transient renal dysfunction and fluid imbalances associated with indomethacin.
By the time of discharge in the majority of extremely preterm
infants (>90%), the PDA will close spontaneously. Spontaneous ductal closure may be facilitated by general supportive measures, including early (<7 days of age) avoidance of excessive fluid administration
and judicious use of diuretics to manage pulmonary edema. However, within the first week of life, in 30% of infants with birthweight
<1,500 g and 70% of infants <1,000 g, the PDA persists. Although

ESSENTIAL
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC
PARAMETERS FOR
ASSESSMENT OF PDA AND
HEMODYNAMIC EVALUATION

A comprehensive echocardiographic assessment should be performed to rule out
any underlying congenital heart defect or pulmonary hypertension and delineate
orientation of arch (left or right sidedness) before any intervention to close the PDA.
E/A ratio, ratio of the early (E) to late (A) ventricular filling velocities; LA/Ao, left atrial to
aortic ratio; LPA, left pulmonary artery; LVEDD, left ventricular end-­diastolic diameter;
PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; SMA, superior mesenteric artery.
From Singh Y, Fraisse A, Erdeve O, Atasay B. Echocardiographic diagnosis and
hemodynamic evaluation of patent ductus arteriosus in extremely low gestational age
newborn (ELGAN) infants. Front Pediatr. 2020;8:Article 573627. Table 1.

many preterm infants with persistent PDA will remain clinically stable while awaiting spontaneous closure, approximately 60% of infants
<1,000 g will develop significant clinical instability (hypotension,
renal failure, worsening respiratory failure secondary to pulmonary
edema). Pharmacologic and surgical ductal closure may be indicated
in the premature infant with a moderate to large, hemodynamically
significant PDA when there is a delay in clinical improvement or
deterioration.

Pharmacologic Closure

Pharmacologic closure of the PDA has been described using COX
inhibitors that inhibit prostaglandin production, with equivalent efficacy and safety profiles described for ibuprofen and indomethacin. The
efficacy of pharmacologic therapy is inversely proportional to the gestational and postnatal age, and closure is more likely when medication
is administered before 21 days of age. However, successful closure has
been reported up to 8 weeks of age. Whether indomethacin or ibuprofen is used, 20–40% of infants demonstrate treatment failure, and of
those infants, 10–20% require eventual surgical ligation. Rates of recurrence following successful pharmacologic closure in general are low
(<15%). Neither therapy significantly impacts the rate of NEC, BPD,
or mortality. General contraindications to both indomethacin and
ibuprofen include thrombocytopenia (<50,000 platelets/mm3), active
hemorrhage (including severe IVH), NEC or isolated intestinal perforation, elevated plasma creatinine (>1.8 mg/dL), or oliguria (urine
output <1 mL/kg/hr). Importantly, the concomitant use of hydrocortisone and indomethacin in extremely preterm infants must be avoided
because the combination is associated with a dramatic increase in
spontaneous intestinal perforation. Although indomethacin reduces

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 126 u Respiratory Distress Syndrome (Hyaline Membrane Disease)
mesenteric blood flow, mounting experience suggests that low-­volume
trophic enteral feeding during administration is safe.
Prophylactic indomethacin given over the first 72 hours of age to
preterm infants with birthweight <1,000 g reduces the incidence of
severe IVH (grade III/IV), pulmonary hemorrhage, symptomatic
PDA, and need for surgical PDA ligation. Although often implicated in
spontaneous intestinal perforation and NEC, randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) have failed to demonstrate that indomethacin increases
their risk significantly. Short-­term side effects include reductions in
cerebral, mesenteric, and renal blood flow. Oliguria unresponsive to
diuretic therapy is observed frequently. Dosing regimens for indomethacin vary considerably, but it usually is administered as a slow IV
infusion (0.1-­0.2 mg/kg/dose over 30 minutes) every 12-­24 hours for
three doses. A repeat course can be attempted if the duct fails to close
or reopens, but additional (>2) courses do not appear to be efficacious.
Longer courses (5-­7 days) of indomethacin are not recommended
because of to an increased risk of NEC in one trial.
Ibuprofen is as effective as indomethacin in closing a PDA, but ibuprofen is associated with reduced rates of oliguria and a small but significant reduction in the length of mechanical ventilation. Although
higher doses may improve closure rates in the most immature infants,
the typical IV or enteral dosing regimen for ibuprofen is 10 mg/kg for
one dose, followed by two doses of 5 mg/kg every 24 hours. A meta-­
analysis showed that a higher dose of oral ibuprofen using 20 mg/kg per
dose for one dose, followed by 10 mg/kg per dose for two doses 24 hours
apart is superior in closing the PDA compared to indomethacin or the
traditional ibuprofen dosing. As with indomethacin, a repeat course may
be considered, but additional courses of ibuprofen are not efficacious and
not recommended. Risk of NEC is not increased with indomethacin, but
in comparison, ibuprofen reduces the relative risk of NEC. Unlike indomethacin, ibuprofen has not been shown to reduce the risk of severe IVH.
Compared to the IV route, enteral ibuprofen may be more efficacious.
Whether ibuprofen used in combination with hydrocortisone results in
increased risk of spontaneous intestinal perforation is unknown.
Oral acetaminophen has been shown to be an effective medication in
closing the PDA, with fewer side effects than existing agents. It is given
enterally at 15 mg/kg per dose q6h for 3 days. In practice, most clinicians
will use a course of one of the previously mentioned medications as first-­
line therapy (typically ibuprofen) and follow with a second course of acetaminophen in a few days if the PDA remains patent and symptomatic.

Surgical Ligation

The infant whose symptomatic PDA fails to close with pharmacologic
interventions or who has contraindications to COX inhibitors is a
candidate for surgical closure via an open thoracotomy. Although the
long-­term benefits are unclear, surgical ligation in infants born at <28
weeks’ GA and <1,250 g is associated with improved survival. Surgical mortality is very low even in extremely low birthweight (ELBW)
infants. However, postligation cardiac syndrome, a significant drop
in blood pressure 6-­12 hours after ductal ligation, is experienced by
up to 50% of low birthweight (LBW) infants. The hypotension has
been attributed to increased systemic vascular resistance along with
decreased pulmonary venous return, resulting in impaired preload and
LV function. Fluid resuscitation, inotropic support (with dobutamine
or milrinone), and hydrocortisone are usually effective. Other complications of surgery include hemorrhage, pneumothorax, chylothorax,
Horner syndrome, and injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve resulting
in vocal cord dysfunction. Inadvertent ligation of the left pulmonary
artery or the transverse aortic arch has rarely been reported. Increased
rates of neurodevelopmental impairment have been reported following surgical ligation, although a causal relationship remains uncertain. Due to the complications associated with surgical ligation, many

RA

1083

LA

LV
RV

Fig. 126.7 Percutaneous device closure of a PDA using the Amplatzer

Piccolo Occluder. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium;
RV, right ventricle. (From Backes CH, Giesinger RE, Rivera BK, et al.
Percutaneous closure of the patent ductus arteriosus in very low weight
infants: considerations following US Food and Drug Administration approval of a novel device. J Pediatr. 2019;213:218–221.)

centers have moved away from this modality and use a less invasive,
percutaneous approach to PDA closure.

Percutaneous Closure of the Patent Ductus
Arteriosus

Percutaneous closure of the PDA is a safe and effective procedure for
definitive PDA closure. In 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the Amplatzer PiccoloOccluder (Abbott Diagnostics,
North Chicago, IL) for percutaneous PDA closure in preterm infants
weighing 700 g or more (Fig. 126.7). A trial in 100 infants weighing <2
kg showed that this technique of PDA closure is 99% effective with a 2%
risk of adverse events. Although a comparative trial has not been done
against the traditional surgical approach, most US centers use percutaneous closure as the first-­line approach for PDA closure when conservative treatment fails. This procedure is done under cardiac anesthesia
in the catheterization laboratory. The femoral vein is accessed using
modified Seldinger technique, and then, under fluoroscopic guidance,
a catheter is advanced through the femoral vein all through the right
ventricular and across the PDA and the Piccolo device is placed. This
technique permits injection of contrast before and after device placement to ensure appropriate device selection, measure size of the PDA,
and ensure that there is no occlusion of the descending aorta or left
pulmonary artery after device placement. If there is evidence of narrowing, the device can be recaptured and repositioned until a satisfactory result is obtained. Rarely, appropriate device placement is not
achieved, and the patient may have to undergo surgical ligation. The
short-­term complications are bleeding at the insertion site, embolization of the device into the descending aorta or left pulmonary artery,
post-­PDA ligation syndrome, and residual shunting across PDA. The
long-­term complications are unknown, but these patients likely need
surveillance echocardiography until 2-­3 years of age.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1084 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Chapter 127

Bronchopulmonary
Dysplasia
Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Susan S. Cohen

lung injury. Pre-­and postnatal infection, excessive pulmonary blood
flow via the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), excessive administration
of intravenous fluid, and pre-­and postnatal growth failure are also
significantly associated with the development of BPD. In addition,
pulmonary artery hypertension may complicate BPD. Although the
mechanisms are unclear, all likely promote lung injury by necessitating increased or prolonged respiratory support or interfering with lung
repair. Regardless, the result is an interference with normal development of the alveolar-­capillary unit and interference with normal gas
exchange.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
INCIDENCE

Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD; also known as chronic lung disease of prematurity) is a clinical pulmonary syndrome that develops
in the majority of extremely preterm infants and is defined by a prolonged need for respiratory support and supplemental oxygen. Almost
60% of infants born at ≤28 weeks’ gestation will develop BPD, and the
incidence of BPD increases inversely with gestational age. For infants
born at 22-­24 weeks, essentially 100% will develop BPD, the majority
of whom will have moderate to severe disease. As neonatal care has
improved and use of antenatal corticosteroids has become the standard of care, survival of infants born at the extreme of viability has
improved, and BPD is encountered with increased prevalence. In the
United States, an additional 10,000-­15,000 new cases occur annually.
Despite decades of experience, the incidence of BPD remains largely
unchanged.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

BPD develops following preterm birth and the necessary life-­supporting
interventions (particularly mechanical ventilation and supplemental oxygen) that cause neonatal lung injury. As very low birthweight
(VLBW) infant’s survival has improved by advances in neonatal care,
the clinical syndrome associated with BPD has evolved. The clinical,
radiographic, and lung histology of classic BPD described in 1967
by Northway, before widespread use of antenatal corticosteroids and
postnatal surfactant, was that of a disease of preterm infants who were
more mature. Infants who developed BPD initially demonstrated classic respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), but the injurious mechanical ventilation and excessive supplemental oxygen required to support
them resulted in a progressive, severe fibroproliferative lung disease.
Improvements in respiratory care, as well as the introduction of surfactant and antenatal steroids, have allowed for less aggressive respiratory
support strategies, and the need for excessive ventilator support and
high percentages of inspired supplemental oxygen has decreased.
Despite a reduction in the fibroproliferative disease described previously, infants born in the modern era of neonatal care continued to
require supplemental oxygen for prolonged periods. The new BPD is a
disease primarily of infants with birthweight <1,000 g who were born
at <28 weeks’ gestation, some of whom have initially little or no lung
disease at birth but over the first weeks of age experience progressive
respiratory failure. Infants with the new BPD are born at a more immature stage of distal lung development, and lung histology demonstrates
variable saccular wall fibrosis, minimal airway disease, abnormal pulmonary microvasculature development, and alveolar simplification.
Although the etiology remains incompletely understood, the histopathology of BPD indicates interference with normal alveolar septation
and microvascular maturation.
The pathogenesis of BPD is likely multifactorial, but pulmonary
inflammation and lung injury in an immature lung are consistently
observed. Alveolar collapse (atelectrauma) as a consequence of surfactant deficiency, together with ventilator-­induced phasic overdistention of the lung (volutrauma), promotes lung inflammation and injury.
Supplemental oxygen produces free radicals that cannot be metabolized by the immature antioxidant systems of VLBW neonates and further contributes to the injury. Pulmonary inflammation evidenced by
infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages in alveolar fluid, as well as
a host of proinflammatory cytokines, contributes to the progression of

Over the first several weeks of age, infants developing BPD demonstrate persistent, often progressive respiratory distress and the need
for respiratory support and supplemental oxygen. In extremely low
birthweight (ELBW) infants at risk for BPD, the need for supplemental
oxygen over the first 2 weeks of age follows one of three distinct patterns. Infants that follow the natural course of RDS, and by 3-­4 days
of age require minimal (Fio2 <0.25) supplemental oxygen, have a low
(<20%) risk of developing BPD. Infants who initially have a low O2
requirement (Fio2 <0.25) during the first week, but then experience
early pulmonary deterioration and increased O2 requirement (Fio2
>0.25) during the second week, have a modest risk (approximately
50%) of developing BPD. Infants that have an early, persistently high
(Fio2 >0.25) need for supplemental oxygen have a significantly high
(70%) risk of developing BPD.
Respiratory distress, commonly characterized by tachypnea and
retractions, persists or worsens and is associated with hypercapnia,
hypoxia, and oxygen dependence. The chest radiograph evolves from
that of RDS to relative hyperinflation and fine, diffuse interstitial opacities. Wandering atelectasis is common. In the most severe cases, usually associated with prolonged mechanical ventilation and chronically
high supplemental oxygen needs, frank cystic changes and/or pneumatoceles are observed (Fig. 127.1). Infants with severe BPD receiving
invasive ventilation often demonstrate airway obstruction. Excessive
airway mucus and edema, airway instability caused by acquired tracheobronchomalacia, and bronchospasm are proposed etiologies.
Acute airway obstruction is manifest clinically by abrupt hypoxemia
and bradycardia and is often referred to as BPD spells. Acute, intermittent right-­to-­left intracardiac or intrapulmonary shunting caused
by abrupt elevations in pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) may also
contribute and resemble BPD spells. Spells are notoriously difficult to
control, but occasionally will respond to bronchodilators, increasing
positive end-­expiratory pressure (PEEP), and sedation acutely.
A common complication of BPD is pulmonary hypertension. Prospective surveillance indicates that in approximately 15% of all infants
born at <1,000 g and <28 weeks’ gestational age, echocardiographic
signs of pulmonary hypertension will develop. Prenatal growth restriction, prolonged duration of mechanical ventilation and supplemental oxygen, and increasing severity of BPD are all associated with an
increased risk. Pulmonary hypertension has been reported in as many
as 40% of infants with the most severe BPD and can progress to right-­
sided heart failure. Pulmonary hypertension complicating BPD has
been associated with increased mortality.

DIAGNOSIS

BPD is diagnosed when a preterm infant requires supplemental oxygen for the first 28 postnatal days; it is further classified at 36 weeks’
postmenstrual age (PMA) according to the degree of O2 supplementation (Table 127.1). Neonates receiving positive pressure support or
≥30% supplemental O2 at 36 weeks’ PMA or at discharge (whichever
occurs first) are diagnosed as having severe BPD; those requiring
<30% supplemental O2 have moderate BPD; and those who previously required O2 supplementation for at least 28 days but are currently breathing room air have mild BPD. Infants who require oxygen
for <28 days of life have “no BPD.” Infants receiving supplemental
O2 should undergo a stepwise reduction in supplemental O2 to room
air at 36 weeks while under continuous observation and with Spo2
monitoring to determine whether they can be weaned off oxygen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 127 u Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia 1085

A

B

C

D

Fig. 127.1 Pulmonary changes in infants treated with prolonged, intermittent positive pressure breathing with air containing 80–100% oxygen in

the immediate postnatal period for the clinical syndrome of hyaline membrane disease. A, A 5-­day-­old infant with nearly complete opacification
of the lungs. B, A 13-­day-­old infant with “bubbly lungs” simulating the radiographic appearance of the Wilson-­Mikity syndrome. C, A 7-­month-­old
infant with irregular, dense strands in both lungs, hyperinflation, and cardiomegaly suggestive of chronic lung disease. D, Large right ventricle and
a cobbly, irregular aerated lung of an infant who died at 11 months of age. This infant also had a patent ductus arteriosus. (From Northway WH Jr,
Rosan RC, Porter DY. Pulmonary disease following respiratory therapy of hyaline-­membrane disease. N Engl J Med. 1967;276:357–368.)

Table 127.1

Definition of Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia: Diagnostic Criteria*
GESTATIONAL AGE
≥32 Wk

<32 Wk
Time point of
assessment

36 wk PMA or discharge home, whichever comes
first
Treatment with >21% oxygen for at least 28 days
plus:

>28 days but <56 days postnatal age or
discharge home, whichever comes first
Treatment with >21% oxygen for at least 28 days
plus:

Mild BPD

Breathing room air at 36 wk PMA or discharge home,
whichever comes first

Breathing room air by 56 days postnatal age or
discharge home, whichever comes first

Moderate BPD

Need† for <30% oxygen at 36 wk PMA or discharge
home, whichever comes first

Need† for <30% oxygen at 56 days postnatal age
or discharge home, whichever comes first

Severe BPD

Need† for ≥30% oxygen and/or positive pressure
(PPV or nCPAP) at 36 wk PMA or discharge home,
whichever comes first

Need† for ≥30% oxygen and/or positive pressure
(PPV or nCPAP) at 56 days postnatal age or
discharge home, whichever comes first

*BPD usually develops in neonates being treated with oxygen and PPV for respiratory failure, most frequently respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). Persistence of the clinical features
of respiratory disease (tachypnea, retractions, crackles) is considered common to the broad description of BPD and has not been included in the diagnostic criteria describing the
severity of BPD. Infants treated with >21% oxygen and/or PPV for nonrespiratory disease (e.g., central apnea or diaphragmatic paralysis) do not have BPD unless parenchymal lung
disease also develops and they have clinical features of respiratory distress. A day of treatment with >21% oxygen means that the infant received >21% oxygen for >12 hr on that
day. Treatment with >21% oxygen and/or PPV at 36 wk PMA or at 56 days postnatal age or discharge should not reflect an “acute” event; rather, it should reflect the infant’s usual
daily therapy for several days preceding and after 36 wk PMA, 56 days postnatal age, or discharge.
†A physiologic test confirming that the oxygen requirement at the assessment time point remains to be defined. This assessment may include a pulse oximetry saturation range.
BPD, Bronchopulmonary dysplasia; nCPAP, nasal continuous positive airway pressure; PMA, postmenstrual age; PPV, positive pressure ventilation.
From Jobe AH, Bancalari E. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001;163:1723–1729.

(physiologic definition of BPD). This test is highly reliable and correlated with discharge home on oxygen, length of hospital stay, and
hospital readmissions in the first year of life. The risk of neurodevelopmental impairment and pulmonary morbidity and the severity of
BPD are directly correlated.
Despite its simplicity, the current severity-­based definition of BPD
has limitations. Because of incomplete or inaccurate data related to
hospital transfer or early discharge, in a significant number of infants
the diagnosis of BPD is either not documented or misapplied. Additionally, those infants requiring O2 support at relatively high flow (>2
L/min) or very low (<0.25 L/min) or those receiving other modes of
noninvasive ventilation are not well characterized. Calculation of
effective oxygen may be helpful but is cumbersome and not well validated. Clinical trials have relied on the need for supplemental O2 at
36 weeks PMA to define BPD. Although this definition can diagnose BPD in the highest percentage of infants, it cannot discriminate
between infants with milder BPD from those with most severe forms
of BPD. A National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(NICHD) workshop on BPD developed a definition of BPD that would
address some of the concerns mentioned earlier (Table 127.2). Specifically, it incorporates the diverse forms of respiratory support used,

distinguishes infants who are receiving invasive vs noninvasive positive
pressure ventilation (PPV), and introduces the term “lethal BPD” or
grade III(A) severe BPD to identify infants who die from this disease
before 36 weeks’ PMA.

PREVENTION

In general, there remains a lack of effective interventions that prevent BPD. Avoidance of mechanical ventilation with the early use of
nCPAP and early, selective surfactant replacement therapy with rapid
extubation decrease the incidence of BPD modestly. The avoidance of
mechanical ventilation achieved by the combination of early rescue
surfactant by the INSURE, MIST, or LISA method with nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) has been associated with a modest reduction in BPD (see Chapter 126). Gentle ventilation strategies,
including volume-­targeted ventilation and high-­frequency oscillatory
ventilation (HFOV), have also been associated with small, inconsistent
reductions in BPD. Caffeine therapy for apnea of prematurity has also
been associated with a decreased risk of BPD. Although the mechanisms are unknown, caffeine likely supports effective spontaneous respiration and decreases the likelihood that an infant will need invasive
mechanical ventilation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1086 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 127.2  New Definition of Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia Based on the 2016 NICHD Executive Workshop on
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia
For infants born <32 wk gestation, with radiographic evidence of parenchymal lung disease, who at 36 wk require one of the following Fio2/oxygen
levels/oxygen concentrations for ≥3 consecutive days to maintain Spo2 in the 90–95% range
INVASIVE IPPV

nCPAP, NIPPV, OR NASAL
CANNULA ≥3 L/MIN

NASAL CANNULA
1-­3 L/MIN

NASAL CANNULA
<1 L/MIN

Grade I BPD

No

21% Fio2

22–29% Fio2

22–70% Fio2

Grade II BPD

21% Fio2

22–29% Fio2

≥30% Fio2

≥70% Fio2

Grade III BPD

>21% Fio2

≥30% Fio2

Grade III(A) BPD

Infants who die between 14 days to 36 wk PMA from respiratory failure secondary to severe parenchymal lung disease
not attributable to other neonatal morbidities

NICHD, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development; BPD, bronchopulmonary dysplasia; IPPV, invasive positive pressure ventilation; nCPAP, nasal continuous positive
airway pressure; NIPPV, noninvasive positive pressure ventilation.
Adapted from Higgins RD, Jobe AH, Koso-­Thomas M, et al. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia: executive summary of a workshop. J Pediatr. 2018;197:300–308.

Systemic corticosteroids (dexamethasone) given either early (<7
days of age to ventilated infants at risk of BPD) or late (>7 days of
age to infants with progressing lung disease) prevent both mortality
and BPD significantly, but because of the increased risk of cerebral palsy (CP) and neurodevelopmental impairment, their routine
use is not recommended. The risk of neurodevelopmental impairment related to systemic corticosteroid use may be offset by the risk
associated with BPD. A systematic review suggested that systemic
corticosteroid therapy, when directed to infants with a ≥65% risk of
developing BPD, may actually reduce the risk of neurodevelopmental impairment and CP. Although predictive models that use clinical
characteristics have been described with promising accuracy, randomized trials using them to guide corticosteroid therapy have not
been performed.
Inhaled corticosteroids administered to VLBW infants requiring
mechanical ventilation at 7-­14 days of age did not prevent BPD significantly. However, early, prolonged administration to mechanically
ventilated extremely preterm infants until they no longer require oxygen or positive pressure support has been shown to reduce the risk of
BPD, but with a concerning trend toward increased mortality. Experience with local delivery of corticosteroids by spiking surfactant with
budesonide is emerging, and early data suggest that endotracheal
administration of corticosteroids may reduce pulmonary inflammation and the risk of BPD and death. However, additional evidence is
needed before widespread use is implemented. The routine use of antibiotics, inhaled bronchodilators, or diuretics has not been shown to
prevent BPD.

TREATMENT

Treatment of evolving and established BPD is supportive. The basic
tenets of therapy should include appropriate support of ventilation
and aggressive nutritional support to optimize linear growth and
encourage normal lung repair and development. Available evidence
suggests short-­
term benefits (improved pulmonary mechanics,
modest reductions in respiratory support parameters) without an
indication of impact on clinically relevant outcomes (survival, need
for long-­term respiratory support, recurrent hospitalization). Currently, available evidence does not support the routine use of any
pharmacologic agents in infants with evolving or established BPD.
Treatment decisions must weigh the perceived benefit against the
potential harm.

Diuretics and Fluid Restriction

Infants with BPD often have excessive pulmonary interstitial fluid that
compromises lung function and increases work of breathing. Diuretic
therapy (usually with furosemide or chlorothiazide) has been associated
with short-­term, temporary improvements in pulmonary compliance

and the ability to wean respiratory support. Furosemide (1 mg/kg/dose
IV or 2 mg/kg/dose orally [PO] every 12-­24 hours) has been demonstrated to decrease pulmonary interstitial edema and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), improve pulmonary function, and facilitate
weaning from mechanical ventilation and oxygen. Adverse effects of
long-­term furosemide therapy are common and include hyponatremia, hypokalemia, alkalosis, azotemia, hypocalcemia, hypercalciuria,
cholelithiasis, renal stones, nephrocalcinosis, and ototoxicity. Sodium
and potassium chloride supplementation is often necessary. Thiazide
diuretics (e.g., chlorothiazide, 5-­10 mg/kg/dose every 12 hours) have
been used as an alternative to avoid hypercalciuria, limit nephrocalcinosis, and preserve bone development. Although avoidance of excessive fluid administration in the first few weeks of age is associated with
a reduced risk of BPD, there is no evidence that fluid restriction (130-­
140 mL/kg/day) in established BPD has any impact. Whether using
diuretics or fluid restriction, careful attention to maintaining appropriate electrolyte levels as well as providing adequate caloric intake (often
>120-­130 kcal/kg/day) is paramount to avoid negatively impacting
nutrition.

Bronchodilators

Inhaled bronchodilators improve lung mechanics by decreasing
airway resistance. Albuterol is a specific β2-­agonist used to treat
bronchospasm in infants with BPD. Albuterol may improve lung
compliance by decreasing airway resistance secondary to smooth
muscle cell relaxation but can exacerbate bronchomalacia. Changes
in pulmonary mechanics may last 4-­6 hours. Hypertension and
tachycardia are adverse effects. Ipratropium bromide is a muscarinic antagonist related to atropine, but the bronchodilator effect is
more potent. Use of ipratropium bromide in BPD has been associated with improved pulmonary mechanics. Compared with either
agent used alone, combined use of albuterol and ipratropium bromide may be more effective. Few adverse effects have been noted.
With current aerosol administration strategies, exactly how much
medication is delivered to the airways and lungs of infants with
BPD, especially if they are ventilator dependent, is unclear.

Corticosteroids

Systemic corticosteroids have been used to treat evolving and established BPD. In mechanically ventilated infants, systemic corticosteroids improve pulmonary mechanics, allow weaning of ventilator
support and supplemental O2, and facilitate extubation. When
given at >7 days of age, long-­term benefits include a reduced need
for O2 at 36 weeks PMA, improved survival, and decreased need for
home O2. Short-­term adverse effects include hyperglycemia, hypertension, and transient hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.
Long-­term adverse effects include osteopenia, severe retinopathy of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 127 u Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia 1087
prematurity (ROP), abnormal neurologic examination, poor brain
growth, neurodevelopmental impairment, and CP. A strategy that
utilizes a low cumulative dose (0.89 mg/kg of dexamethasone given
over 10-­day taper) in preterm infants who remain ventilator dependent after 7 days of age (and therefore have a high risk of developing BPD) facilitates weaning of ventilator and oxygen support and
promotes successful extubation without an impact on long-­term
outcomes, including the incidence of BPD or neurodevelopmental impairment. The controversy concerning the appropriate use
of systemic corticosteroids to prevent and/or treat BPD is ongoing,
and until additional evidence is available, their use remains limited
to infants with severe respiratory failure (ventilator dependent at
>7-­14 days of age with significant respiratory and oxygen support
needs) at high risk for imminent death.
Inhaled corticosteroids (budesonide, fluticasone, and beclomethasone) have been described as an alternative therapy in evolving or
established BPD. Small randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and case
reports in infants with established moderate to severe BPD have not
shown a significant benefit for pulmonary mechanics or reduction in
the need for ventilator or oxygen support. Inhaled fluticasone propionate (corticosteroid) combined with salmeterol (long-­acting β2-­
agonist) may be beneficial.

Pulmonary Vasodilators

Many infants with evolving or established moderate and severe
BPD demonstrate increased PVR caused by pulmonary microvascular maldevelopment and abnormal vasoreactivity. In infants with
BPD with pulmonary hypertension, acute exposure to even modest
levels of hypoxemia can cause PAP to increase abruptly. Maintaining infants with established BPD and pulmonary hypertension at
higher So2 targets (92–96%) can lower PAP effectively. For infants
in whom appropriate O2 supplementation and support of ventilation are ineffective, the use of low-­dose inhaled nitric oxide (iNO)
may improve oxygenation anecdotally. Despite its frequent use,
there is no evidence to support the use of iNO to improve lung function, cardiac function, or oxygenation in evolving BPD. Several case
series have reported on the use of the phosphodiesterase-­5 inhibitor
sildenafil in treating pulmonary hypertension in established moderate to severe BPD. Despite its widespread use, no RCTs are evaluating the safety and efficacy of sildenafil in preterm infants with
BPD. However, many experts would recommend a trial of low-­dose
sildenafil (1 mg/kg/dose every 8 hours) for infants with evidence
of pulmonary hypertension and persistent respiratory instability
despite appropriate oxygen and ventilator support.

Chronic Respiratory Support

Experience suggests that maintaining functional residual capacity
(FRC) with appropriate positive pressure support (with noninvasive support whenever possible) promotes optimal lung growth and
development. Provision of nCPAP until respiratory status improves
and oxygen dependence resolves, with subsequent transition
directly to room air, may be beneficial. Continuation of caffeine
therapy may facilitate spontaneous breathing and weaning from
support. Established severe BPD with cystic, heterogeneous lung
disease often requires prolonged mechanical ventilation. A long
inspiratory time is required to adequately ventilate diseased lung
units, and appropriate expiratory time is required to allow exhalation. The use of a low rate (<20-­30 breaths/min), long inspiratory
time (≥0.6 seconds) strategy is usually required. To attain appropriate minute ventilation, larger tidal volumes (10-­15 mL/kg) may

be necessary. Higher PEEP (often >6-­8 cm H2O) may be needed
to attain adequate expansion and minimize gas-­trapping caused by
dynamic airway collapse. Gradual weaning of ventilator settings
should be attempted as the infant grows and lung disease improves,
but the incidence of death or tracheostomy placement for chronic
ventilation may be as high as 20%. By 2-­3 years of age, the majority
of infants who undergo tracheostomy for severe BPD are successfully liberated from mechanical ventilation.

PROGNOSIS

Compared with extremely preterm infants without BPD, infants
with BPD have higher rates of neurodevelopmental impairment,
lung diffusion impairment, wheezing and airflow obstruction,
rehospitalization, and mortality. The risk of these complications
increases with BPD severity. Infants with grade III BPD are most
likely to either die or have long-­term respiratory morbidity. Prolonged mechanical ventilation, intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH),
pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, and oxygen dependence
beyond 1 year of life are poor prognostic signs. Mortality in infants
with BPD ranges from 10–25% and is highest in infants who remain
ventilator dependent for >6 months. Cardiorespiratory failure associated with cor pulmonale and acquired infection (respiratory syncytial virus [RSV]) are common causes of death. Infants are at risk
for severe RSV infections and must receive prophylactic therapy
(see Chapter 307).
Pulmonary function slowly improves in most survivors because
of ongoing lung repair and the natural period of lung growth and
alveolarization. Rehospitalization for impaired pulmonary function
is most common during the first 3 years of life and is much more
common in infants requiring respiratory support at discharge. The
incidence of physician-­diagnosed asthma, use of bronchodilators,
and wheezing is elevated. Despite a gradual decrease in symptom
frequency, persistence of respiratory symptoms and abnormal pulmonary function test results are measurable in children, adolescence, and young adults. Although not always clinically apparent,
pulmonary function testing consistently reveals impaired exercise
capacity, reduced pulmonary diffusing capacity, and persistent
expiratory flow obstruction. High-­resolution chest CT scanning or
MRI studies in children and adults with a history of BPD reveal
lung abnormalities that correlate directly with the degree of pulmonary function abnormality. The ultimate long-­term pulmonary
health of survivors of BPD is unknown. As trajectories of developing lung function remain abnormal in survivors of BPD, concerns
have been raised highlighting the potential for pulmonary emphysema, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and pulmonary vascular disease resulting in early debilitating lung dysfunction.
Other complications of BPD include growth failure, neurodevelopmental impairment, and parental stress, as well as sequelae of therapy,
such as nephrolithiasis, osteopenia, and electrolyte imbalance. Airway
problems such as vocal cord paralysis, subglottic stenosis, and tracheomalacia are common and may aggravate or cause pulmonary hypertension. Subglottic stenosis may require tracheotomy or an anterior
cricoid split procedure to relieve upper airway obstruction. Cardiac
complications of BPD include pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, systemic hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy, and development of aortopulmonary collateral vessels, which, if large, may cause
heart failure.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1088 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Chapter 128

Transient Tachypnea of
the Newborn
Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and
Susan S. Cohen
INCIDENCE

Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) is a clinical syndrome of self-­
limited tachypnea associated with delayed clearance of fetal lung fluid.
Although the actual incidence is likely underreported, it is estimated at
3-6 per 1,000 term infant births, making TTN the most common etiology of tachypnea in the newborn. Twin gestation, maternal asthma,
maternal hypertension, late prematurity, precipitous delivery, perinatal
depression, gestational diabetes, macrosomia, and cesarean delivery,
particularly without labor, are common risk factors.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

TTN is believed to result from ineffective clearance of fetal lung
fluid. Retained fetal lung fluid decreases pulmonary compliance and
impedes gas exchange. Clearance of fetal lung fluid occurs through
increased expression of epithelial sodium channels (ENaCs) and
sodium-­
potassium adenosine triphosphatase (Na+,K+-­ATPase) that
drive active sodium (and thereby fluid) reabsorption. There is evidence that the channels involved in fluid clearance differ for infants
with TTN. Additional lung fluid is cleared via compressive forces at
the time of delivery and hydrostatic forces with the infant’s first breaths
(see Chapter 124.1). Decreased respiratory effort can delay fluid clearance and increase the risk for TTN.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

TTN is characterized by the early onset of tachypnea (>60 breaths/min),
sometimes with retractions or expiratory grunting and occasionally with
cyanosis that is relieved by minimal O2 supplementation (<40%). The
chest generally sounds clear without crackles or wheeze, and the chest
radiograph shows prominent perihilar pulmonary vascular markings,
fluid in the intralobar fissures, and rarely small pleural effusions (Fig.
128.1). Hypercapnia and acidosis are uncommon. Respiratory failure
requiring positive pressure support (either with nasal continuous positive airway pressure [nCPAP] or mechanical ventilation) also is uncommon, but when it occurs usually resolves rapidly (<12-24 hours). Most
infants recover with supportive care alone, and over the first 24-72 hours
the tachypnea and O2 requirements slowly resolve.

DIAGNOSIS

Distinguishing TTN from respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) and
other respiratory disorders (e.g., pneumonia) may be difficult, and
transient tachypnea is frequently a diagnosis of exclusion. The distinctive features of TTN are rapid recovery of the infant and the

absence of radiographic findings for RDS (low lung volumes, diffuse
reticulogranular pattern, air bronchograms) and other lung disorders. Other respiratory disorders to consider include meconium
aspiration syndrome (see Chapter 129), persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (see Chapter 130), congenital lung anomalies,
and spontaneous air leak (see Chapter 132). Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) often presents in the newborn period and may resemble
TTN or RDS. PCD in the newborn often lasts longer than TTN and
requires a longer duration of oxygen therapy (Chapter 455).

PREVENTION

Prevention of TTN generally focuses on avoidance of modifiable risk factors. As prematurity increases the risk of TTN, the American College of
Obstetrics and Gynecology recommends against nonmedically indicated
deliveries, either vaginal or cesarean, before 39 weeks. They further state
that documentation of fetal lung maturity, previously accomplished via
amniocentesis with amniotic fluid testing, should not be used to guide
early delivery as this does not ensure appropriate maturation of physiologic processes. When late-­preterm delivery is medically indicated or
threatened, the use of a single course of antenatal steroids is associated with
a decreased risk of TTN and may be considered. Use of antenatal steroids
at increasing gestational ages must be balanced against an increased risk of
hypoglycemia in the neonate postpartum.

TREATMENT

Treatment for TTN is supportive. Based on the degree of symptoms and progression of those symptoms over the first 2 hours after
birth, transfer to a facility with appropriate neonatal intensive care
unit (NICU) care may be required. Supplemental oxygen should be
provided to maintain saturations over 90%. nCPAP can be used to
support infants with more significant work of breathing or oxygen
requirements. Further evaluation with chest radiograph or blood
gas analysis can be undertaken when distress is more significant,
or the diagnosis is in question. Infants with significant tachypnea
may be unable or unsafe to feed orally and can be supported with
intravenous fluids or nasogastric feedings. Generally, TTN is unrelated to an underlying infection; however, antibiotic coverage may
be initiated in patients with additional risk factors. Further evaluation for an alternate diagnosis should be undertaken if symptoms
are not resolving by 72 hours of age.
Inhaled β2-­agonists such as albuterol (salbutamol) increase expression and activation of ENaC and Na+,K+-­ATPase and facilitate fluid
clearance. Emerging evidence suggests that when given early in the
course of TTN, albuterol may improve oxygenation, shorten the duration of supplemental O2 therapy, and expedite recovery; however, more
data are needed before employing this method.

PROGNOSIS

Infants with a history of TTN do have an increased risk of developing a wheezing diagnosis during childhood. This association persists even after stratifying for the underlying risk factor of maternal
asthma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 129 u Aspiration of Foreign Material (Meconium Aspiration Syndrome, Aspiration Pneumonia)

“Sunburst”
appearance

1089

Streaky infiltrates

Fluid in the minor
fissure
Mildly
hyperexpanded
lungs

Mild cardiomegaly

Minimal pleural
effusion

Chapter 129

Aspiration of Foreign
Material (Meconium
Aspiration Syndrome,
Aspiration Pneumonia)
Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and
Susan S. Cohen
Aspiration in the neonate can occur intrapartum often as a result of
fetal distress or aspiration may occur postpartum, which can be related
to a number of conditions including cardiopulmonary dysfunction,
gastroesophageal reflux, aerodigestive tract anomalies, neurodevelopmental impairment, and craniofacial abnormalities.

INTRAPARTUM ASPIRATION

With fetal distress, the fetus often initiates vigorous respiratory movements in utero because of interference with the supply of oxygen
through the placenta. Under such circumstances, the infant may aspirate amniotic fluid containing vernix caseosa, epithelial cells, meconium, blood, or material from the birth canal, which may block the
smallest airways and interfere with alveolar exchange of O2 and CO2.
Pathogenic bacteria may accompany the aspirated material, and pneumonia may ensue, but even in noninfected cases, respiratory distress
accompanied by radiographic evidence of aspiration is seen (Fig.
129.1). The most relevant consequences of intrapartum aspiration are
pneumonia and meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS).

Early-­Onset Sepsis and Neonatal Pneumonia

Pneumonia as a presentation of early-­onset sepsis typically arises following aspiration of infected amniotic fluid (see Chapter 149). The
incidence of early-­onset sepsis is 0.5 per 1,000 among term infants and
increases to 1 per 1,000 among late preterm infants. The mortality rate
is 2–3%. The most common causative agent is group B streptococcus

Fig. 128.1 Chest radiograph of an infant
with transient tachypnea of the newborn. Notable features include increased pulmonary
markings particularly in the perihilar region
and fluid in the fissure. This contrasts with
the radiograph of an infant with respiratory
distress syndrome, which generally includes a
homogenous ground glass appearance and
hypoinflation. (From Alhassen Z, Vali P, Guglani L, Lakshminrusimha S, Ryan RM. Recent advances in pathophysiology and management
of transient tachypnea of newborn. J Perinatol.
2021;41:6–16. Fig. 5.)

(GBS; 40–45% of cases). Other causative agents include Escherichia coli
and other gram-­negative rods (10–15% of cases), Enterococcus faecalis,
Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes.
Bacteria within the airways causes direct mucosa injury, surfactant
dysfunction, pulmonary edema, mechanical airway obstruction due to
inflammation and debris, and can trigger vasoconstriction and pulmonary hypertension. Infants are particularly susceptible to infection due
to immaturity of their innate and adaptive immune systems, a risk factor that is more pronounced in premature or growth-­restricted infants.
Additional risk factors for infection include being male, known maternal colonization with GBS, maternal fever, and prolonged rupture of
membranes (>18 hours).
Diagnosis of neonatal pneumonia includes radiographic evidence
of infiltrate, and consolidation, and less often cavitation or pneumatocele. Infants will display hypoxic and hypercarbic respiratory
failure with frequent need for invasive ventilation; hypotension is
common. Temperature instability, particularly hypothermia, is also
common. White blood cell counts and single values of inflammatory markers have limited predictive potential. Blood cultures are
indicated, and cerebrospinal fluid should be obtained if the blood
culture is positive.
Treatment of neonatal pneumonia includes the prompt initiation of
empiric broad-­
spectrum antibiotics. Commonly, ampicillin and an
aminoglycoside (gentamicin) are used as first-­line therapy with the
substitution of a cephalosporin or meropenem in place of the aminoglycoside when meningitis is a concern or in cases of suspected antibiotic resistance. Therapy is typically 7-­14 days in duration and should
be completed parenterally.
Prevention of early-­onset sepsis has largely involved the targeted
intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis of mothers known to be colonized with GBS. GBS prophylaxis, generally penicillin, is indicated for
women who screen positive for colonization via vaginal-­rectal culture
at 36-­37 weeks’ gestation, have a history of an infant affected by GBS
disease, or for preterm labor when GBS status is unknown. Additional
broad-­spectrum antibiotic therapy is indicated for women with intrapartum fever to decrease risk of ascending infection.
For more information on early-­onset sepsis see Chapter 149.

Meconium Aspiration Syndrome

Meconium-­stained amniotic fluid is found in 10–15% of births and usually occurs in term or postterm infants. MAS develops in 5% of such
infants; 30% require mechanical ventilation, and 3–5% die. Usually, but

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1090 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Physiologic meconium passage
(particularly if postdates)
Fetal compromise (hypoxia, cord
compression, etc.)
meconium passage

Meconium-stained amniotic fluid

Post-partum
aspiration

In-utero
gasping

Continued
compromise

Meconium aspiration

Fig. 129.1 Anteroposterior chest radiograph of a term infant with

meconium aspiration syndrome shows the typical pattern of mixed atelectasis and local emphysema. An endotracheal tube is seen in good
position. Two chest tubes are present in the right chest without persistent pneumothorax. (From Rodriguez NE. Assessment of the neonatal
and pediatric patient. In Heuer AJ, ed. Wilkins’ Clinical Assessment in
Respiratory Care, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 12.17)

Proximal
airway
obstruction

Peripheral
airway
obstruction

Inflammatory
and chemical
pneumonitis

Partial
Complete
Ball-valve effect

Remodeling of
pulmonary
vasculature

Acidosis
Hypoxemia
Hypercapnea

Atelectasis

Persistent
pulmonary
hypertension

Air-trapping

not invariably, fetal distress and hypoxia occur before the passage of
meconium into amniotic fluid. The infants are meconium stained and
may be depressed and require resuscitation at birth. Either in utero or
with the first breath, thick, particulate meconium is aspirated into the
lungs. Partial obstruction of some airways may lead to pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax, or both. Overdistention of the chest may be
prominent. Meconium within the lungs causes a chemical pneumonitis leading to surfactant dysfunction and inflammation (Fig. 129.1). The
combination of airway obstruction and chemical injury can contribute
to the development of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN; see Chapter 130). The pathophysiology of MAS is further
described in Figure 129.2.
The clinical presentation of MAS is that of respiratory distress and
cyanosis. In cases where in utero hypoxia was present, the presentation of MAS may be compounded by hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy and multiorgan dysfunction (including myocardial injury).
The condition usually improves within 72 hours, but when its course
requires assisted ventilation, it may be severe, prolonged, and with
a risk for mortality. Tachypnea may persist for many days or even
several weeks. The typical chest radiograph is characterized by patchy
infiltrates, coarse streaking of both lung fields, increased anteroposterior diameter, and flattening of the diaphragm with possible pneumothorax (see Fig. 129.1).
The risk of meconium aspiration may be decreased by rapid
identification of fetal distress and initiation of prompt delivery.
Intrapartum nasopharyngeal suctioning in infants with meconium-­
stained amniotic fluid does not reduce the risk for MAS. Routine
intubation and aspiration of depressed infants (those with hypotonia, bradycardia, or decreased respiratory effort) born through
meconium-­stained fluid is not effective in reducing the MAS or
other major adverse outcomes and is not recommended for neonatal resuscitation. The risk of meconium-­stained amniotic fluids
increases with increasing gestational age. Additionally, among those
infants with meconium-­stained fluids, the risk for MAS increases
with increasing gestational age (4.8% at >42 weeks vs 2.6% at 40
weeks) therefore limiting significantly postterm deliveries (>42
weeks) decreases the incidence of MAS.
Treatment of MAS includes supportive care and standard management for respiratory distress. The beneficial effect of mean airway pressure on oxygenation must be weighed against the risk of
pneumothorax. Administration of exogenous surfactant and/or

V/Q mismatch
Air leaks

Fig. 129.2 Pathophysiology of meconium passage and the meconi-

um aspiration syndrome. V/Q, ventilation-­perfusion ratio. (From Wiswell
TE, Bent RC. Meconium staining and the meconium aspiration syndrome: unresolved issues. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1993;40:955–981.)

inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) to infants with MAS and hypoxemic
respiratory failure, or pulmonary hypertension requiring mechanical ventilation, decreases the need for extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO), which is required by the most severely
affected infants who show no response to therapy. In infants with
MAS who demonstrate no other signs of sepsis, there is no role for
continued antibiotic therapy. Severe meconium aspiration may be
complicated by persistent pulmonary hypertension. Patients with
MAS refractory to conventional mechanical ventilation may benefit from high-­frequency ventilation (HFV) or ECMO (see Chapter 130). Management may also include concurrent treatment for
hypoxic injury as discussed in Chapter 120.
The mortality rate of meconium-­
stained infants is considerably
higher than that of nonstained infants. The decline in neonatal deaths
caused by MAS is related to improvements in obstetric and neonatal
care. Residual lung problems are rare but include symptomatic cough,
wheezing, and persistent hyperinflation for up to 5-­10 years. The ultimate prognosis depends on the extent of central nervous system injury
from asphyxia and the presence of associated problems such as pulmonary hypertension.

POSTPARTUM ASPIRATION

Aspiration in the newborn after birth can be globally divided into categories of anatomic abnormalities and swallowing dysfunction. Regardless of the cause, the consequences of aspiration include pneumonia,
chemical pneumonitis, and airway swelling.

Anatomic Causes of Postpartum Aspiration

Abnormalities of the aerodigestive tract can contribute to the passage of oral secretions and milk into the lungs. Obstruction or narrowing of the nasal cavity or nasopharynx can interrupt the normal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 130 u Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the ­Newborn (Persistent Fetal Circulation)
suck-­swallow-­breath cycle of the infant and increase the risk of
aspiration. These conditions include genetic disorders associated
with midface hypoplasia, choanal atresia, and congenital nasal
masses or tumors. Infants with nasal obstruction will present with
stertor, cyanosis improved with crying, and an inability to pass a
nasal feeding tube. Oral sources of aspiration include micrognathia/
retrognathia and oral masses that compromise airway protection.
Cleft lip and palate can impair velopharyngeal closure and increase
nasal regurgitation of milk with subsequent aspiration. Anatomic
causes of aspiration at the level of the larynx include laryngomalacia due to increased work of breathing with poorer airway protective mechanisms, laryngotracheoesophageal clefts, and vocal fold
paralysis or paresis where aspiration occurs as the vocal folds are
unable to adduct and protect the airway. Tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) contributes to aspiration via a direct connection between the
esophagus and the airway. TEF can be divided into five types based
on the location of the fistula and presence of esophageal atresia.
Prenatal diagnosis may occur after the recognition of polyhydramnios and a small fetal stomach. Postnatal symptoms include excessive salivation that worsen with feeding attempts, choking, cough,
cyanosis, respiratory distress, and an inability to pass an orogastric
(OG) tube. TEF should prompt an evaluation for other anomalies.
When an anatomic abnormality is believed to be contributing to
aspiration, initial management should include cessation of feeding
pending an evaluation. Some conditions including vocal fold paresis
and laryngomalacia may resolve spontaneously, and modified feeding
strategies, often under the direction of a speech language pathologist,
can allow delivery of nutrition until the condition improves with time
and growth. Cleft palate can often be managed with feeding modification until surgical repair in infancy. Other conditions including
choanal atresia and TEF require surgical intervention in the newborn
period. In some cases, tracheostomy is required for infants unable
to adequately protect their airway. Although reflux alone is not the
cause of aspiration in these cases, decreasing the acidity of the aspirate may decrease airway swelling, and antireflux medications can be
considered in select populations.

Swallowing Dysfunction

Swallowing dysfunction is another cause of aspiration in the newborn. Swallowing is a complex process and must be coordinated
with respirations. Infants with neurologic injury may display abnormalities in the swallowing reflex or in the recognition and prevention of aspiration. Infants with pulmonary or cardiovascular disease
leading to tachypnea will have more trouble coordinating a suck-­
swallow-­breath cycle. Premature infants are more likely to have
swallowing dysfunction because of prematurity-­related pulmonary
insufficiency and because of immaturity of the swallow mechanism, which begins to mature between 32 and 34 weeks. Hypotonic
infants due to neuromuscular diseases or as a sequalae of hypoxic-­
ischemic encephalopathy are at increased risk of aspiration.
Evaluation of the swallow in at-­risk infants often occurs with
the assistance of a speech language pathologist and may include
video fluoroscopic swallow studies to evaluate swallowing pattern
and document aspiration. A fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of
the swallow (FEES) is another strategy whereby a speech language
pathologist and ear, nose, and throat doctor observe a small-­volume
swallow via direct endoscopic visualization. Neurologic imaging
may be indicated to assess for the underlying etiology of an ineffective or uncoordinated swallow.
Treatment strategies include feeding modifications such as pacing (tilting the bottle down every three to five sucks to allow recovery time), modified feeding position, or using a slower flow nipple.
In cases where feeding modification does not adequately improve
swallow safety, a percutaneous gastric tube for feeding may be
indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1091

Chapter 130

Persistent Pulmonary
Hypertension of the
­Newborn (Persistent Fetal
Circulation)
Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and
Susan S. Cohen
Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) predominantly occurs in term and postterm infants. Predisposing factors
include birth asphyxia, meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS), early-­
onset sepsis, respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), hypoglycemia, polycythemia, maternal use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs with
in utero constriction of the ductus arteriosus, maternal late trimester
use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and pulmonary hypoplasia caused by diaphragmatic hernia (Table 130.1). PPHN is often
idiopathic. Some patients with PPHN have low plasma arginine and
nitric oxide (NO) metabolite concentrations and polymorphisms of
the carbamoyl phosphate synthase gene, findings suggestive of a possible subtle defect in NO production. The incidence is 1 in 500-­1,500
live births, with a wide variation among clinical centers. Regardless of
etiology of PPHN, profound hypoxemia from right-­to-­left shunting
and normal or elevated Paco2 are present (Fig. 130.1).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Persistence of the fetal circulatory pattern of right-­to-­left shunting
through the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and foramen ovale after
birth is a result of excessively high pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR). Fetal PVR is usually elevated relative to fetal systemic or postnatal pulmonary pressure. This fetal state normally permits shunting
of oxygenated umbilical venous blood to the left atrium (and brain)
through the foramen ovale, from which it bypasses the lungs through
the ductus arteriosus and passes to the descending aorta. After birth,
PVR normally declines rapidly as a consequence of vasodilation secondary to lung inflation, a rise in postnatal Pao2, a reduction in Paco2,
increased pH, and release of vasoactive substances. Increased neonatal
PVR may be (1) maladaptive from an acute injury (not demonstrating normal vasodilation in response to increased O2 and other changes
after birth); (2) the result of increased pulmonary artery medial muscle
thickness and extension of smooth muscle layers into the usually nonmuscular, more peripheral pulmonary arterioles in response to chronic
fetal hypoxia; (3) a consequence of pulmonary hypoplasia (diaphragmatic hernia, Potter syndrome); or (4) obstructive as a result of polycythemia, total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR), or
congenital diffuse development disorders of acinar lung development.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

PPHN usually manifests in the delivery room or within the first 12 hours
after birth. Idiopathic PPHN or PPHN related to polycythemia, hypoglycemia, hypothermia, or asphyxia may result in severe cyanosis and respiratory distress. In some cases, however, initial signs of respiratory distress
may be minimal. Infants who have PPHN associated with meconium aspiration, group B streptococcal pneumonia, diaphragmatic hernia, or pulmonary hypoplasia usually exhibit cyanosis, grunting, flaring, retractions,
tachycardia, and shock. Multiorgan involvement may be present. Myocardial ischemia, papillary muscle dysfunction with mitral and tricuspid
regurgitation, and biventricular dysfunction produce cardiogenic shock
with decreases in pulmonary blood flow, tissue perfusion, and O2 delivery.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1092 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 130.1  Etiology of Persistent Pulmonary
Hypertension of the Newborn in Neonates
Maladaptation of pulmonary vasculature (abnormal, “reactive”
pulmonary vasoconstriction)
• Parenchymal lung diseases, such as meconium aspiration
syndrome (MAS), respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), and
pneumonia
• In response to systemic disorders, such as hypothermia, sepsis,
fetal hypoxia/distress, hypercapnia, acidosis, and hyperviscosity
• Toxic/pharmacologic exposure in utero (maternal selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) use)
Maldevelopment of pulmonary vasculature (remodeling of
pulmonary vasculature)
• In utero closure of ductus arteriosus (maternal cyclooxygenase
inhibitor use)
• Sustained pulmonary over circulation in congenital heart disease
with large left-­to-­right shunts
• Intrauterine growth restriction
• Genetic/chromosomal anomalies (trisomy 21, alveolar-­capillary
dysplasia, surfactant protein deficiency)
Underdevelopment of pulmonary vasculature (hypoplastic
pulmonary vessels; ↓ cross-­sectional area)
• Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
• Pulmonary hypoplasia (premature prolonged rupture of
membranes, oligohydramnios and anhydramnios, space-­
occupying lesions in the chest).
From Sharma M, Callan E, Konduri GG. Pulmonary vasodilator therapy in persistent
pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. Clin Perinatol. 2022;49:103–105. Box 1.

Initial stabilization
Oxygen
CPAP/mechanical ventilation
HFV if parenchymal lung disease
Early surfactant administration
iNO if OI >15 despite optimizing ventilation (1st line)

If severe PPHN (OI >25)
Consider adjuvant therapies (2nd line)
• Iloprost inhaled (immediate onset, short lasting)
• If response, Treprostinil (subQ/IV)
• If no response, Sildenafil oral/IV (onset of action 6-12h)
Optimize BP with fluids, vasopressors, steroids

Decreased myocardial function,
add milrinone IV

Restrictive ductus or right heart
failure, consider PGE1 IV

Bosentan oral (3rd line)
(slow onset, unreliable absorption)

OI >40 on serial ABGs or significant
cardiovascular instability

ECMO
↑ PVR
SVR ↓

Pulmonary Vascular
(structural changes;
altered reactivity to
dilator and constrictor
stimuli)

↑ right to left shunting
at PDA and FO

Fig. 130.2 Algorithm for the suggested approach and timing of

Heart
(RV pressure
overload,
hypotension, and
LV dysfunction)

Hypoxia,
hypercarbia,
acidosis

Lung
↓ lung volume
↓ compliance
↑ intrapulmonary shunt

Fig. 130.1 Cardiopulmonary interactions in persistent pulmonary hy-

pertension of the newborn (PPHN). FO, Foramen ovale; LV, left ventricle; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance;
RV, right ventricle; SVR, systemic vascular resistance. (From Kinsella JP,
Abman SH. Recent developments in the pathophysiology and treatment of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. J Pediatr.
1995;126:853–864.)

Hypoxemia is often labile and out of proportion to the findings on
chest radiographs. In PPHN due to asphyxia and idiopathic PPHN,
chest x-­ray findings are often normal, whereas in PPHN associated
with pneumonia and diaphragmatic hernia, parenchymal opacification
and bowel/liver in the chest, respectively, are seen.

DIAGNOSIS

Independent of the prenatal history, PPHN should be suspected in all
term infants who have cyanosis. Hypoxemia is universal and intermittently unresponsive to 100% O2 given by oxygen hood or nasal

interventions for the management of hypoxic respiratory failure
(HRF)/persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN). It is
important to consider cardiopulmonary system to be one fully integrated unit and optimize lung recruitment, pulmonary vasodilation, and cardiac function to facilitate successful transition. The algorithm focuses on
vasodilator agents and is not meant to be inclusive of all therapies used
in the management of PPHN. ABG, Arterial blood gas; BP, blood pressure; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; ECMO, extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation; HFV, high-­frequency ventilation; iNO, inhaled
nitric oxide; IV, intravenous; OI, oxygenation index; PGE1, prostaglandin E1; subQ, subcutaneous. (From Sharma M, Callan E, Konduri GG.
Pulmonary vasodilator therapy in persistent pulmonary hypertension of
the newborn. Clin Perinatol. 2022;49:103–105, Fig. 3.)

cannula. A Pao2 or Sao2 gradient between a preductal (right radial
artery) and a postductal (umbilical artery) site of blood sampling suggests right-­to-­left shunting through the ductus arteriosus. Intracardiac
shunting through the patent foramen ovale does not lead to a Pao2 or
Sao2 gradient.
Real-­time echocardiography combined with Doppler flow imaging
is very helpful in evaluating PPHN. Systolic flattening of the interventricular septum as the right ventricular systolic pressure approaches
the left ventricular systolic pressure can be used to estimate the degree
of pulmonary hypertension. The peak velocity of the tricuspid valve
regurgitation jet, when present, yields a quantitative estimate of the
right ventricular systolic pressure. Likewise, the direction and velocity
of a shunt across the PDA provides a quantitative comparison between
the aortic and pulmonary artery pressures. In advanced cases, right-­to-­
left or bidirectional shunting across a PDA and a patent foramen ovale
can be observed.
The differential diagnosis of PPHN includes cyanotic heart disease
(especially obstructed TAPVR), idiopathic pulmonary vein stenosis,
congenital surfactant (protein) deficiency syndromes, pulmonary artery
thrombosis, and congenital diffuse development disorders of acinar lung
development (acinar dysplasia, congenital alveolar dysplasia, and alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of the pulmonary veins).
Alveolocapillary dysplasia (ACD) is a rare, lethal autosomal recessive disorder of distal lung development characterized by immature
lobular development and reduced capillary density. Infants with ACD

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 130 u Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the ­Newborn (Persistent Fetal Circulation)
present with idiopathic PPHN, demonstrating little or no parenchymal
lung disease and profound hypoxemia. Over 60% of infants with ACD
manifest hypoxemia and respiratory failure within 48 hours of birth,
while some with milder disease present beyond 6 months of age. The
diagnosis is made on autopsy in 90% of cases, and the constellation of
findings include thickened alveolar septa, increased muscularization
of the pulmonary arterioles, a reduced number of capillaries, with the
remaining capillaries demonstrating abnormal apposition to the air
interface, and misalignment of the intrapulmonary veins. In up to 80%
of cases, extrapulmonary malformations of the genitourinary, gastrointestinal, or cardiovascular system are present. Pathogenic variants in
the transcription factor gene FOXFI have been identified in up to 40%
of cases, but the diagnosis continues to rest on clinical and histopathologic features. There also may be associated gastrointestinal (malrotation), genitourinary, and cardiac (hypoplastic left heart syndrome)
malformations. ACD is uniformly lethal and should be suspected in
infants with idiopathic PPHN who fail to respond to maximal medical
therapy, or when symptoms recur after successful weaning from extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). In a UK ECMO report, up
to 14% of infants who failed ECMO ultimately were diagnosed with
ACD. Regardless of the timing of presentation, ACD is uniformly fatal,
and lung transplantation remains the sole, experimental therapy.

TREATMENT

Therapy for PPHN is directed toward correcting any predisposing
condition (e.g., hypoglycemia, polycythemia) and improving poor tissue oxygenation by addressing the underlying pathology (Fig. 130.2).
Initial management includes O2 administration and correction of acidosis, hypotension, and hypercapnia. Persistent hypoxemia should be
managed with intubation and mechanical ventilation.
Infants with PPHN are usually managed without hyperventilation or
alkalization. Gentle ventilation with normocarbia or permissive hypercarbia and avoidance of hypoxemia result in excellent outcomes and a
low incidence of chronic lung disease and ECMO use.
Because of their instability and ability to fight the ventilator, newborns with PPHN usually require sedation. Nonpharmacologic measures such as minimal noise, light, and tactile stimulation are also
employed. The use of paralytic agents is controversial and reserved
for the newborn who cannot be treated with sedatives alone. Muscle relaxants may promote atelectasis of dependent lung regions
and ventilation-­perfusion mismatch and may be associated with an
increased risk of death.
Inotropic therapy is frequently needed to support blood pressure
and perfusion. Whereas epinephrine is frequently used as a first-­line
agent, other agents, such as dobutamine and milrinone, may be helpful
when myocardial contractility is poor. Many centers use echo-­guided
assessment of cardiac function to choose appropriate inotropic therapy.
Dopamine is typically avoided due to its ability to increase PVR. Some
of the sickest newborns with PPHN demonstrate hypotension refractory to vasopressor administration. This results from desensitization of
the cardiovascular system to catecholamines by overwhelming illness
and relative adrenal insufficiency. Hydrocortisone rapidly upregulates
cardiovascular adrenergic receptor expression and serves as a hormone
substitute in cases of adrenal insufficiency.
Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) is an endothelium-­derived signaling
molecule that relaxes vascular smooth muscle and can be delivered to
the lung by inhalation. Use of iNO reduces the need for ECMO support
by approximately 40%. The optimal starting dose is 20 ppm. Higher
doses have not been shown to be more effective and are associated
with side effects, including methemoglobinemia and increased levels of nitrogen dioxide, a pulmonary irritant. Most newborns require
iNO for <5 days. Although iNO has been used as long-­term therapy in

1093

children and adults with primary pulmonary hypertension, prolonged
dependency is rare in neonates and suggests the presence of lung hypoplasia, congenital heart disease, or ACD. The maximal safe duration
of iNO therapy is unknown. The infant can be weaned to 5 ppm after
6-­24 hours of therapy. The dose can then be reduced slowly and discontinued when Fio2 is <0.6 and the iNO dose is 1 ppm. Abrupt discontinuation should be avoided because it may cause rebound pulmonary
hypertension. iNO should be used only at institutions that offer ECMO
support or have the capability of transporting an infant on iNO therapy
if a referral for ECMO is necessary. Some infants with PPHN do not
respond adequately to iNO. Therapy with continuous inhaled or intravenous (IV) prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2) can improve oxygenation
in infants with PPHN. The safety and efficacy of sildenafil (type 5 phosphodiesterase inhibitor) in newborns with PPHN is under investigation; initial results are promising.
In 5–10% of patients with PPHN, the response to 100% O2, mechanical ventilation, and drugs is poor, and many of these infants benefit
from ECMO. In such patients, two parameters have been used to predict mortality: the alveolar-­arterial oxygen gradient (Pa-­ao2), and the
oxygenation index (OI), calculated as Fio2 (as %) × MAP/Pao2. A
Pa-­ao2 >600 for 8-­12 hours and an OI >40 unresponsive to iNO predict
a high mortality rate (>80%) and are indications for ECMO. In carefully
selected, severely ill infants with hypoxemic respiratory failure caused
by RDS, meconium aspiration pneumonia, congenital diaphragmatic
hernia, PPHN, or sepsis, ECMO significantly improves survival.
ECMO is a form of cardiopulmonary bypass that augments systemic perfusion and provides gas exchange. Most experience has been
with venoarterial bypass, which requires carotid artery ligation and
the placement of large catheters in the right internal jugular vein and
carotid artery. Venovenous bypass avoids carotid artery ligation and
provides gas exchange, but it does not support cardiac output. Blood is
initially pumped through the ECMO circuit at a rate that approximates
80% of the estimated cardiac output (150-­200 mL/kg/min). Venous
return passes through a membrane oxygenator, is rewarmed, and
returns to the aortic arch in venoarterial ECMO and to the right atrium
in venovenous ECMO. Venous O2 saturation values are used to monitor tissue O2 delivery and subsequent extraction for infants undergoing
venoarterial ECMO, whereas arterial O2 saturation values are used to
monitor oxygenation for infants receiving venovenous ECMO.
Because ECMO requires complete heparinization to prevent clotting in the circuit, its use is generally avoided in patients with existing
intracranial hemorrhage or who are at high risk of developing intraventricular hemorrhage (weight <2 kg, gestational age <34 weeks). In
addition, infants being considered for ECMO should have reversible
lung disease, no signs of systemic bleeding, and no severe asphyxia or
lethal malformations, and they should have been ventilated for <10
days. Complications of ECMO include thromboembolism, air embolization, bleeding, stroke, seizures, atelectasis, cholestatic jaundice,
thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, hemolysis, infectious complications
of blood transfusions, edema formation, and systemic hypertension.

PROGNOSIS

Survival in patients with PPHN varies with the underlying diagnosis
but is generally ∼90%. Long-­term, survivors of PPHN are at risk for
neurodevelopmental impairment and sensorineural deafness, which
can occur in about 25% of patients. The outcome for infants with
PPHN who are treated with ECMO is also favorable; >80–90% survive,
and 60–75% of survivors appear normal at 1-­3.5 years of age.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1094 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Chapter 131

Diaphragmatic Hernia
Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Susan S. Cohen
A diaphragmatic hernia is defined as a communication between the
abdominal and thoracic cavities with or without abdominal contents in the thorax (Fig. 131.1). The etiology is rarely traumatic
and usually congenital. The symptoms and prognosis depend on
the location of the defect and associated anomalies. The defect
may be at the esophageal hiatus (hiatal hernia); paraesophageal,
adjacent to the hiatus (paraesophageal hernia; see Chapter 131.2);
retrosternal (foramen of Morgagni hernia; see Chapter 131.1); or
at the posterolateral portion of the diaphragm (Bochdalek hernia).
In congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), the Bochdalek hernia
accounts for up to 90% of the hernias seen, with 80–90% occurring
on the left side. The Morgagni hernia accounts for 2–6% of CDH.
The size of the defect is highly variable, ranging from a small hole
to complete agenesis of this area of the diaphragm. These lesions
may cause significant respiratory distress at birth, can be associated
with other congenital anomalies, and have significant mortality and
long-­term morbidity.

CONGENITAL DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA
(BOCHDALEK)
Pathology and Etiology

Although CDH is characterized by a structural diaphragmatic defect,
a major limiting factor for survival is the association with other anomalies, syndromes, and primarily with pulmonary hypoplasia. Lung
hypoplasia was initially thought to be solely caused by the compression
of the lung from the herniated abdominal contents, which impaired
lung growth. However, evidence indicates that pulmonary hypoplasia,
at least in some cases, may precede the development of the diaphragmatic defect.
Pulmonary hypoplasia is characterized by a reduction in pulmonary
mass and the number of bronchial divisions, respiratory bronchioles,
and alveoli. The pathology of pulmonary hypoplasia and CDH includes
abnormal septa in the terminal saccules, thickened alveoli, and thickened pulmonary arterioles. Biochemical abnormalities include relative

surfactant deficiencies, increased glycogen in the alveoli, and decreased
levels of phosphatidylcholine, total DNA, and total lung protein, all of
which contribute to limited gas exchange.

Epidemiology

The incidence of CDH is between 1 in 2,000 and 1 in 3,000 live births,
with males affected more often than females. Defects are more common on the left (85%) and are occasionally bilateral (<5%). Pulmonary hypoplasia and malrotation of the intestine are part of the
lesion, not associated anomalies. Most cases of CDH are nonsyndromic (sporadic; 60%), but familial and syndromic cases have been
reported. Associated anomalies in nonsyndromic patients have been
reported in up to 30% of cases, including hypoplastic left heart syndrome and accessory spleens. CDH is recognized as part of several
aneuploidy syndromes: trisomies 21, 13, and 18 and those with copy
number variation: del 15q26.1-­q26.2, del 8p23.1, del 1q41-­q42, and
del 4p16.3 as well as definable single gene syndromes including Cornelia de Lange, Donnai-­Barrow, Cutis Laxa, cardiac-­urogenital, and
Matthew-­Wood syndromes.

Diagnosis and Clinical Presentation

In >50% of cases, CDH can be diagnosed on prenatal ultrasonography (US) between 16 and 24 weeks of gestation. High-­speed fetal
MRI can further define the lesion. US findings may include polyhydramnios, chest mass, mediastinal shift, gastric bubble or a liver in
the thoracic cavity, and fetal hydrops. Certain imaging features may
predict outcome including liver position in the chest, observed-­to-­
expected total lung volume (O/E TLV), and observed-­to-­expected
lung-­to-­head ratio (O/E LHR). Nonetheless, no definitive characteristic reliably predicts outcome. After delivery, a chest radiograph is
needed to confirm the diagnosis (Fig. 131.2). In some infants with
an echogenic chest mass, further imaging is required. The differential
diagnosis may include other diaphragm disorders, such as eventration or a cystic lung lesion (pulmonary sequestration, cystic adenomatoid malformation).
Arriving at the diagnosis early in pregnancy allows for prenatal
counseling, possible fetal interventions (see Chapter 118), and planning for postnatal care. A referral to a center providing high-­risk
obstetrics, pediatric surgery, and tertiary care neonatology is advised.
Careful evaluation for other anomalies should include echocardiography and amniocentesis. To avoid unnecessary pregnancy termination
and unrealistic expectations, an experienced multidisciplinary group
must carefully counsel the parents of a child diagnosed with a diaphragmatic hernia.
Respiratory distress is a cardinal sign in babies with CDH. It may
occur immediately after birth, or there may be a period of up to 48
hours during which the baby is relatively stable. Respiratory distress

A
Normal diaphragm

A

Bochdalek diaphragmatic defect
with herniation of small lung

B

Fig. 131.1 A, Normal diaphragm separating the abdominal and tho-

racic cavity. B, Diaphragmatic hernia with a small lung and abdominal
contents in the thoracic cavity.

B

Fig. 131.2 Bochdalek hernia. A, Chest radiograph showing herniated
bowel loops in the left hemithorax, displacement of the mediastinum
to the contralateral side, severely reduced lung space, and unclear lung
fields bilaterally. B, Upper gastrointestinal tract radiograph showing the
stomach and bowel loops stained with contrast in the left hemithorax.
(From Hu X, Liu B. Bochdalek hernia. Lancet. 2018;392:60.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 131 u Diaphragmatic Hernia

1095

is characterized clinically by tachypnea, grunting, use of accessory
muscles, and cyanosis. Children with CDH may also have a scaphoid
abdomen and increased chest wall diameter. Bowel sounds may also
be heard in the chest with decreased breath sounds bilaterally. The
point of maximal cardiac impulse may be displaced away from the
side of the hernia if mediastinal shift has occurred. A chest radiograph and passage of a gastric tube are usually sufficient to confirm
the diagnosis.
A small group of infants with CDH present beyond the neonatal period.
Patients with a delayed presentation may experience vomiting as a result
of intestinal obstruction or mild respiratory symptoms. Occasionally,
incarceration of the intestine proceeds to ischemia with sepsis and shock.
Unrecognized diaphragmatic hernia is a rare cause of sudden death in
infants and toddlers. Group B streptococcal sepsis has been associated
with delayed onset of symptoms and a CDH (often right side).

criteria for ECMO have been developed. Birthweight and the 5-­minute
Apgar score may be the best predictors of outcome in patients treated
with ECMO. There is no strict lower weight limit for ECMO, but generally, vessels in infants <1,800 g are too small to cannulate.
The duration of ECMO for neonates with diaphragmatic hernia is longer (than for those with isolated PPHN or meconium aspiration and may
last up to 2-­4 weeks). Timing of repair of the diaphragm while the infant
receives ECMO is controversial; some experts prefer early repair to allow a
greater duration of ECMO after the repair, whereas many defer repair until
the infant has demonstrated the ability to tolerate weaning from ECMO.
The recurrence of pulmonary hypertension is associated with high mortality and weaning from ECMO support should be cautious. If the patient
cannot be weaned from ECMO after repair of CDH, redirection of care
toward comfort is usually offered to families.

Treatment
Initial Management

The most studied prenatal predictor of outcome in children with CDH
studied is fetal US. A prospective study of US at 24-­26 weeks compared
fetal LHR with mortality. There were no survivors with LHR <1, but all
babies with LHR >1.4 survived. A second important consideration is the
presence of liver in the thoracic cavity, which is a poor prognostic feature.
Because LHR measurements increase with gestation, an O/E LHR is considered a more reliable predictor of severity irrespective of GA. O/E LHR
of ≥45% is considered a good prognostic sign, whereas <25% is considered
a poor prognostic sign. Fetal MRI is used at many fetal centers at 28-­32
weeks for prognostication. The advantages of fetal MRI are that they are
operator independent, allow measurement of both lungs, and allow better
tissue contrast and better images. Normal reference values for fetal lung
volumes on MRI have been published and TLV can be compared with the
referent fetus. O/E TLV ≥45% is a good prognostic sign, whereas <25% is
considered a poor prognostic sign.
Based on the observation that hydrostatic pressure exerted by fetal
lung fluid plays a critical role in lung growth and maturity, a promising fetal therapy is in utero tracheal occlusion (fetoscopic endoluminal
tracheal occlusion [FETO]). FETO therapy at 27–29 weeks’ gestation
improves survival from 15% to 40% in fetuses with severe left CDH with
O/E LHR of <25%; preterm birth is a risk factor. FETO therapy is only
offered at a select few centers across the United States (see Chapter 118).

Delivery at a tertiary center with experience in the management of
CDH is required to provide early, appropriate respiratory support. In
the delivery room, infants with respiratory distress should be rapidly
stabilized with endotracheal intubation. Prolonged mask ventilation
in the delivery room, which enlarges the stomach and small bowel and
thus makes oxygenation more difficult, must be avoided and a nasogastric or orogastric tube placed immediately for decompression. Once in
the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), central arterial and venous
(umbilical) lines are placed, pre-­and postductal saturations monitored, and gastric contents intermittently decompressed to prevent
enlargement. A preductal arterial oxygen saturation (Spo2) value
≥85% should be the minimum goal. An initial arterial Pco2 >80
mm Hg is predictive of mortality in infants with CDH. Volutrauma
is a significant problem. Gentle ventilation with permissive hypercapnia reduces lung injury, need for extracorporeal membrane oxygen
(ECMO), and mortality. Factors that contribute to persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN; hypoxia, acidosis, hypothermia) should be avoided (see Chapter 130). Echocardiography is
important to guide therapeutic decisions by measuring pulmonary
and system vascular pressures and defining the presence of cardiac
dysfunction. Routine use of inotropes is indicated in the presence
of left ventricular dysfunction. Neonates with CDH may be surfactant deficient. Although surfactant is frequently used, no study has
proved that it is beneficial in treatment of CDH, and it may precipitate decompensation. In infants with severe respiratory failure and
hypoxemia, sedation and paralysis may be required.

Ventilation Strategies

Conventional mechanical ventilation, high-­frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV), and ECMO are the three main strategies to support
respiratory failure in the newborn with CDH. The goal is to maintain
oxygenation and CO2 elimination without inducing volutrauma. Conventional ventilation using a gentle, lung protective strategy (peak
inspiratory pressure [PIP] <25, positive end-­
expiratory pressure
[PEEP] 3-­5 cm H2O) that allows for permissive hypercapnia (Paco2
<65 mm Hg) is recommended. Permissive hypercapnia (as opposed to
hyperventilation with high PIP) has reduced lung injury and improved
survival. HFOV as a rescue therapy is indicated if a PIP >25 is required
to maintain appropriate ventilation or if hypoxemia persists.
Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) is a selective pulmonary vasodilator. Its
use reduces ductal shunting and pulmonary pressures and results in
improved oxygenation. Although iNO has been helpful in PPHN, randomized trials have not demonstrated improved survival or reduced
need for ECMO when iNO is used in newborns with CDH. Nonetheless, iNO is used in patients with CDH as a bridge to ECMO.

Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation

The availability of ECMO and the utility of preoperative stabilization
has improved survival of babies with CDH. ECMO is the therapeutic
option for children in whom conventional ventilation or HFOV fails.
ECMO is most often used before repair of the defect. Several objective

Prenatal Markers of Severity and Fetal Treatment

Surgical Repair

Most experts plan surgery at least 48 hours after stabilization and resolution of the pulmonary hypertension. Good relative indicators of stability are the requirement for conventional ventilation only, a low PIP,
and Fio2 <50%. If the newborn is receiving ECMO, an ability to be
weaned from this support should be a consideration before surgical
repair. In some centers, the repair is done with the cannulas in place; in
other centers the cannulas are removed. A subcostal approach is most
frequently used (Fig. 131.3). This allows for good visualization of the
defect, and if the abdominal cavity cannot accommodate the herniated
contents, a polymeric silicone (Silastic) patch can be placed, commonly
known as a silo. Both laparoscopic and thoracoscopic repairs have been
reported, but these should be reserved for only the most stable infants.
The defect size and amount of native diaphragm present are variable.
Whenever possible, a primary repair using native tissue is performed. If
the defect is too large, a porous polytetrafluoroethylene (Gore-­Tex) patch
is used.
Following surgical repair, the infant must be carefully monitored for
worsening pulmonary hypertension. In some patients, a postoperative
course of ECMO is needed. Other recognized complications include
bleeding, chylothorax, and bowel obstruction. CDH recurrence can occur
in about 10% of cases, usually during the first year of life, but can occur
up to the first 5 years of life. There is a higher recurrence rate of CDH in
children with patches (the patch does not grow as the child grows) than in
those with native tissue repairs, those with larger defects, and those with
liver in the defect. A loosely fitted patch may reduce the recurrence rates.

Outcome and Long-­Term Survival

Overall survival of liveborn infants with CDH is 75%. Relative predictors
of a poor prognosis include an associated major anomaly and syndromes,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1096 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Diaphragm
defect

although some children report lower quality of life. The burden of the
child’s diagnosis on families long-­term is also reportedly low. ECMO
use is associated with a lower HRQoL in certain domains, as is the
need for special education services in school, and chronic respiratory
problems.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

131.1 Foramen of Morgagni Hernia
Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Susan S. Cohen

A

Diaphragm with
patch repair

B
Fig. 131.3 A, Intraoperative photo of congenital diaphragmatic her-

Failure of the sternal and crural portions of the diaphragm to meet and
fuse produces the foramen of Morgagni hernia. These defects are usually small, with a greater transverse than anteroposterior diameter, and
are more often right sided (90%) but may be bilateral. The transverse
colon, small intestine, or liver is usually contained in the hernial sac.
Most children with these defects are asymptomatic and are diagnosed
beyond the neonatal period, often by chest radiograph performed for
evaluation of another condition. The anterolateral radiograph shows
a structure behind the heart, and a lateral film localizes the mass to
the retrosternal area. Chest CT or MRI confirms the diagnosis. When
symptoms occur, they can include recurrent respiratory infections,
cough, vomiting, or reflux; in rare cases, incarceration may occur.
Repair is recommended for all patients, in view of the risk of bowel
strangulation, and can be accomplished laparoscopically. Prosthetic
material is rarely required.

nia (CDH) before repair. B, Intraoperative photo of patch repair of CDH.

131.2 Paraesophageal Hernia
severe pulmonary hypoplasia, herniation to the contralateral lung, and the
need for ECMO. The size of the defect appears to be the strongest predictor
of morbidity.
Pulmonary problems continue to be a source of morbidity for long-­
term survivors of CDH. Children receiving CDH repair who were studied at 6-­11 years of age demonstrated significant decreases in forced
expiratory flow at 50% of vital capacity and decreased peak expiratory
flow. Chronic lung disease can occur in about 15% of patients. Both
obstructive and restrictive patterns can occur. Those without severe
pulmonary hypertension and volutrauma do the best. Those at highest risk include children who required ECMO and patch repair, but the
data clearly show that CDH survivors who did not require ECMO also
need frequent attention to pulmonary issues. At discharge, up to 20% of
infants require oxygen, but only 1–2% require oxygen past 1 year of age.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is reported in >50% of
children with CDH. GERD is more common in children whose diaphragmatic defect involves the esophageal hiatus. Intestinal obstruction is reported in up to 20% of children and may result from a midgut
volvulus, adhesions, or a recurrent hernia that became incarcerated.
Children with CDH typically have delayed growth in the first 2 years
of life. Contributing factors include poor intake, GERD, and a caloric
requirement that may be higher because of the energy required to breathe.
Many children normalize and “catch up” in growth by the time they are 2
years old.
Neurocognitive defects are common and may result from the disease
or the interventions. The incidence of neurologic abnormalities is higher
in infants who require ECMO (67% vs 24% of those who do not). The
abnormalities are similar to those seen in neonates treated with ECMO
for other diagnoses and include transient and permanent developmental
delay, abnormal hearing or vision, and seizures. Serious hearing loss may
occur in up to 28% of children who underwent ECMO. The majority of
neurologic abnormalities are classified as mild to moderate.
Other long-­term problems include pectus excavatum and scoliosis.
Survivors of CDH repair, particularly those requiring ECMO support,
have a variety of long-­term abnormalities that appear to improve with
time but require close monitoring and multidisciplinary support.
Health-­related quality of life (HRQoL) of school-­
age children
born with CDH is overall good and comparable to healthy children,

Shawn K. Ahlfeld
Paraesophageal hernia is differentiated from the hiatal hernia in that
the gastroesophageal junction is in the normal location. The herniation of the stomach alongside or adjacent to the gastroesophageal junction is prone to incarceration with strangulation and perforation. A
previous Nissen fundoplication and other diaphragmatic procedures
are risk factors. This unusual diaphragmatic hernia should be repaired
promptly after identification.

131.3 Eventration
Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and
Susan S. Cohen
Eventration of the diaphragm is an abnormal elevation consisting of a thinned diaphragmatic muscle that causes elevation of
the entire hemidiaphragm or more often the anterior aspect of the
hemidiaphragm. This elevation produces a paradoxical motion of
the affected hemidiaphragm. Most eventrations are asymptomatic
and do not require repair. A congenital form is the result of either
incomplete development of the muscular portion or central tendon
or abnormal development of the phrenic nerves. Congenital eventration may affect lung development, but it has not been associated
with pulmonary hypoplasia. The differential diagnosis includes
diaphragmatic paralysis, diaphragmatic hernia, traction injury,
and iatrogenic injury after heart surgery. Eventration is also associated with pulmonary sequestration, congenital heart disease, spinal
muscular atrophy with respiratory distress, and chromosomal trisomies. Most eventrations are asymptomatic and do not require repair.
The indications for surgery include continued need for mechanical ventilation, recurrent infections, and failure to thrive. Large or
symptomatic eventrations can be repaired by plication through an
abdominal or thoracic approach that is minimally invasive.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 132 u Pulmonary Air Leaks

Chapter 132

Pulmonary Air Leaks:
Pneumothorax,
Pneumomediastinum,
Pulmonary Interstitial
Emphysema,
Pneumopericardium
Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and
Susan S. Cohen
Pulmonary air leaks represent air breaching the alveolus and
entering potential cavities within the chest. Asymptomatic pneumothorax, usually unilateral, is estimated to occur in 1–2% of all
newborn infants; symptomatic pneumothorax and pneumomediastinum are less common. The incidence of pneumothorax is
increased in infants with lung diseases such as meconium aspiration and respiratory distress syndrome (RDS); in those who
receive assisted ventilation, especially if high-­frequency ventilation (HFV) support is necessary; and in infants with pulmonary
hypoplasia.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The most common cause of pneumothorax is overdistention
resulting in alveolar rupture. Alveolar overdistention can occur
with positive pressure ventilation during neonatal resuscitation,
or it may occur in association with the “ball-­v alve” phenomenon
that results from aspiration (classically meconium) and bronchial/bronchiolar obstruction. Although spontaneous rupture of
an underlying pulmonary malformation (e.g., lobar emphysema,
congenital lung cyst, pneumatocele) occurs, pneumothorax usually occurs in an otherwise normal lung, and no underlying etiology is identified.
Pneumothorax associated with pulmonary hypoplasia is common,
tends to occur during the first few hours after birth, and is caused by
reduced alveolar surface area and poorly compliant lungs. It is associated with disorders of decreased amniotic fluid volume (Potter syndrome, renal agenesis, renal dysplasia, chronic amniotic fluid leak),
decreased fetal breathing movement (oligohydramnios, neuromuscular disease, fetal akinesia syndrome), pulmonary space-­occupying
lesions (diaphragmatic hernia, pleural effusion, chylothorax), and thoracic abnormalities (thoracic dystrophies).
Gas from a ruptured alveolus escapes into the interstitial spaces of
the lung, where it tracks along small conducting airways and dissects
along the peribronchial and perivascular connective tissue sheaths to
the hilum of the lung (pulmonary interstitial emphysema, PIE). If the
volume of escaped air is great enough, it may collect in the mediastinal
space (pneumomediastinum) or rupture into the pleural space (pneumothorax), subcutaneous tissue (subcutaneous emphysema), and/or
pericardial sac (pneumopericardium).
Tension pneumothorax occurs if an accumulation of air within the
pleural space is sufficient to elevate intrapleural pressure above atmospheric pressure. Unilateral tension pneumothorax results in impaired
ventilation not only in the ipsilateral lung but also in the contralateral

1097

lung because of a shift in the mediastinum toward the contralateral
side. Compression of the vena cava and torsion of the great vessels may
interfere with venous return.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The physical findings of a clinically asymptomatic pneumothorax
are hyperresonance and diminished ipsilateral breath sounds with or
without tachypnea. Symptomatic pneumothorax is characterized by
respiratory distress, which varies from merely high respiratory rate to
severe dyspnea, tachypnea, and cyanosis. Irritability and restlessness
or apnea may be the earliest signs. The onset is usually sudden but
may be gradual; an infant may rapidly become critically ill. Physical
exam findings include chest asymmetry with an increased anteroposterior diameter, hyperresonance, and diminished or absent breath
sounds. The heart is displaced toward the contralateral side, resulting
in displacement of the cardiac apex and point of maximal impulse.
The diaphragm is displaced downward, as is the liver with right-­sided
pneumothorax, and may result in abdominal distention. Because
pneumothorax may be bilateral in approximately 10% of patients,
symmetry of findings does not rule it out. In tension pneumothorax,
signs of shock are typical.
Pneumomediastinum can occur with or without a pneumothorax
and itself is usually asymptomatic. The degree of respiratory distress
depends on the amount of trapped gas; if great, bulging of the midthoracic area is observed, the neck veins are distended, and blood
pressure is low. The last two findings are a result of tamponade of the
systemic and pulmonary veins. Although often asymptomatic, subcutaneous emphysema in newborn infants is almost pathognomonic of
pneumomediastinum. Rarely, air may embolize into the circulation
(pulmonary air embolism) and cause cutaneous blanching, air in intravascular catheters, an air-­filled heart and vessels on chest radiographs,
and death.
PIE may precede the development of a pneumothorax or may occur
independently and lead to increasing respiratory distress as a result of
decreased compliance, hypercapnia, and hypoxemia. Hypoxemia is
caused by an increased Pa-­ao2 gradient and intrapulmonary shunting.
Progressive enlargement of blebs of gas may result in cystic dilation
and respiratory deterioration resembling pneumothorax. In severe
cases, PIE precedes the development of bronchopulmonary dysplasia
(BPD). Avoidance of high inspiratory or mean airway pressures may
prevent the development of PIE.
Pneumopericardium is generally associated with pneumothorax
with air moving into the pericardium via areas of weakness in the
pericardiac sac or via embryonic connections between the pleura and
pericardium. Pneumopericardium may be asymptomatic, requiring
only general supportive treatment, but it usually manifests as sudden
shock with tachycardia, muffled heart sounds, and poor pulses suggesting tamponade. Air pressure within the pericardium can cause cardiac
tamponade.
Preterm infants whose course is complicated by pulmonary air leaks
are at increased risk for mortality, BPD (see Chapter 127), severe intracranial hemorrhage, and prolonged NICU stays.

DIAGNOSIS

Pneumothorax and other air leaks should be suspected in newborn
infants who show signs of respiratory distress, are restless or irritable,
or have a sudden change in condition. The diagnosis of pneumothorax
is established by chest radiography, with the edge of the collapsed lung
standing out in relief against the pneumothorax (Fig. 132.1). Pneumomediastinum is signified by hyperlucency around the heart border and
between the sternum and the heart border and the displacement of the
thymus by air, typically referred to as the “spinnaker sail” sign (Fig.
132.2). Transillumination of the thorax is often helpful in the emergency diagnosis of pneumothorax; the affected side transmits excessive light. In pneumopericardium, chest radiography demonstrates a
halo of air around the cardiac silhouette. PIE appears as small cystic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1098 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
TREATMENT

A

B

Fig. 132.1 A, Right-­sided tension pneumothorax and widespread

right lung pulmonary interstitial emphysema (PIE) in a preterm infant
receiving intensive care. B, Resolution of pneumothorax with a chest
tube in place; PIE persists. (From Meerstadt PWD, Gyll C. Manual of
Neonatal Emergency X-­
Ray Interpretation. Philadelphia: Saunders;
1994. p. 73.)

Fig. 132.2 Pneumomediastinum in newborn infant. Anteroposterior
view (left) demonstrates compression of the lungs, and lateral view
(right) shows bulging of the sternum, each resulting from distention of
the mediastinum by trapped air.

radiolucencies along the interstitium often with hyperexpansion and is
typically only seen in premature infants with preexisting lung disease.

PREVENTION

Early recognition of patients at risk for air leak is essential. Infants
with oligohydramnios, extreme prematurity, or congenital pulmonary
malformations are at increased risk. Surfactant therapy for RDS (see
Chapter 126) reduces the incidence of pneumothorax. Avoidance of
high inspiratory or mean airway pressures may prevent the development of air leaks.

Without a continued air leak, small asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and pneumopericardium require only close observation. Conservative management of a
pneumothorax is effective even in selected infants requiring ventilatory support. Frequent small feedings may prevent gastric dilation
and minimize crying, which can further compromise ventilation and
worsen the pneumothorax. Breathing 100% oxygen in term infants
may accelerate the resorption of free pleural air into blood by reducing the nitrogen tension in blood and producing a resultant nitrogen
pressure gradient from the trapped gas in the blood; however, this is no
longer practiced given the risks of oxygen toxicity.
When a pneumothorax is large, expanding, or with severe respiratory or circulatory embarrassment, emergency decompression by
needle thoracentesis and/or chest tube placement is indicated. Needle
thoracentesis is typically accomplished with the use of an angiocath
or a 23-­gauge butterfly needle attached to a stopcock and syringe to
withdraw air. It can be inserted into the second intercostal space of the
anterior chest. After the needle thoracentesis a chest radiograph should
be obtained to evaluate and monitor for reaccumulation.
Chest tube placement should be undertaken in cases of recurrent pneumothorax after needle decompression or as a primary
intervention in select patients at risk for ongoing air leak (i.e., on
high-­
pressure invasive ventilation). In studies comparing needle
decompression with primary chest tube placement there are no differences in mortality; however, approximately 30% of patients receiving a needle thoracentesis eventually required chest tube placement.
Chest tube placement should occur under sterile conditions whenever possible and be preceded by appropriate analgesia. Pigtail catheters are the preferred type of chest tube in infants because of higher
success rates and low complication rates. These catheters are placed
using the Seldinger technique by introducing a needle, aspirating free
air, and subsequently introducing a guidewire over which a pigtail
catheter is advanced. Ideally the chest tube should be introduced into
the fourth intercostal space (generally at the level of the nipple) in
the anterior axillary line. Following placement, the chest tube should
be attached to underwater seal drainage or continuous suction (−5
to −20 cm H2O). Serial chest radiographs should be obtained for all
infants with a chest tube in place.
Pneumopericardium with clinical symptoms (tamponade) requires
prompt evacuation of entrapped air via pericardiocentesis. Pericardiocentesis should be performed using sterile technique and
analgesia whenever possible. Ideally an echocardiogram should
be completed before undertaking the procedure and cardiology
or cardiothoracic surgery involvement is encouraged. Continuous
cardiopulmonary monitoring is essential during the procedure. A
20–23-­gauge butterfly needle is introduced into the chest to the left
of the subxiphoid process at a 30–45-­degree angle pointing toward
the right shoulder. The needle is advanced until air returns and the
pericardium is subsequently evacuated of air. The provider should
stop aspirating once air no longer returns, if there is blood return,
or if ectopy is observed. Following the procedure an echocardiogram should be obtained.
Treatment of PIE may include bronchoscopy in patients with evidence of mucous plugging, selective intubation and ventilation of the
uninvolved bronchus, oxygen, general respiratory care, and use of HFV.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 134 u Digestive System Disorders

Chapter 133

Chapter 134

Pulmonary Hemorrhage

Digestive System
Disorders

Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and
Susan S. Cohen
Massive pulmonary hemorrhage is a relatively uncommon, but catastrophic complication with a high risk of morbidity and mortality. Some degree of pulmonary hemorrhage occurs in about 10%
of extremely preterm infants. However, massive pulmonary hemorrhage is less common and can be fatal. Autopsy demonstrates
massive pulmonary hemorrhage in 15% of neonates who die in the
first 2 weeks of life. The reported incidence at autopsy varies from
1-­4 per 1,000 live births. Approximately 75% of affected patients
weigh <2,500 g at birth. Prophylactic indomethacin in extremely
low birthweight (ELBW) infants reduces the incidence of pulmonary hemorrhage.
Most infants with pulmonary hemorrhage have had symptoms of
respiratory distress that are indistinguishable from those of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). The onset may occur at birth or
may be delayed several days. Hemorrhagic pulmonary edema is
the source of blood in many cases and is associated with significant
ductal shunting and high pulmonary blood flow or severe left-­sided
heart failure resulting from hypoxia. In severe cases, sudden cardiovascular collapse, poor lung compliance, profound cyanosis, and
hypercapnia may be present. Radiographic findings are varied and
nonspecific, ranging from minor streaking or patchy infiltrates to
massive consolidation.
The risk of pulmonary hemorrhage is increased in association
with acute pulmonary infection, severe asphyxia, RDS, assisted
ventilation, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), congenital heart disease, erythroblastosis fetalis, hemorrhagic disease of the newborn,
thrombocytopenia, inborn errors of ammonia metabolism, and
cold injury. Pulmonary hemorrhage is the only severe complication
in which the rate is increased with surfactant treatment. Pulmonary hemorrhage is seen with all surfactants; the incidence ranges
from 1–5% of treated infants and is higher with natural surfactant.
Bleeding is predominantly alveolar in approximately 65% of cases
and interstitial in the rest. Bleeding into other organs is observed
at autopsy of severely ill neonates, suggesting an additional bleeding diathesis, such as disseminated intravascular coagulation. In
preterm infants, often intraventricular hemorrhage can occur at
the same time. Acute pulmonary hemorrhage may rarely occur in
previously healthy full-­term infants. The cause is unknown. Pulmonary hemorrhage may manifest as hemoptysis or blood in the
nasopharynx or airway with no evidence of upper respiratory or
gastrointestinal bleeding. Patients present with acute, severe respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation. Chest radiographs
usually demonstrate bilateral alveolar infiltrates. The condition usually responds to intensive supportive treatment (see Chapter 458).
Treatment of pulmonary hemorrhage includes blood replacement, suctioning to clear the airway, intratracheal administration
of epinephrine, and tamponade with increased mean airway pressure (often requiring high-­f requency ventilation [HFV]). Although
surfactant treatment has been associated with the development
of pulmonary hemorrhage, administration of exogenous surfactant after the bleeding has occurred can improve lung compliance,
because the presence of intraalveolar blood and protein can inactivate surfactant.

1099

Robert M. Kliegman
Signs and symptoms suggestive of gastrointestinal (GI) tract pathology in the newborn may reflect immaturity, disorders specific to
the GI tract, or systemic diseases affecting the GI tract as part of a
multisystem disorder (Table 134.1; see Chapter 121).
Feeding intolerance in the very low birthweight neonate may be
due to immaturity of GI motility but also to anatomic lesions from
the esophagus to the anus, as well as systemic, metabolic (galactosemia, etc.), or inflammatory processes (sepsis, hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis). Recognizing other organ system abnormalities and abnormal laboratory findings (anemia, thrombocytopenia,
leukocytosis, neutropenia, elevated inflammatory markers, acidosis, hypoglycemia) may help identify the specific disease.

Table 134.1  Differential Diagnosis of Gastrointestinal
Symptoms
SYMPTOM

GI DISORDERS

SYSTEMIC DISORDERS

Emesis

Reflux
Volvulus
Pyloric stenosis
Hirschsprung disease
Imperforate anus
NEC
Meconium plug

Sepsis
Inborn error of metabolism
Congenital adrenal
hyperplasia
Increased intracranial
pressure

Jaundice

Hepatitis
Biliary atresia
GALD
PFIC
Alagille syndrome

Physiologic
Hemolysis
HLH
Sepsis
HSV
Inborn error of metabolism

Abdominal
distention

Feeding intolerance
GI obstruction
Meconium plug
Ileus
Meconium ileus
NEC
Pseudoobstruction
Inguinal hernia

Sepsis
Hypokalemia
Hydronephrosis
Ascites
Hypermagnesemia

GALD, Gestational alloimmune liver disease; PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic
cholestasis; GI, gastrointestinal; NEC, necrotizing enterocolitis; HLH, hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis; HSV, herpes simplex virus.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 134 u Digestive System Disorders

Chapter 133

Chapter 134

Pulmonary Hemorrhage

Digestive System
Disorders

Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and
Susan S. Cohen
Massive pulmonary hemorrhage is a relatively uncommon, but catastrophic complication with a high risk of morbidity and mortality. Some degree of pulmonary hemorrhage occurs in about 10%
of extremely preterm infants. However, massive pulmonary hemorrhage is less common and can be fatal. Autopsy demonstrates
massive pulmonary hemorrhage in 15% of neonates who die in the
first 2 weeks of life. The reported incidence at autopsy varies from
1-­4 per 1,000 live births. Approximately 75% of affected patients
weigh <2,500 g at birth. Prophylactic indomethacin in extremely
low birthweight (ELBW) infants reduces the incidence of pulmonary hemorrhage.
Most infants with pulmonary hemorrhage have had symptoms of
respiratory distress that are indistinguishable from those of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). The onset may occur at birth or
may be delayed several days. Hemorrhagic pulmonary edema is
the source of blood in many cases and is associated with significant
ductal shunting and high pulmonary blood flow or severe left-­sided
heart failure resulting from hypoxia. In severe cases, sudden cardiovascular collapse, poor lung compliance, profound cyanosis, and
hypercapnia may be present. Radiographic findings are varied and
nonspecific, ranging from minor streaking or patchy infiltrates to
massive consolidation.
The risk of pulmonary hemorrhage is increased in association
with acute pulmonary infection, severe asphyxia, RDS, assisted
ventilation, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), congenital heart disease, erythroblastosis fetalis, hemorrhagic disease of the newborn,
thrombocytopenia, inborn errors of ammonia metabolism, and
cold injury. Pulmonary hemorrhage is the only severe complication
in which the rate is increased with surfactant treatment. Pulmonary hemorrhage is seen with all surfactants; the incidence ranges
from 1–5% of treated infants and is higher with natural surfactant.
Bleeding is predominantly alveolar in approximately 65% of cases
and interstitial in the rest. Bleeding into other organs is observed
at autopsy of severely ill neonates, suggesting an additional bleeding diathesis, such as disseminated intravascular coagulation. In
preterm infants, often intraventricular hemorrhage can occur at
the same time. Acute pulmonary hemorrhage may rarely occur in
previously healthy full-­term infants. The cause is unknown. Pulmonary hemorrhage may manifest as hemoptysis or blood in the
nasopharynx or airway with no evidence of upper respiratory or
gastrointestinal bleeding. Patients present with acute, severe respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation. Chest radiographs
usually demonstrate bilateral alveolar infiltrates. The condition usually responds to intensive supportive treatment (see Chapter 458).
Treatment of pulmonary hemorrhage includes blood replacement, suctioning to clear the airway, intratracheal administration
of epinephrine, and tamponade with increased mean airway pressure (often requiring high-­f requency ventilation [HFV]). Although
surfactant treatment has been associated with the development
of pulmonary hemorrhage, administration of exogenous surfactant after the bleeding has occurred can improve lung compliance,
because the presence of intraalveolar blood and protein can inactivate surfactant.

1099

Robert M. Kliegman
Signs and symptoms suggestive of gastrointestinal (GI) tract pathology in the newborn may reflect immaturity, disorders specific to
the GI tract, or systemic diseases affecting the GI tract as part of a
multisystem disorder (Table 134.1; see Chapter 121).
Feeding intolerance in the very low birthweight neonate may be
due to immaturity of GI motility but also to anatomic lesions from
the esophagus to the anus, as well as systemic, metabolic (galactosemia, etc.), or inflammatory processes (sepsis, hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis). Recognizing other organ system abnormalities and abnormal laboratory findings (anemia, thrombocytopenia,
leukocytosis, neutropenia, elevated inflammatory markers, acidosis, hypoglycemia) may help identify the specific disease.

Table 134.1  Differential Diagnosis of Gastrointestinal
Symptoms
SYMPTOM

GI DISORDERS

SYSTEMIC DISORDERS

Emesis

Reflux
Volvulus
Pyloric stenosis
Hirschsprung disease
Imperforate anus
NEC
Meconium plug

Sepsis
Inborn error of metabolism
Congenital adrenal
hyperplasia
Increased intracranial
pressure

Jaundice

Hepatitis
Biliary atresia
GALD
PFIC
Alagille syndrome

Physiologic
Hemolysis
HLH
Sepsis
HSV
Inborn error of metabolism

Abdominal
distention

Feeding intolerance
GI obstruction
Meconium plug
Ileus
Meconium ileus
NEC
Pseudoobstruction
Inguinal hernia

Sepsis
Hypokalemia
Hydronephrosis
Ascites
Hypermagnesemia

GALD, Gestational alloimmune liver disease; PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic
cholestasis; GI, gastrointestinal; NEC, necrotizing enterocolitis; HLH, hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis; HSV, herpes simplex virus.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1100 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Chapter 135

Meconium Ileus,
Peritonitis, Intestinal
Obstruction, and
Gastroschisis
Eric C. Eichenwald
Meconium consists of bile salts, bile acids, and debris shed from the
intestinal mucosa in the intrauterine period. More than 90% of full-­
term newborn infants and 80% of very low birthweight (VLBW)
infants pass meconium within the first 24 hours. The possibility of
intestinal obstruction should be considered in any infant who does not
pass meconium by 24-­36 hours.

MECONIUM PLUGS

Meconium plugs syndrome refers to intestinal obstruction, usually in the distal colon, rectum, and anal canal, caused by meconium plugs (Fig. 135.1). Resulting from a disproportionately low
amount of water in the intestinal lumen, meconium plugs are a rare
cause of intrauterine intestinal obstruction and meconium peritonitis unrelated to cystic fibrosis (CF). Anorectal plugs may also
cause mucosal ulceration from bowel wall erosion and subsequent
intestinal perforation. Meconium plugs are associated with small
left colon syndrome in infants of diabetic mothers, infants with CF
(40%) and Hirschsprung disease (40%), maternal opiate use, and
magnesium sulfate therapy for preeclampsia and tocolysis. Up to
30% of patients can have spontaneous resolution. Initial treatment
may include administration of a glycerin suppository or rectal irrigation with isotonic saline. In up to 95% of patients, a Gastrografin enema (meglumine diatrizoate, a hyperosmolar, water-­soluble,
radiopaque solution containing 0.1% polysorbate 80 [Tween 80]
and 37% organically bound iodine) will be both diagnostic and
therapeutic, inducing passage of the plug, presumably because the
high osmolarity (1,900 mOsm/L) of the solution draws fluid rapidly
into the intestinal lumen and loosens the inspissated material. Such
rapid loss of fluid into the bowel may result in acute fluid shifts
with dehydration and shock, so it is advisable to dilute the contrast
material with an equal amount of water and provide intravenous
(IV) fluids, during and for several hours after the procedure, sufficient to maintain normal vital signs, urine output, and electrolytes.
After removal of a meconium plug, the infant should be observed
closely, and consideration given to performing diagnostic testing to
identify Hirschsprung disease (congenital aganglionic megacolon;
see Chapter 378.4) and CF (see Chapter 454).

Meconium ileus is primarily associated with cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) pathologic variants F508del, G542X,
W1282X, R553X, and G551D. Patients with two copies of the
F508del variant have a 25% chance of presenting with meconium
ileus. F508del plus any other CF mutation confers 17% risk, and
two other CF variants confer a 12% risk of meconium ileus. In addition, non-­CFTR genetic modifier genes influence meconium ileus.
In families who already have at least one child with CF complicated
by meconium ileus, there is a 39% risk for meconium ileus in subsequent children, which is more than the rates expected with autosomal recessive inheritance. In a twin study, 82% of monozygotic
twins showed concordance for meconium ileus, whereas only 22%
of dizygotic and 24% of two affected siblings showed concordance.
Positive newborn screening for CF should prompt sweat testing
when the infant weighs >2 kg and is at least 36 weeks of corrected
gestational age. Genetic testing confirms the diagnosis of CF (see
Chapter 454). In ∼20% of patients with meconium ileus, there is no
evidence of CF; in some of these patients, pathogenic variants in
GUCY2C are identified.
The differential diagnosis involves other causes of intestinal
obstruction, including intestinal pseudoobstruction, and other
causes of pancreatic insufficiency (see Chapter 398). Prenatal
diagnosis is readily achieved by ultrasound with identification of
enlarged bowel loops or a mass with distention of the proximal small
bowel. Clinically the diagnosis can be made with a history of CF in

A

MECONIUM ILEUS

Meconium ileus, or impaction of inspissated meconium in the distal
small bowel, accounts for up to 30% of cases of neonatal intestinal
obstruction. It is common in patients with CF in whom the lack of
fetal pancreatic enzymes inhibits digestive mechanisms, and meconium becomes viscid and mucilaginous. Clinically, neonates present
with intestinal obstruction with or without perforation. Abdominal
distention is prominent, and vomiting, often bilious, becomes persistent, although occasionally inspissated meconium stools may be passed
shortly after birth. Meconium ileus can present as early as in utero,
in which the fetus develops acute intestinal obstruction resulting in
volvulus or perforation, peritoneal ascites, meconium peritonitis, and
hydrops; if untreated, fetal loss may occur.

B
Fig. 135.1 Meconium plug. A, Meconium plug evacuated after a di-

agnostic contrast enema demonstrated the distinctive white tip (arrow).
B, Image from a contrast enema in a term neonate with vomiting and
bowel distension demonstrates the long filling defect characteristic of
meconium plug syndrome. The child was relieved of the obstruction
after evacuation of the plug, without recurrence of symptoms. (From
Hernanz-­Schulman M. Congenital and neonatal disorders. In Coley BD,
ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013: Fig. 106-­14.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 135 u Meconium Ileus, Peritonitis, Intestinal Obstruction, and Gastroschisis

1101

Mid ileum with
thick tarlike
tenacious
meconium
“Microcolon”
Proximal
small bowel
with more fluid
meconium
Distal ileum
with pellets
of meconium

A

A

B

Fig. 135.3 Uncomplicated meconium ileus. A, Abdominal radiograph

in 3-­
day-­
old infant with abdominal distention and bilious aspirates
shows dilation of multiple loops of bowel. No calcifications are seen
on the radiograph to suggest complicated meconium ileus. Orogastric
tube near the gastroesophageal junction was subsequently advanced.
B, Contrast enema demonstrates a microcolon, with multiple meconium plugs, consistent with the diagnosis of meconium ileus. (From
Hernanz-­Schulman M. Congenital and neonatal disorders. In Coley BD,
ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 102-­36)

B
Fig. 135.2 Meconium ileus. A, Schematic drawing of uncomplicated

meconium ileus. Pellets of inspissated meconium fill the terminal ileum
proximal to a microcolon. Several loops of more proximal ileum contain
thick, tenacious meconium. B, Enterotomy of proximal bowel and the
nature of the thick and tenacious meconium. Note the dilated proximal
loops of bowel filled with meconium and the progressively small caliber
of the distal bowel leading to the microcolon. (A from Leonidas JC,
Berdon WE, et al. Meconium ileus and its complications: a reappraisal
of plain film roentgen diagnostic criteria. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther
Nucl Med. 970;108[3]:598–609; B courtesy Dr. Wallace W. Neblett III,
Nashville, TN.)

a sibling, by palpation of doughy or cordlike masses of intestines
through the abdominal wall, and from the radiographic appearance.
Plain radiographs reveal small bowel obstruction. Air-­fluid levels
may not be apparent because of the thickened meconium.
In contrast to the generally evenly distended intestinal loops above
an atresia, the loops may vary in width and are not as evenly filled
with gas. At points of heaviest meconium concentration, the infiltrated gas may create a bubbly, granular appearance (Figs. 135.2 and
135.3).
Treatment for simple meconium ileus is a high-­osmolarity Gastrografin enema, as described for meconium plugs. If the procedure
is unsuccessful or perforation of the bowel wall is suspected, a laparotomy is performed and the ileum opened at the point of largest
diameter of the impaction. Approximately 50% of these infants have
associated intestinal atresia, stenosis, or volvulus that requires surgery.
The inspissated meconium is removed by gentle and patient irrigation with warm isotonic sodium chloride or N-­acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) solution through a catheter passed between the impaction and

the bowel wall. Some patients will require bowel resection with a temporary double-­barrel enterostomy followed by serial irrigations and
distal refeeding, or primary anastomosis at the initial operation. Most
infants with meconium ileus survive the neonatal period. If meconium ileus is associated with CF, the long-­term prognosis depends on
the severity of the underlying disease (see Chapter 454). In ∼20% of
patients with meconium ileus, there is no evidence of CF; in some of
these patients pathogenic variants in GUCY2C are identified.

MECONIUM PERITONITIS

Perforation of the intestine may occur in utero or shortly after birth.
Frequently, the intestinal perforation seals naturally with relatively
little meconium leakage into the peritoneal cavity. Perforations occur
most often as a complication of meconium ileus in infants with CF
but occasionally result from a meconium plug or in utero intestinal
obstruction of another cause.
Cases at the most severe end of the spectrum may be diagnosed
on prenatal ultrasound with fetal ascites, polyhydramnios, bowel
dilation, intraabdominal speckled calcifications, and hydrops fetalis
(Fig. 135.4). At the other end are cases in which an intestinal perforation may seal spontaneously and patients remain asymptomatic,
except when meconium becomes calcified and is later discovered
on radiographs. Alternatively, the clinical picture may be dominated by signs of intestinal obstruction (as in meconium ileus) with
abdominal distention, vomiting, and absence of stools or chemical
peritonitis presenting with sepsis. Treatment consists primarily of
elimination of the intestinal obstruction and drainage of the peritoneal cavity with a timely surgical intervention proved to result
in high survival rate and favorable outcome even in complicated
meconium peritonitis.

GASTROSCHISIS

Gastroschisis is the herniation of abdominal contents (usually small
intestine) through a defect in the anterior abdominal wall lateral to the
umbilical cord (Fig. 135.5). The etiology is unknown, but it has been

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1102 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

B

A

C

D

E

Fig. 135.4 Complicated meconium ileus. A, Abdominal radiograph in 2-­day-­old girl with abdominal distention and bilious aspirates shows absence
of bowel gas in the right abdomen with a partly calcified mass displacing gas-­filled dilated loops of bowel to the left. B, Ultrasound image demonstrates the subhepatic, partly calcified mass with internal debris and fluid-­fluid level (arrowhead). C, Additional ultrasound image shows a portion of
the cyst wall (arrows) and multiple, abnormal, hyperechoic loops of bowel. D, Abdominal radiograph in different 1-­day-­old infant shows a calcified
mass in right upper quadrant, shown at sonography to represent a loculated complex meconium collection. E, Radiograph a few hours later of the
same infant shown in D shows a persistent perforation with gas entering into the right upper quadrant collection (arrows). (From Hernanz-­Schulman
M. Congenital and neonatal disorders. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 102-­37)

Chapter 136

Necrotizing Enterocolitis
Sagori Mukhopadhyay and Misty Good
Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is the most common life-­threatening
emergency of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract in the newborn period. The
disease is characterized by various degrees of mucosal or transmural
necrosis of the intestine followed by local and systemic inflammation.
The cause of NEC remains unclear but is most likely multifactorial.

DEFINITION

Fig. 135.5 Intraoperative view of a complex gastroschisis with intesti-

nal atresia. Note the severe bowel matting in the complex gastroschisis.
(Modified from Vinit N, Talbotec C, De Tristan MA, et al. Predicting
factors of protracted intestinal failure in children with gastroschisis. J
Pediatr. 2022;243:122–129. Fig. 1B.)

associated with young maternal age and possible opioid use; the incidence is ∼2-­5 infants in 10,000 births.
Gastroschisis is usually an isolated anomaly but has a high morbidity
and mortality especially in complex lesions associated with intestinal
atresias and necrosis resulting in short bowel syndrome and intestinal failure (see Chapter 385.6). Treatment requires resection of atretic
or necrotic tissue and long-­term parenteral alimentation until enteral
nutrition can be established.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

NEC is clinically identified using a combination of clinical and radiographic signs and staged by categorizing NEC into suspected (stage I),
definite (stage II, clinical signs of abdominal pathology with an abnormal abdominal radiograph showing pneumatosis intestinalis, portal
venous gas, or ileus), and advanced (stage III, signs of stage II plus
severe systemic signs of inflammation and acidosis with or without
signs of intestinal perforation). In addition, NEC is also categorized
into medical and surgical NEC defined by the type of acute intervention required. These criteria have been criticized for categorizing conditions with heterogeneous origins as the same disease. For example,
conditions such as spontaneous intestinal perforation, septic ileus, and
allergic enterocolitis can present with signs similar to NEC, but they
arise from differing pathogenesis and may have differing outcomes.
Similarly, term infants often present with NEC attributable to coexisting conditions such as congenital heart disease or gastroschisis,
and likely do not share identical pathogenesis with NEC occurring in
preterm infants. To minimize the heterogeneity of presentations that
get diagnosed as NEC, a definition of “preterm NEC” has been proposed for use in clinical research. Preterm NEC in clinical research
is defined by the presence of (1) clinical sign of abdominal distention
and/or hematochezia; (2) onset between 10 days after birth to 36 weeks’
postmenstrual age with the highest risk period being 30-­32 weeks’

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 136 u Necrotizing Enterocolitis
postmenstrual age; and (3) one of the following—pneumatosis intestinalis or portal venous gas by radiograph or ultrasound, histopathologic
evidence of intestinal necrosis, or evidence of vasculitis, coagulopathy,
or inflammation in the absence of infection.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Epidemiologic studies have reported changes in NEC incidence in the past
decade. Among 473,895 very low birthweight infants (VLBW, birthweight
<1,500 g) admitted to one of 820 centers in the United States (2006-2017),
the overall rate of NEC was 7.6%. From 2006–2017, there was a significant
reduction in the prevalence of medical but not surgical NEC; mortality
with NEC also decreased from 20.7% to16.8% among infants with medical
NEC, and 36.6% to 31.6% for neonates with surgical NEC.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Many factors contribute to the development of the pathologic findings of NEC, including mucosal ischemia and subsequent necrosis; gas
accumulation in the submucosa of the bowel wall (pneumatosis intestinalis); and progression of the necrosis to perforation, peritonitis,
sepsis, and death. An overview of common hypothesized pathogenic
mechanisms, related clinical presentation, and management is shown
in Figure 136.1. The distal part of the ileum and the proximal segment
of the colon are involved most frequently; in fatal cases, transmural
necrosis may extend from the stomach to the rectum (NEC totalis).
The pathogenesis of NEC is not fully understood, but three major
risk factors have been implicated: prematurity, bacterial colonization
of the gut, and enteral feeding. NEC develops primarily in premature infants with exposure to a nutritional substrate in the context of
immature intestinal motility, and immunity, microbial dysbiosis, and
mucosal ischemia. An underlying genetic predisposition is recognized
with variants in genes regulating immunomodulation and inflammation (e.g., toll-­like receptor-­4, interleukin [IL]-­4 receptor α chain, IL-­
6), apoptosis and cellular repair (e.g., platelet-­activating factor), and

1103

oxidant stress (e.g., vascular endothelial growth factor, arginine, nitric
oxide). The greatest risk factor for NEC is prematurity, with a mean onset
between 30 and 32 weeks’ postmenstrual age. Other risk factors include
small for gestational age, polycythemia, and conditions resulting in in
utero hypoxia. NEC rarely occurs before the initiation of enteral feeding and is much less common in infants fed human milk.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infants with NEC have a variety of signs and symptoms and may have
an insidious or sudden catastrophic onset (Table 136.1). Age of onset is
inversely related to gestational age. The first signs of impending disease
may be nonspecific, including lethargy and temperature instability, or
related to GI pathology, such as abdominal tenderness and distention,
feeding intolerance, and bloody stools. Because of nonspecific signs, sepsis
may be suspected before NEC. The spectrum of illness is broad, ranging
from mild disease with only guaiac-­positive stools to severe illness with
bowel perforation, peritonitis, systemic inflammatory response syndrome,
shock, and death. Laboratory findings may include neutropenia, anemia,
thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy, and metabolic acidosis. Hypotension
and respiratory failure are common. Progression may be rapid, but it is
unusual for the disease to progress from mild to severe after 72 hours.

DIAGNOSIS

A very high index of suspicion in treating preterm at-­risk infants is crucial.
Plain abdominal radiographs are essential to make a diagnosis of NEC.
The finding of pneumatosis intestinalis confirms the clinical suspicion of
NEC and is diagnostic; 50–75% of patients have pneumatosis when treatment is started (Fig. 136.2). Portal venous gas is a sign of severe disease,
and pneumoperitoneum indicates a perforation (Figs. 136.3 and 136.4).
Ultrasound may be useful to evaluate for free fluid, abscess, pneumatosis intestinalis, and bowel wall thickness, peristalsis, and perfusion (Fig.
136.5). Doppler flowmetry studies can be used to assess flow in superior
mesenteric artery and portal vein.

Provide hemodynamic support
Improve oxygen delivery
Treat acidosis
Minimize metabolic demand
Treat anemia and coagulation
abnormalities

Initiate broad-spectrum
antibiotic coverage
Preventative measures —
probiotics and restricting
unnecessary antibiotic use

Blood and other
microbiological cultures
Molecular diagnostics
for virus detection

Blood gas/lactate
Electrolytes, creatinine
Hematological profile
Hypoxia/Ischemia

Microbial injury

Prematurity

Genetics

Mechanical and
mucosal injury

Genetic variants in
Toll-like receptor-4,
IL-4 receptor α-chain,
IL-16

Abdominal X-ray
Ultrasound
Markers of inflammation
Markers of gut injury

Encourage research to
determine mechanisms of
injury and beneficial
interventions

Decompression
Hold feeds
Preventative measure — use of
human milk

Fig. 136.1 Overview of risk factors and mechanisms of injury in necrotizing enterocolitis–associated presentation and management approaches.
Bold indicates interventions that are common first-­line interventions for NEC. IL, Interleukin. (Figure created by authors using BioRender.com.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1104 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 136.1  Signs and Symptoms Associated with Necrotizing Enterocolitis
GASTROINTESTINAL
Abdominal distention
Abdominal tenderness
Feeding intolerance
Delayed gastric emptying
Emesis
Occult/gross blood in stool
Change in stool pattern/diarrhea
Abdominal mass
Erythema of abdominal wall

SYSTEMIC
Lethargy
Apnea/respiratory distress
Temperature instability
Acidosis (metabolic and/or respiratory)
Glucose instability
Poor perfusion/shock
Thrombocytopenia
Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy

From Kanto WP Jr, Hunter JE, Stoll BJ. Recognition and medical management of necrotizing enterocolitis. Clin Perinatol. 1994;21:335–346.

ureter-­
bladder
Fig. 136.2 Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). Kidney-­
film demonstrates abdominal distention, hepatic portal venous gas (arrow), and a bubbly appearance of pneumatosis intestinalis (arrowhead;
right lower quadrant). The latter two signs are thought to be pathognomonic for neonatal NEC.

Fig. 136.4 Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). Plain abdominal x-­ray film
of an infant with perforated NEC showing pneumoperitoneum. (From
Tam PKH, Chung PHY, St Peter SD, et al. Advances in paediatric gastroenterology. Lancet. 2017;390:1072–1082. Fig. 4)

TREATMENT

Fig. 136.3 Intestinal perforation. Cross-­table abdominal radiograph

in patient with neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis demonstrates marked
distention and massive pneumoperitoneum, as evidenced by the free
air below the anterior abdominal wall.

The differential diagnosis of NEC includes septic ileus, GI obstruction, volvulus, and isolated intestinal perforation. Idiopathic focal
intestinal perforation can occur spontaneously or can be associated
with the early use of postnatal corticosteroids and indomethacin.
Pneumoperitoneum develops in such patients, but they are usually less
ill than those with NEC. Occasional clusters of NEC cases have been
attributed to viral infections, specifically norovirus, enterovirus, and
rotavirus. Stool viral testing and infectious disease consultation should
be considered when multiple cases occur together.

Rapid initiation of therapy is required for infants with suspected, as
well as proven NEC. There is no specific treatment for established
NEC, so therapy is directed at providing supportive care and preventing further injury with cessation of feeding, nasogastric decompression, and administration of intravenous fluids and antibiotics
(see Fig. 136.1). Careful attention to the respiratory status, coagulation profile, and acid-­base and electrolyte balances are important.
Ventilation should be assisted in the presence of apnea or if abdominal distention is contributing to hypoxia and hypercapnia. Intravascular volume replacement with crystalloid or blood products,
cardiovascular support with fluid boluses and/or inotropes, and
correction of hematologic, metabolic, and electrolyte abnormalities are essential to stabilize the infant with NEC. Umbilical arterial
catheters are reported to reduce blood flow in the mesenteric blood
vessels and should be removed if they remain in place after a diagnosis of NEC. Maintaining reliable intravenous access for ongoing
hemodynamic support and medication administration is critical.
Approximately 16% of definite NEC cases may be associated with
bacteremia detected within 72 hours of its diagnosis, most frequently
with a gram-­negative organism. NEC with associated bacteremia has
a higher risk for requiring surgical intervention and mortality. Once
blood has been drawn for culture, systemic antibiotics (with broad
coverage based on the antibiotic sensitivity patterns in the particular
neonatal ICU) should be started immediately. The addition of anaerobic coverage with antibiotics such as metronidazole or clindamycin is
variably practiced. Management of NEC with anaerobic coverage is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 136 u Necrotizing Enterocolitis

1105

B

A

F

Fig. 136.5 Necrotizing enterocolitis. A, Mu-

cosal and submucosal thickening (arrows). B,
Intramural gas (pneumatosis intestinalis) creates
an echogenic ring (arrows). C, Widespread echogenic bubbles of gas in the portal veins (arrows).
D, Fluid with echogenic debris (F) lies adjacent
to thick loops. (From John SD, Hollingsworth C:
The pediatric gastrointestinal tract. In Levine D,
Rumack CM, Wilson SR, Charboneau JW, eds.
Diagnostic Ultrasound, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2014. Fig 55.29.)

D

C

associated with slightly lower risk of mortality and higher risk of subsequent strictures.
The patient’s course should be monitored closely by means of frequent
physical assessments in the NICU; sequential anteroposterior and cross-­
table lateral or lateral decubitus abdominal radiographs to detect intestinal perforation; and serial determinations of hematologic, electrolyte,
and acid-­base status. A surgeon should be consulted early in the course of
treatment. The only absolute indication for surgery is evidence of perforation on an abdominal radiograph (pneumoperitoneum). However, this is
present in less than half of infants with perforation or necrosis at operative
exploration. Progressive clinical deterioration despite maximum medical
management, a single fixed bowel loop on serial radiographs, and abdominal wall erythema are relative indications for exploratory laparotomy. Ideally, surgery should be performed after intestinal necrosis develops but
before perforation and peritonitis occur. The optimal surgical approach,
however, remains controversial. The options for surgical treatment include
primary peritoneal drainage (PPD) or exploratory laparotomy with resection of the necrotic intestine and usually stoma creation. Laparotomy is
usually the initial therapy in the majority of VLBW infants with surgical
NEC, even in those <1,000 g. Randomized clinical trials comparing these
approaches failed to demonstrate significant differences in survival, nutritional outcomes, or length of stay. However, among those with a diagnosis
of NEC (as opposed to intestinal perforation), 69% died or had neurodevelopmental impairment (NDI) when managed with initial laparotomy
versus 85% when managed with PPD. In contrast, among infants with a
diagnosis of intestinal perforation, death or NDI occurred 69% and 63%
after initial management with laparotomy or PPD, respectively. When
the diagnosis is confirmed NEC, initial management with laparotomy is
more likely to reduce risk of death or NDI compared to PPD. However,
the ultimate surgical approach for an individual case also depends on the
surgeon’s assessment and physiologic status of the patient.

PROGNOSIS

In patients with pneumatosis intestinalis at NEC diagnosis, disease progression is nonresponsive to medical management alone in

approximately 20–40%; of these that require surgery, 20–50% die.
Early postoperative complications include wound infection, dehiscence, and stomal problems (prolapse, necrosis). Later complications include intestinal strictures, which occur in approximately
25–35% of surgically or medically managed patients. After massive
intestinal resection, complications from postoperative NEC include
short bowel syndrome (malabsorption, growth failure, malnutrition), complications related to central venous catheters (sepsis,
thrombosis), and cholestatic jaundice. Preterm infants with NEC
who require surgical intervention are at increased risk for adverse
growth and neurodevelopmental outcomes.

PREVENTION

The most effective preventive strategy for NEC is the use of human
milk (maternal or donor); newborns exclusively fed breast milk
have a reduced risk of NEC. However, because human milk does
not provide complete nutritional support for very preterm infants,
nutritional fortification is usual practice. Some studies have suggested that an “exclusive human milk diet” using human rather than
bovine fortifiers may further reduce the risk of NEC. An optimal
feeding protocol (rapid vs slow volume increments) has not been
discovered; it is important to note that strict adherence to a NICU-­
specific feeding protocol reduces the risk of NEC. Additionally,
while extensive data and meta-­analyses would support the use of
probiotics to prevent NEC, there is no clear consensus on the safest,
most effective formulation, timing of administration, or length of
therapy. Other preventive strategies using prebiotics and synbiotics
have also been studied, with variable outcomes. Inhibitors of gastric
acid secretion (H2-­receptor blockers, proton pump inhibitors), high
osmolality enteral fluids, or prolonged empirical antibiotics in the
early neonatal period have been associated with increased risk of
NEC and should be avoided.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1106 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Circulating
unconjugated
bilirubin

Chapter 137

BMG

ob
ilin
oid
s
as
e

Unconjugated
bilirubin

BDG

ETIOLOGY

During the neonatal period, metabolism of bilirubin is in transition
from the fetal stage, during which the placenta is the principal route
of elimination of the lipid-­soluble, unconjugated bilirubin, to the adult
stage, during which the water-­soluble conjugated form is excreted from
hepatic cells into the biliary system and gastrointestinal tract. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia may be caused or increased by any factor that
(1) increases the load of bilirubin to be metabolized by the liver (hemolytic anemias, polycythemia, bruising or internal hemorrhage, shortened RBC life as a result of immaturity or transfusion of cells, increased
enterohepatic circulation, infection), (2) damages or reduces the activity
of the transferase enzyme or other related enzymes (genetic deficiency,
hypoxia, infection, thyroid deficiency), (3) competes for or blocks the
transferase enzyme (drugs and other substances requiring glucuronic
acid conjugation), or (4) leads to an absence or decreased amounts of the
enzyme or to reduction of bilirubin uptake by liver cells (genetic defect,
prematurity). Gene polymorphisms in the hepatic uridine diphosphate
glucuronosyltransferase isoenzyme 1A1 (UGT1A1) and the solute carrier organic anion transporter 1B1 (SLCO1B1), alone or in combination,
influence the incidence of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia.
The toxic effects of elevated serum concentrations of unconjugated
bilirubin are increased by factors that reduce the retention of bilirubin
in the circulation (hypoproteinemia, displacement of bilirubin from
its binding sites on albumin by competitive binding of drugs such as
sulfisoxazole and moxalactam, acidosis, and increased free fatty acid
concentration secondary to hypoglycemia, starvation, or hypothermia). Neurotoxic effects are directly related not only to the permeability of the blood-­brain barrier (BBB) and nerve cell membranes
but also to neuronal susceptibility to injury, all of which are adversely
influenced by asphyxia, prematurity, hyperosmolality, and infection.
Early and frequent feeding decreases, whereas suboptimal feedings
and dehydration increases serum levels of bilirubin. Delay in passage of
meconium, which contains 1 mg bilirubin/dL, may contribute to jaundice by enterohepatic recirculation after deconjugation by intestinal

Ti

Hyperbilirubinemia is a common and, in most cases, benign problem in neonates. Jaundice is observed during the first week after birth
in approximately 60% of term infants and 80% of preterm infants. The
yellow color usually results from the accumulation of unconjugated,
nonpolar, lipid-­soluble bilirubin pigment in the skin. This unconjugated bilirubin (designated indirect-­acting by nature of the van den
Bergh reaction) is an end product of heme-­protein catabolism from a
series of enzymatic reactions by heme-­oxygenase and biliverdin reductase and nonenzymatic reducing agents in the reticuloendothelial cells.
It may also be partly caused by deposition of pigment from conjugated
bilirubin, the end product from indirect, unconjugated bilirubin that
has undergone conjugation in the liver cell microsome by the enzyme
uridine diphosphoglucuronic acid (UDP)–glucuronyl transferase to
form the polar, water-­soluble glucuronide of bilirubin (direct-­reacting).
Although bilirubin may have a physiologic role as an antioxidant, elevations of indirect, unconjugated bilirubin are potentially neurotoxic. Even
though the conjugated form is not neurotoxic, direct hyperbilirubinemia
indicates potentially serious hepatic disorders or a systemic illness.

ss

ue

X

gl

uc

ur

on

Kelsey S. Ryan and Robert M. Kliegman

Meconium
Bilirubin MG
Bilirubin DG

id

Ur

Jaundice and
­ yperbilirubinemia
H
in the Newborn

Intestinal
lumen

Unconjugated
bilirubin

Recirculated
unconjugated
bilirubin

Fig. 137.1 Metabolism of bilirubin in the neonatal period. Neonatal

production rate of bilirubin is 6-­8 mg/kg/24 hr (in contrast to 3-­4 mg/
kg/24 hr in adults). Water-­insoluble bilirubin is bound to albumin. At
the plasma-­hepatocyte interface, a liver membrane carrier (bilitranslocase) transports bilirubin to a cytosolic binding protein (ligandin or Y
protein, now known to be glutathione S-­transferase), which prevents
back-­absorption to plasma. Bilirubin is converted to bilirubin monoglucuronide (BMG). Neonates excrete more BMG than adults. In the fetus, conjugated lipid-­insoluble BMG and bilirubin diglucuronide (BDG)
must be deconjugated by tissue β-­glucuronidases to facilitate placental
transfer of lipid-­soluble unconjugated bilirubin across the placental lipid membranes. After birth, intestinal or milk-­containing glucuronidases contribute to the enterohepatic recirculation of bilirubin and possibly
to the development of hyperbilirubinemia.

glucuronidase (Fig. 137.1). Drugs such as oxytocin (in the mother) and
chemicals used in the nursery such as phenolic detergents may also
produce unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Jaundice usually appears during the early neonatal period, depending on etiology. Whereas jaundice from deposition of indirect bilirubin in the skin tends to appear bright yellow or orange, jaundice of
the obstructive type (direct bilirubin) has a greenish or muddy yellow
cast. Jaundice usually becomes apparent in a cephalocaudal progression, starting on the face and progressing to the abdomen and then the
feet, as serum levels increase. Dermal pressure may reveal the anatomic
progression of jaundice (face, approximately 5 mg/dL; mid-­abdomen,
15 mg/dL; soles, 20 mg/dL), but clinical examination cannot reliably
estimate serum levels. Noninvasive techniques for transcutaneous measurement of bilirubin that correlate with serum levels may be used to
screen infants, but determination of the serum bilirubin level is indicated in patients with elevated age-­specific transcutaneous bilirubin
measurement, progressing jaundice, or risk for hemolysis or sepsis.
Infants with severe hyperbilirubinemia may present with lethargy and
poor feeding and, without treatment, can progress to acute bilirubin
encephalopathy (kernicterus) (see Chapter 137.1).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The distinction between physiologic and pathologic jaundice relates to the
timing, rate of rise, and extent of hyperbilirubinemia, because some of
the same causes of physiologic jaundice (e.g., large RBC mass, decreased
capacity for bilirubin conjugation, increased enterohepatic circulation)
can also result in pathologic jaundice. Evaluation should be determined
on risk factors, clinical appearance, and severity of the hyperbilirubinemia (Tables 137.1-­137.3). Jaundice that is present at birth or appears
within the first 24 hours after birth should be considered pathologic
and requires immediate attention. Potential diagnoses would include
erythroblastosis fetalis, concealed hemorrhage, sepsis, or congenital

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 137 u Jaundice and ­Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn
Table 137.1  Risk Factors for Severe Neonatal
Hyperbilirubinemia
GENETIC FACTORS
• Gilbert syndrome
• Crigler-­Najjar syndrome
• Alagille syndrome
• β thalassemia
• Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
• Bilirubin glucuronosyltransferase polymorphism
• Pyruvate kinase deficiency
• Erythrocyte structural defects (including hereditary spherocytosis
and elliptocytosis)
• Galactosemia
MATERNAL FACTORS
• Family history of severe jaundice, splenectomy, or
cholecystectomy
• Primiparity
• Teenage pregnancy
• Diabetes
• Rhesus incompatibility
• ABO incompatibility
• Other blood group isoimmunization
• Use of drugs during labor (including oxytocin, promethazine, and
bupivacaine)
• Exclusive breastfeeding
PERINATAL FACTORS
• Mode of deliver (breech vs vertex, instrumentation)
• Birth trauma (cephalohematoma or substantial bruising,
extravasation)
• Birth asphyxia
• Congenital infections (including cytomegalovirus and syphilis)
• Sepsis
NEONATAL FACTORS
• Male sex
• Prematurity or low birthweight and small-­for-­gestational age
• Hypothyroidism
• Polycythemia
• Hypoglycemia
• Low intake of breast milk, dehydration, or weight loss
• Breast milk jaundice
• Jaundice in the first day of life
• Trisomy 21
• Infant of diabetic mother
• Cephalohematoma, other bruising
OTHER RISK FACTORS AND MARKERS
• Previous sibling received phototherapy or exchange transfusion
• Predischarge total serum bilirubin or transcutaneous bilirubin
concentration in the high zone
• Use of hemolytic agents (e.g., naphthalene or menthol-­based
products) in glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficient
population groups
• Folate deficiency
• Aflatoxins
• Hypothermia
• Birth outside of a healthcare facility
Modified from Olusanya BO, Kaplan M, Hansen TWR. Neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia: a
global perspective. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2018;2:610–618. Panel 2, p. 612.

infections, including syphilis, cytomegalovirus (CMV), rubella, and
toxoplasmosis. Significant hemolysis is suggested by a rapid rise in
serum bilirubin concentration (>0.5 mg/dL/hr), anemia, pallor, reticulocytosis, hepatosplenomegaly, and a positive family history. An unusually
high proportion of direct-­reacting bilirubin may characterize jaundice in
infants who have received intrauterine transfusions for erythroblastosis
fetalis. Jaundice that first appears on the second or third day is usually

1107

Table 137.2  Evaluation of the Neonate with Significant
Jaundice

CONCERN

INITIAL
LABORATORY
TESTS

POSSIBLE
DIAGNOSIS

Jaundice on day 1

Hemolysis*
TORCH/sepsis
Hepatic failure
syndromes†
Internal hemorrhage

CBC, smear
Total and direct
bilirubin
Blood type and
Coombs test

Jaundice
requiring
phototherapy

Hemolysis*
TORCH/sepsis

As above

Direct/
TORCH/sepsis
conjugated
Biliary atresia
hyperbilirubinemia Other causes of
cholestasis‡
Hepatic failure
syndromes†

Hepatic enzymes,
INR, check
newborn screen for
metabolic disease,
blood glucose,
blood ammonia
and lactate, urine
and blood cultures,
CMV and HSV PCR

*Hemolysis may be immune or nonimmune (RBC membrane or enzyme defects).
†Hepatic failure syndromes: HSV, CMV, gestational alloimmune liver disease,
mitochondrial liver disease, familial hemophagocytic syndrome.
‡See Chapter 404.
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; CBC, complete blood count; HSV, herpes simplex virus;
PCR, polymerase chain reaction; INR, international normalized ratio; TORCH,
toxoplasmosis, other, rubella, CMV, herpes.

physiologic but may represent a more severe form. Familial nonhemolytic icterus (Crigler-­Najjar syndrome) and early-­onset breastfeeding
(suboptimal intake) jaundice are seen initially on the second or third day.
Jaundice appearing after the third day and within the first week suggests
bacterial sepsis or urinary tract infection; it may also be caused by other
infections, notably syphilis, toxoplasmosis, CMV, herpes simplex virus
(HSV), and enterovirus. Jaundice secondary to extensive ecchymosis or
blood extravasation may occur during the first day or later, especially in
premature infants. Polycythemia may also lead to early jaundice.
There is a long differential diagnosis for jaundice first recognized
after the first week of life, including breast milk jaundice, septicemia,
congenital atresia or paucity of the bile ducts, hepatitis, galactosemia,
hypothyroidism, cystic fibrosis (CF), pyloric stenosis, and congenital
hemolytic anemia crises related to RBC morphology and enzyme deficiencies (Fig. 137.2). The differential diagnosis for persistent jaundice
during the first month of life includes hyperalimentation-­associated
cholestasis, hepatitis, CMV, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, familial nonhemolytic icterus, biliary atresia, galactosemia and other inborn errors
of metabolism, and inspissated bile syndrome following hemolytic disease of the newborn. Rarely, physiologic jaundice may be prolonged
for several weeks, as in infants with hypothyroidism or pyloric stenosis.
Regardless of gestation or time of appearance of jaundice, patients
with significant hyperbilirubinemia and those with symptoms or signs
require a complete diagnostic evaluation, which includes review of
risks (Table 137.1), determination of direct and indirect bilirubin fractions, hemoglobin, reticulocyte count, blood type, direct antiglobulin/
antibody test (DAT) (Coombs test), and examination of a peripheral
blood smear. Indirect hyperbilirubinemia, reticulocytosis, and a smear
with evidence of RBC destruction suggest hemolysis (see Table 137.2).
In the absence of blood group incompatibility, non–immunologically-­
induced hemolysis should be considered. If the reticulocyte count,
Coombs test result, and direct bilirubin value are normal, physiologic
or pathologic indirect hyperbilirubinemia may be present (see Fig.
137.2). If direct hyperbilirubinemia is present, diagnostic possibilities
include hepatitis, congenital bile duct disorders (biliary atresia, paucity
of bile ducts, Byler disease), cholestasis, inborn errors of metabolism,
CF, congenital hemosiderosis, sepsis, and neonatal hepatic failure syndromes (Table 137.4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DIAGNOSIS

VAN DEN BERGH
REACTION

JAUNDICE
APPEARS

PEAK BILIRUBIN CONCENTRATION
DISAPPEARS

MG/DL

AGE IN DAYS

BILIRUBIN RATE OF
ACCUMULATION
(mg/dL/day)

COMMENTS
Usually relates to degree of
maturity

“Physiologic
jaundice”
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Full-­term

Indirect

2-­3 days

4-­5 days

10-­12

2-­3

<5

Premature

Indirect

3-­4 days

7-­9 days

15

6-­8

<5

Metabolic factors: hypoxia,
respiratory distress, lack of
carbohydrate

Hyperbilirubinemia
caused by
metabolic factors
Full-­term

Indirect

2-­3 days

Variable

>12

First wk

<5

Hormonal influences:
hypothyroidism, hormones,
Gilbert syndrome

Premature

Indirect

3-­4 days

Variable

>15

First wk

<5

Genetic factors: Crigler-­
Najjar syndrome, Gilbert
syndrome

Hemolytic states
and hematoma

Indirect

May appear
in first 24 hr

Variable

Unlimited

Variable

Usually >5

Erythroblastosis: Rh, ABO,
Kell congenital hemolytic
states: spherocytic,
nonspherocytic
Infantile pyknocytosis
Drug: vitamin K
Enclosed hemorrhage—
hematoma

Mixed hemolytic
and hepatoxic
factors

Indirect and direct

May appear in
first 24 hr

Variable

Unlimited

Variable

Usually >5

Infection: bacterial sepsis,
pyelonephritis, hepatitis,
toxoplasmosis
CMV
HSV
Rubella, syphilis

Hepatocellular
damage

Indirect and direct

Usually 2-­3 days; may
appear by second wk

Variable

Unlimited

Variable

Variable, can be >5

Biliary atresia; paucity of
bile ducts, familial
cholestasis, galactosemia;
hepatitis, infection,
hepatic failure syndromes*

*Gestational alloimmune liver disease, hemophagocytic lymphocytosis, mitochondrial hepatic disorders, inborn errors of metabolism
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus.
From Brown AK. Neonatal jaundice. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1962;9:575–603.

1108 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Table 137.3  Diagnostic Features of the Various Types of Neonatal Jaundice

Chapter 137 u Jaundice and ­Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn
Increased indirect
bilirubin

Increased direct bilirubin

Sepsis
Intrauterine infection
Toxoplasmosis
Cytomegalovirus
Rubella
Herpes simplex
Syphilis
Enterovirus
Paucity of bile ducts
Disorders of bile acid metabolism
Severe hemolytic disease
Biliary atresia
Giant cell hepatitis
Choledochal cyst
Cystic fibrosis
Galactosemia, other IEM
Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency
Tyrosinemia
Hyperalimentation cholestasis
GALD
HLH
Citrin deficiency

1109

Negative Coombs test

Positive Coombs test

Hemoglobin

Isoimmunization
Rh
ABO
Other blood group

Normal or low

High (polycythemia)
Twin transfusion
Maternal–fetal
transfusion
Delayed cord
clamping
Small for gestational
age infant
Trisomy 21

Reticulocyte count
Increased

Red cell morphology

Characteristic

Nonspecific

Normal

Spherocytosis
Elliptocytosis
Stomatocytosis
Pyknocytosis
Fragmented cells

G6PD deficiency
PK deficiency
Other enzyme
deficiency
Disseminated
intravascular
coagulation

Enclosed hemorrhage
Increased enterohepatic circulation,
delayed or infrequent stooling,
bowel obstruction
Inadequate caloric intake
Neonatal asphyxia

Prolonged hyperbilirubinemia

Gilbert syndrome
Down syndrome
Hypothyroidism
Breast-feeding
Crigler-Najjar syndrome

Fig. 137.2 Algorithmic approach to the diagnosis of neonatal jaundice. G6PD, Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; GALD, gestational alloim-

mune liver disease; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; IDM, infants of diabetic mothers; IEM, inborn error of metabolism; PK, pyruvate
kinase. (From Oski FA. Differential diagnosis of jaundice. In Taeusch HW, Ballard RA, Avery MA, eds. Schaffer and Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn.
6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1991.)

Table 137.4  Typical Laboratory Findings in Neonatal Liver Failure
GALD

HLH

MITOCHONDRIAL

VIRAL

ISCHEMIC

Transaminase levels
(IU/L)

Normal/mild
increase <100

Moderate/significant
increase (>1,000)

Moderate increase
(100-­500)

Significant increase
(>1,000)

Significant increase
(>1,000-­6,000)

INR

Significant increase

Moderate/significant
increase

Moderate/significant
increase

Moderate/significant Moderate/significant
increase
increase

Ferritin level (ng/mL)

800-­7,000

Significant increase
(>20,000)

Variable

Significant increase
(>20,000)

Variable depending on
underlying cause of
ischemia

Triglyceride levels

Normal

Increased

Normal

Normal

Normal

Hypoglycemia

Yes

Often

Yes

Often

Variable

Lactic acidosis

Normal

Normal

Increased

Normal

Often

α-­Fetoprotein level
(for age)

Increased

Normal

Normal/increased

Normal

Normal

Cholestasis

Progressive after
birth

Moderate/significant

Moderate

None/mild at
­presentation

Mild/moderate

HLH, Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; GALD, gestational alloimmune liver disease; INR, international normalized ratio.
From Larson-­Nath C, Vitola BE. Neonatal acute liver failure. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:25–39. Table 2 with data from Sundaram SS, Alonso EM, Narkewicz, MR, et al. J Pediatr
2011;159:813–818; Taylor SA, Whitington, PF. Liver Transpl. 2016;22(5):677–685; Bitar R, Thwaites R, Davison S, et al. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2017;64(1):70–75; Fellman V, Kotarsky
H. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011;16(4):222–228.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1110 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
PHYSIOLOGIC JAUNDICE (ICTERUS NEONATORUM)

Under normal circumstances, the level of indirect bilirubin in umbilical cord serum is 1-­3 mg/dL and rises at a rate of <5 mg/dL/24 hr; thus
jaundice becomes visible on the second or third day, usually peaking
between the second and fourth days at 5-­6 mg/dL and decreasing to
<2 mg/dL between the fifth and seventh days after birth. Jaundice associated with these changes is designated physiologic and is believed to
be the result of increased bilirubin production from the breakdown of
fetal RBCs combined with transient limitation in the conjugation of
bilirubin by the immature neonatal liver.
Overall, 6–7% of full-­term infants have indirect bilirubin levels
>13 mg/dL, and <3% have levels >15 mg/dL. Risk factors for elevated
indirect bilirubin include maternal age, ethnicity (Chinese, Japanese,
Korean, Native American), maternal diabetes, prematurity, drugs,
altitude, polycythemia, male, trisomy 21, cutaneous bruising, blood
extravasation (cephalohematoma), oxytocin induction, breastfeeding, weight loss (dehydration or caloric deprivation), delayed bowel
movement, and a family history of, or a sibling who had, physiologic
jaundice (see Table 137.1). In infants without these variables, indirect
bilirubin levels rarely rise >12 mg/dL, whereas infants with several risk
factors are more likely to have higher bilirubin levels. A combination
of breastfeeding, variant-­glucuronosyltransferase activity (1A1), subclinical glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, and
alterations of the organic anion transporter-­2 gene increases the risk of
hyperbilirubinemia. Predicting which neonates are at risk for exaggerated physiologic jaundice can be based on hour-­specific bilirubin levels
in the first 24-­72 hours of life (Fig. 137.3). Transcutaneous measurements of bilirubin are linearly correlated with serum levels and can be
used for screening. Indirect bilirubin levels in full-­term infants decline
to adult levels (1 mg/dL) by 10-­14 days of life. Persistent indirect hyperbilirubinemia beyond 2 weeks suggests hemolysis, hereditary glucuronyl transferase deficiency, breast milk jaundice, hypothyroidism, or
intestinal obstruction. Jaundice associated with pyloric stenosis may
be the result of caloric deprivation, relative deficiency of hepatic UDP–
glucuronyl transferase, or an increase in the enterohepatic circulation
of bilirubin from an ileus. In premature infants, the rise in serum bilirubin tends to be the same or somewhat slower but of longer duration
than in term infants. Peak levels of 8-­12 mg/dL are not usually reached
until the fourth to seventh day, and jaundice is infrequently observed
after the 10th day, corresponding to the maturation of mechanisms for
bilirubin metabolism and excretion.
The diagnosis of physiologic jaundice in term or preterm infants can
be established only by excluding known causes of jaundice based on
the history, clinical findings, and laboratory data (see Table 137.3). In
general, a search to determine the cause of jaundice should be made
428
th %ile

High zone

20

95

zone
diate

e
term
h in
zone
Hig
ediate
interm
w
o
L

10
10
5
0
12

24

36

48

60

72

40th %ile

257
171
85

Low zone

0

342

th
75 %ile

µmol/L

Serum bilirubin (mg/dL)

25

84

0
96 108 120 132 144

Postnatal age (hours)

Fig. 137.3 Neonatal bilirubin nomogram. Percentile designation of

well newborns ≥35 weeks’ gestational age based on their hour-­specific
serum bilirubin values. The high zone is subdivided by the 95th percentile track. The intermediate zone is subdivided into upper and lower
zones by the 75th percentile track. The low zone has been electively
and statistically defined by the 40th percentile track. (Modified from
Bahr TM, Henry E, Christensen RD, et al. A new hour-­specific serum
bilirubin nomogram for neonates ≥35 weeks of gestation. J Pediatr.
2021;236:28–33. Fig. 2.)

if (1) it appears in the first 24-­36 hours after birth, (2) serum bilirubin is rising at a rate faster than 5 mg/dL/24 hr, (3) serum bilirubin
is >12 mg/dL in a full-­term infant (especially in the absence of risk
factors) or 10-­14 mg/dL in a preterm infant, (4) jaundice persists after
10-­14 days after birth, or (5) direct bilirubin fraction is >2 mg/dL at any
time. Other factors suggesting a pathologic cause of jaundice are family history of hemolytic disease, pallor, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly,
failure of phototherapy to lower the bilirubin level, vomiting, lethargy,
poor feeding, excessive weight loss, apnea, bradycardia, abnormal vital
signs (including hypothermia), light-­colored stools, dark urine positive
for bilirubin, bleeding disorder, and signs of kernicterus (see Chapter
137.1).

PATHOLOGIC HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA

Jaundice and its underlying hyperbilirubinemia are considered
pathologic if the time of appearance, duration, or pattern varies significantly from that of physiologic jaundice, or if the course
is compatible with physiologic jaundice but other reasons exist to
suspect that the infant is at special risk for neurotoxicity. It may not
be possible to determine the precise cause of an abnormal elevation
of unconjugated bilirubin, but many infants with this finding have
associated risk factors such as ethnicity, prematurity, breastfeeding,
and weight loss. Frequently, the terms exaggerated physiologic jaundice and hyperbilirubinemia of the newborn are used in infants whose
primary problem is probably a deficiency or inactivity of bilirubin
glucuronyl transferase (Gilbert syndrome) rather than an excessive
load of bilirubin for excretion (see Table 137.1). The combination of
G6PD deficiency and a pathogenic variant of the promoter region of
UDP-­glucuronyl transferase-­1 produces indirect hyperbilirubinemia in
the absence of signs of hemolysis.
The greatest risk associated with indirect hyperbilirubinemia
is the development of bilirubin-­induced neurologic dysfunction,
which typically occurs with high indirect bilirubin levels (see Chapter 137.1). The development of kernicterus (bilirubin encephalopathy) depends on the level of indirect bilirubin, duration of
exposure to bilirubin elevation, the cause of jaundice, and the
infant’s well-­being. Neurologic injury including kernicterus may
occur at lower bilirubin levels in preterm infants and in the presence of asphyxia, sepsis, meningitis, intraventricular hemorrhage,
hemolysis, or drugs that displace bilirubin from albumin. The exact
serum indirect bilirubin level that is harmful for very low birthweight
(VLBW) infants is unclear.

JAUNDICE ASSOCIATED WITH BREASTFEEDING

Significant elevation in unconjugated bilirubin (breast milk jaundice)
develops in an estimated 2% of breastfed term infants after the seventh
day, with maximal concentrations as high as 10-­30 mg/dL reached during the second to third week. If breastfeeding is continued, the bilirubin gradually decreases but may persist for 3-­10 weeks at lower levels.
Phototherapy may be of benefit (see Chapter 137.1). Although very
uncommon, kernicterus can occur in patients with breast milk jaundice. The etiology of breast milk jaundice is not entirely clear, although
intestinal β-­glucuronidase resulting in deconjugation of bilirubin and
increased enterohepatic circulation and other factors in breast milk
that might interfere with bilirubin conjugation (e.g., pregnanediol, free
fatty acids) have been implicated.
The late jaundice associated with breast milk should be distinguished
from an early onset, accentuated unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia known
as suboptimal intake hyperbilirubinemia or breastfeeding jaundice,
which occurs during the first week after birth in breastfed infants, who
normally have higher bilirubin levels than formula-­fed infants (Fig. 137.4).
Lower milk intake before breast milk production is established can result
in various degrees of dehydration, which hemoconcentrates bilirubin,
while also causing fewer bowel movements, which in turn increases the
enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin. Prophylactic supplements of glucose
water to breastfed infants are associated with higher bilirubin levels, in part
because of reduced intake of the higher–caloric density breast milk and are
not indicated. Frequent breastfeeding (>10 in 24 hours), rooming-­in with
night feeding, and ongoing lactation support may reduce the incidence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 137 u Jaundice and ­Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn
140

Table 137.5  Clinical Features of Kernicterus
Breast-fed infants
Bottle-fed infants

120
Number of infants

1111

100
80

ACUTE FORM
Phase 1 (first 1-­2 days): poor suck, stupor, hypotonia, seizures
Phase 2 (middle of first week): hypertonia of extensor muscles,
opisthotonos, retrocollis, fever
Phase 3 (after the first week): hypertonia
CHRONIC FORM
First year: hypotonia, active deep tendon reflexes, obligatory tonic
neck reflexes, delayed motor skills
After first year: movement disorders (choreoathetosis, ballismus,
tremor), upward gaze, sensorineural hearing loss

60
40
20

From Dennery PA, Seidman DS, Stevenson DK. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:581–590.

0
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18
Maximum total serum bilirubin concentration (mg/dL)

Fig. 137.4 Distribution of maximal bilirubin levels during the first week

of life in breastfed and formula-­fed White infants weighing >2,500 g.
(From Maisels MJ, Gifford K. Normal serum bilirubin levels in the newborn and the effect of breast-­feeding. Pediatrics. 1986;78:837–843.)

early breastfeeding jaundice. In addition, supplementation with formula
or more preferred expressed breast milk is appropriate if the intake seems
inadequate, weight loss is excessive, or the infant appears dehydrated.

NEONATAL CHOLESTASIS
See Chapter 404.

CONGENITAL ATRESIA OF THE BILE DUCTS

See Chapter 404.1.
Jaundice persisting for >2 weeks or associated with acholic stools
and dark urine suggests biliary atresia. All infants with such findings
require immediate diagnostic evaluation, including determination of
direct bilirubin.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

137.1 Kernicterus and Therapy of
Hyperbilirubinemia
Kelsey S. Ryan and Robert M. Kliegman
Kernicterus, or bilirubin encephalopathy, is a neurologic syndrome
resulting from the deposition of unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin in
the basal ganglia and brainstem nuclei. The pathogenesis of kernicterus
is multifactorial and involves an interaction between unconjugated bilirubin levels, albumin binding and unbound bilirubin levels, passage
across the BBB, and neuronal susceptibility to injury. Disruption of the
BBB by disease, asphyxia, infection, and other factors and maturational
changes in BBB permeability affect risk.
The precise blood level above which indirect-­reacting bilirubin or
free bilirubin will be toxic for an individual infant is unpredictable. In
a large series, however, kernicterus occurred only in infants with a bilirubin >20 mg/dL (more often >25-­30 mg/dL), 90% of whom were previously healthy, predominantly breastfed, term and near-­term infants.
The duration of exposure to high bilirubin levels needed to produce
toxic effects is unknown; the more immature the infant, and possibly
age (day 1 vs day of life ≥4), the greater the susceptibility to kernicterus.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Signs and symptoms of kernicterus usually appear 2-­5 days after birth
in term infants and as late as the seventh day in preterm infants, but
hyperbilirubinemia may lead to encephalopathy at any time during the
neonatal period. The early signs may be subtle and indistinguishable
from those of sepsis, asphyxia, hypoglycemia, intracranial hemorrhage,

apnea, and other acute systemic illnesses in a neonate. Lethargy, poor
feeding, and loss of the Moro reflex are common initial signs. Subsequently, the infant may appear gravely ill and prostrate, with diminished
tendon reflexes and respiratory distress. Opisthotonos with a bulging
fontanel, twitching of the face or limbs, and a shrill, high-­pitched cry
may follow. In advanced cases, convulsions and spasm occur, with
affected infants stiffly extending their arms in an inward rotation with
the fists clenched (Table 137.5). Rigidity is rare at this late stage.
Many infants who progress to these severe neurologic signs die; the
survivors usually have serious sequalae but may appear to recover and
for 2-­3 months show few abnormalities. Later in the first year, opisthotonos, muscle rigidity, irregular movements, and convulsions tend
to recur. In the second year the opisthotonos and seizures abate, but
irregular, involuntary movements, muscle rigidity, or, in some infants,
hypotonia increase steadily. By 3 years of age, the complete neurologic
syndrome is often apparent: bilateral choreoathetosis with involuntary
muscle spasms, extrapyramidal signs, seizures, mental deficiency, dysarthric speech, high-­frequency hearing loss, squinting, and defective
upward eye movements. Pyramidal signs, hypotonia, and ataxia occur
in a few infants. In mildly affected infants, the syndrome may be characterized only by mild to moderate neuromuscular incoordination,
partial deafness, or “minimal brain dysfunction,” occurring singly or in
combination; these problems may be unapparent until the child enters
school (see Table 137.5).

INCIDENCE AND PROGNOSIS

By pathologic criteria, kernicterus develops in 30% of infants (all gestational ages) with untreated hemolytic disease and bilirubin levels
>25-­30 mg/dL. The incidence at autopsy in hyperbilirubinemic preterm infants is 2–16% and is related to the risk factors discussed in this
chapter. Reliable estimates of the frequency of the clinical syndrome
are not available because of the wide spectrum of manifestations. Overt
neurologic signs carry a grave prognosis; >75% of infants die, and 80%
of affected survivors have bilateral choreoathetosis with involuntary
muscle spasms. Developmental delay, deafness, and spastic quadriplegia are common.

PREVENTION

The aim of bilirubin management is prevention of kernicterus.
Although kernicterus has been thought to be a disease of the past, there
are reports of neurotoxic effects of bilirubin in term and near-­term
infants who were discharged as healthy newborns. Effective prevention
requires ongoing vigilance and a practical, system-­based approach to
distinguish infants with benign newborn jaundice from those whose
course may be less predictable and potentially harmful. Predischarge
universal screening for hyperbilirubinemia and assessment of clinical risk factors for severe jaundice and bilirubin-­induced neurologic
dysfunction include either total serum bilirubin or transcutaneous
bilirubin measurement (interchangeably), although transcutaneous
instruments may be less accurate at higher bilirubin levels (>15 mg/
dL) or for infants with darker skin or if phototherapy has been used.
If transcutaneous levels are documented as ≥15 mg/dL or rising rapidly, confirmation with a total serum bilirubin is recommended. Serum

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1112 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
values should also be measured once infants begin phototherapy,
because transcutaneous measurement may falsely underestimate total
bilirubin in this setting.
Protocols using the hour-­
specific bilirubin nomogram (see Fig.
137.3), physical examination, and clinical risk factors have been successful in identifying patients at risk for hyperbilirubinemia and
candidates for targeted management. Potentially preventable causes
of kernicterus include (1) early discharge (<48 hours) with no early
follow-­up (within 48 hours of discharge), a problem that is particularly
important in near-­term infants (35-­37 weeks of gestation); (2) failure to
check the bilirubin level in an infant noted to be jaundiced in the first
24 hours; (3) failure to recognize the presence of risk factors for hyperbilirubinemia, especially hemolysis; (4) underestimation of the severity
of jaundice by clinical (visual) assessment, which is inaccurate; (5) lack
of concern regarding the presence of jaundice; (6) delay in measuring
the serum bilirubin level despite marked jaundice or delay in initiating
phototherapy in the presence of elevated bilirubin levels; and (7) failure to respond to parental concern regarding jaundice, poor feeding,
or lethargy. Figure 137.5 provides a consensus-­based (expert opinion)
management plan for neonates with significant hyperbilirubinemia
that relies on consensus-­recommended (expert opinion) phototherapy
thresholds for gestational ages ≥35 weeks (Figs. 137.6 and 137.7) in well
appearing neonates.
The following approach is further recommended: (1) any infant
who is jaundiced before 24 hours requires measurement of total and
direct serum bilirubin levels and, if elevated, evaluation for possible
hemolytic or primary hepatic diseases, and (2) follow-­up should be

provided within 2-­3 days of discharge to all neonates discharged earlier
than 48 hours after birth. Early follow-­up is particularly important
for infants <38 weeks of gestation. The timing of follow-­up depends
on the age at discharge and the presence of risk factors. In some
cases, follow-­up within 24 hours is necessary. Postdischarge follow­up is essential for early recognition of problems related to hyperbilirubinemia and disease progression. Parental communication
with regard to concerns about the infant’s skin color and behavioral
activities should be addressed early and frequently, including education about potential risks and neurotoxicity. Ongoing lactation
promotion, education, support, and follow-­up services are essential throughout the neonatal period. Parents should be advised to
nurse their infants 8-12 times in 24 hours and to avoid supplementation with water or glucose water to ensure adequate hydration and
caloric intake.

TREATMENT OF HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA

Regardless of the cause, the goal of therapy is to prevent neurotoxicity related to indirect-­reacting bilirubin while causing no undue
harm. Phototherapy and, if unsuccessful, exchange transfusion
remain the primary treatment modalities used to keep the maximal total serum bilirubin below pathologic levels (Table 137.6; see
Figs. 137.6 and 137.7). The risk of injury to the central nervous system from bilirubin must be balanced against the potential risk of
treatment. Because phototherapy may require 6-­12 hours to have a
measurable effect, it must be started at bilirubin levels below those
indicated for exchange transfusion. When identified, underlying

Start
(TcB or TSB measure in
infant ≥12 hours old)

• Determine hour-specific phototherapy threshold based on gestational
age and presence of a known hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor
• Measure TSB if TcB exceeds 3.0 mg/dL below the phototherapy
treatment threshold or if the TcB is ≥15 mg/dL.

TSB at or above the
phototherapy
threshold?

Yes

Begin phototherapy

No
Phototherapy threshold minus TcB or TSDB
0.1-1.9 mg/dL

Discharge recommendations

Age <24 hours

Delay discharge, consider phototherapy, measure TSB in 4 to 8 hours

Age ≥24 hours

Measure TSB in 4 to 24 hoursa
Options:
• Delay discharge and consider phototherapy
• Discharge with home phototherapy if all considerations in the guideline are met
• Discharge without phototherapy but with close follow-up

2.0-3.4 mg/dL

Regardless of age or discharge time

TSB or TcB in 4 to 24 hoursa

3.5-5.4 mg/dL

Regardless of age or discharge time

TSB or TcB in 1-2 days

5.5-6.9 mg/dL

Discharging <72 hours

Follow-up within 2 days; TcB or TSB according to clinical judgmentb

Discharging ≥72 hours

Clinical judgmentb

Discharging <72 hours

Follow-up within 3 days; TcB or TSB according to clinical judgmentb

Discharging ≥72 hours

Clinical judgmentb

≥7.0 mg/dL

Fig. 137.5 Algorithm to determine postdischarge follow-­up for infants who have not received phototherapy during the birth hospitalization. aUse

clinical judgment and shared decision-­making to determine when to repeat the bilirubin measure within this 4–24-­hour time window. bClinical judgment decisions should include physical examination, the presence of risk factors for the development of hyperbilirubinemia or hyperbilirubinemia
neurotoxicity risk factors, feeding adequacy, weight trajectory, and family support. TcB, Transcutaneous bilirubin; TSB, total serum bilirubin. (From
Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL, et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or
more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2022; 150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 7.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 137 u Jaundice and ­Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn

1113

24
22

Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)

20
18

Phototherapy Thresholds: No Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
16

Gestational Age

14

 40 Weeks
39 Weeks
38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks

12
10
8
6
0

12

24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120 132 144 156 168 180 192 204 216 228 240 252 264 276 288 300 312 324 336
(1d)
(2d)
(3d)
(4d)
(5d)
(6d)
(7d)
(8d)
(9d)
(10d)
(11d)
(12d)
(13d)
(14d)

Age – hours

Fig. 137.6 Phototherapy thresholds by gestational age and age in hours for infants with no recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk

factors other than gestational age. These thresholds are based on expert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of
phototherapy exceed its potential harms. Use total serum bilirubin concentrations; do not subtract direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the
total serum bilirubin. In rare cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult
an expert. Note that infants <24 hours old with a TSB at or above the phototherapy threshold are likely to have a hemolytic process and should be
evaluated for hemolytic disease. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include gestational age <38 weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune
hemolytic disease, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any significant clinical instability
in the previous 24 hours. (From Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL, et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia
in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2022;150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 2.)

20

18

Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)

16

Phototherapy Thresholds: One or More Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors

14

12

Gestational Age

10

 38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks

8

6

4
0

12

24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120 132 144 156 168 180 192 204 216 228 240 252 264 276 288 300 312 324 336
(1d)
(2d)
(3d)
(4d)
(5d)
(6d)
(7d)
(8d)
(9d)
(10d)
(11d)
(12d)
(13d)
(14d)

Age – hours

Fig. 137.7 Phototherapy thresholds by gestational age and age in hours for infants with any recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk fac-

tors other than gestational age. These thresholds are based on expert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of phototherapy exceed its potential harms. Use total serum bilirubin concentrations; do not subtract the direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total
serum bilirubin. In rare cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an
expert. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include gestational age <38 weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-­
6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours.
(From Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL, et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35
or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2022:150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1114 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
medical causes of elevated bilirubin and physiologic factors that
contribute to neuronal susceptibility should be treated, such as
antibiotics for sepsis, correction of acidosis, and dehydration (Fig.
137.8).

Phototherapy

Clinical jaundice and indirect hyperbilirubinemia are reduced by exposure to high-­intensity light in the visible spectrum. Bilirubin absorbs
light maximally in the blue range (420-­470 nm). Broad-­spectrum
white, blue, and special narrow-­spectrum (super) blue lights have been
effective in reducing bilirubin levels. Bilirubin in the skin absorbs light
energy, causing several photochemical reactions. One major product
from phototherapy is a result of a reversible photoisomerization reaction converting the toxic native unconjugated 4Z,15Z-­bilirubin into
an unconjugated configurational isomer, 4Z,15E-­bilirubin, which can
then be excreted in bile without conjugation. The other major product from phototherapy is lumirubin, which is an irreversible structural
isomer converted from native bilirubin that can be excreted by the kidneys in the unconjugated state.
The therapeutic effect of phototherapy depends on the light energy
emitted in the effective range of wavelengths, the distance between the
lights and the infant, and the surface area of exposed skin, as well as the

Table 137.6  Suggested Maximal Indirect Serum Bilirubin
Concentrations (mg/dL) in Preterm Infants
BIRTHWEIGHT (g)

UNCOMPLICATED*

<1,000

12-­13

10-­12

COMPLICATED*

1,000-­1,250

12-­14

10-­12

1,251-­1,499

14-­16

12-­14

1,500-­1,999

16-­20

15-­17

2,000-­2,500

20-­22

18-­20

*Complications include perinatal asphyxia, acidosis, hypoxia, hypothermia,
hypoalbuminemia, meningitis, intraventricular hemorrhage, hemolysis, hypoglycemia,
or signs of kernicterus. Phototherapy is usually started at 50–70% of the maximal
indirect level. If values greatly exceed this level, if phototherapy is unsuccessful in
reducing the maximal bilirubin level, or if signs of kernicterus are evident, exchange
transfusion is indicated.

rate of hemolysis and in vivo metabolism and excretion of bilirubin.
Available commercial phototherapy units vary considerably in spectral output and the intensity of radiance emitted; therefore the wattage can be accurately measured only at the patient’s skin surface. Dark
skin does not reduce the efficacy of phototherapy. Maximal intensive
phototherapy should be used when indirect bilirubin levels approach
those noted in Figures 137.6 and 137.7. Such therapy includes using
LED lamps and/or putting a fiberoptic phototherapy blanket under the
infant’s back to increase the exposed surface area.
The use of phototherapy has decreased the need for exchange transfusion in term and preterm infants with hemolytic and nonhemolytic
jaundice. When indications for exchange transfusion are present, phototherapy should not be used as a substitute; however, phototherapy
may reduce the need for repeated exchange transfusions in infants with
hemolysis. Conventional phototherapy is applied continuously (except
for breastfeeding). It should be discontinued as soon as the indirect bilirubin concentration has reduced to levels considered safe with respect
to the infant’s age and condition. Serum bilirubin levels and hematocrit
should be monitored every 4-­8 hours in infants with hemolytic disease and those with bilirubin levels near toxic range. Serum bilirubin
monitoring should continue for at least 24 hours after cessation of phototherapy in patients with hemolytic disease, because unexpected rises
in bilirubin may occur, requiring further treatment. Skin color, visual
assessment, or transcutaneous bilirubin levels cannot be relied on for
evaluating the effectiveness of phototherapy; the skin of babies exposed
to light may appear to be almost without jaundice in the presence of
marked hyperbilirubinemia. Although not necessary for all affected
infants, intravenous fluid supplementation added to oral feedings are
beneficial in dehydrated patients or infants with bilirubin levels nearing those requiring exchange transfusion.
Complications associated with phototherapy include loose stools,
erythematous macular rash, purpuric rash associated with transient
porphyrinemia, hypothermia from exposure, and a benign condition called “bronze baby syndrome,” which occurs in the presence
of direct hyperbilirubinemia. Phototherapy is contraindicated in the
presence of porphyria. Before phototherapy is initiated, the infant’s
eyes should be closed and adequately covered to prevent light exposure and corneal damage. Body temperature should be monitored,
and the infant should be shielded from bulb breakage and fluorescent bulb use. Irradiance should be measured directly. In infants with
hemolytic disease, care must be taken to monitor for the development

Start
(TSB exceeds escalation
of care level)

At appropriate
location for
exchange
transfusion?

Yes

No
• Consult neonatologist
• Initiate urgent transfer to NICU,
directly if possible
• Intensive phototherapy and
PO+IV hydration during
transfer, if possible

• STAT labs: total and direct serum bilirubin,
CBC and blood smear, albumin, serum
chemistries, type and cross match
• Notify blood bank
• Measure TSB at least every 2 hours
• Intensive phototherapy and PO+IV
hydration
• Consider IVIG therapy

Acute bilirubin encephalopathy
OR
Latest TSB at or above the
exchange transfusion threshold?

Yes

Urgent exchange
transfusion

No
TSB below the
escalation-of-care level?

Yes

Return to regular
phototherapy
guidelines

No
Continue intensive phototherapy and
PO+IV hydration and measuring TSB
at least every 2 hours

Fig. 137.8 Approach to escalation of care. The escalation-­of-­care threshold is 2 mg/dL below the exchange transfusion threshold. IVIG, Intrave-

nous immunoglobulin; NICU, neonatal intensive care unit; PO, orally; TSB, total serum bilirubin. (Modified from Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter
JL, et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics.
2022;150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 4.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 137 u Jaundice and Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn

1115

28

Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)

26

24

Exchange Transfusion Thresholds: No Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
22

20

Gestational Age
 38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks

18

16

14

0

12

24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120 132 144 156 168 180 192 204 216 228 240 252 264 276 288 300 312 324 336
(1d)
(2d)
(3d)
(4d)
(5d)
(6d)
(7d)
(8d)
(9d)
(10d)
(11d)
(12d)
(13d)
(14d)

Age − hours
(days)

Fig. 137.9 Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with no recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors other

than gestational age. These thresholds are based on expert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of escalation of
care exceed its potential harms. The stippled lines for the first 24 hours indicate uncertainty because of the wide range of clinical circumstances and
responses to intensive phototherapy. Use total serum bilirubin concentrations; do not subtract direct bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. In rare
cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an expert. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency,
or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours. (From Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL,
et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics.
2022;150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 5.)

of anemia, which may require transfusion; anemia may develop
despite lowering of bilirubin levels. Clinical experience suggests that
long-­term adverse biologic effects of phototherapy are absent, minimal, or unrecognized.
The term bronze baby syndrome refers to a dark, grayish brown skin
discoloration sometimes noted in infants undergoing phototherapy.
Almost all infants observed with this syndrome have had significant
elevation of direct-­reacting bilirubin and other evidence of obstructive
liver disease. The discoloration may result from photo-­induced modification of porphyrins, which are often present during cholestatic jaundice and may last for many months. Despite the bronze baby syndrome,
phototherapy can continue if needed.

Intravenous Immunoglobulin

The administration of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is an
adjunctive treatment for hyperbilirubinemia caused by isoimmune
hemolytic disease. It has been used when serum bilirubin is approaching exchange levels despite maximal interventions, including phototherapy. IVIG (0.5-­1.0 g/kg/dose; repeat in 12 hours) may reduce the
need for exchange transfusion in both ABO and Rh hemolytic disease,
presumably by reducing hemolysis. The effectiveness is unclear.

Exchange Transfusion

Double-­volume exchange transfusion is performed if intensive phototherapy has failed to reduce bilirubin levels to a safe range and the
risk of kernicterus exceeds the procedural risk. Potential complications from exchange transfusion are not trivial and include metabolic
acidosis, electrolyte abnormalities, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia,

thrombocytopenia, volume overload, arrhythmias, necrotizing
enterocolitis (NEC), infection, graft versus host disease, and death.
This widely accepted treatment is repeated if necessary to keep indirect bilirubin levels in a safe range (Fig. 137.9). Ideally the exchange
transfusion should be performed with leukocyte-­depleted, washed
fresh-­packed RBC’s, reconstructed with fresh-­frozen plasma to a
hematocrit of ∼40%. It should be cross matched against the neonate
and the mother.
Various factors may influence the decision to perform a double-­
volume exchange transfusion in an individual patient (see Fig. 137.8).
The appearance of clinical signs suggesting kernicterus is an absolute
indication for exchange transfusion at any level of serum bilirubin. A
hydropic jaundiced neonate with erythroblastosis from Rh disease will
be critically ill and requires exchange transfusion at much lower levels
than recommended in Figures 137.9 and 137.10. See other risk factors
affecting exchange transfusion threshold in Figure 137.10.
A healthy full-­term infant with physiologic or breast milk jaundice
may tolerate a bilirubin concentration slightly higher than 25 mg/dL
with no apparent ill effect, whereas kernicterus may develop in a sick
premature infant at a significantly lower level. A level approaching that
considered critical for the individual infant may be an indication for
exchange transfusion during the first or second day after birth, when
a further rise is anticipated, but not typically after the fourth day in a
term infant or after the seventh day in a preterm infant, because an
imminent decrease in bilirubin levels may be anticipated as the hepatic
conjugating mechanism becomes more effective.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1116 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
24

Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL)

22

20

Exchange Transfusion Thresholds: 1 or More Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors
18

Gestational Age
 38 Weeks
37 Weeks
36 Weeks
35 Weeks

16

14

12
0

12

24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120 132 144 156 168 180 192 204 216 228 240 252 264 276 288 300 312 324 336
(1d)
(2d)
(3d)
(4d)
(5d)
(6d)
(7d)
(8d)
(9d)
(10d)
(11d)
(12d)
(13d)
(14d)

Age – hours
(days)

Fig. 137.10 Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with any recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors other

than gestational age. These thresholds are based on expert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of escalation of
care exceed its potential harms. The stippled lines for the first 24 hours indicate uncertainty because of the wide range of clinical circumstances and
responses to intensive phototherapy. Use total serum bilirubin concentrations; do not subtract direct bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. In rare
cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an expert. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency,
or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours. (From Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL,
et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics.
2022;150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 6.)

Chapter 138

Blood Disorders
Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert
NORMAL ERYTHROPOIESIS AND HEMOGLOBIN
FUNCTIONS

The diagnosis of anemia or polycythemia, and interpretation of laboratory values, requires understanding normal hemoglobin-­
oxygen
binding and delivery physiology. Heterotetrameric hemoglobin, comprising two α-­globin and two β-­globin monomers, has an exquisite
ability to cooperatively bind and release oxygen molecules in response
to environmental conditions. Hemoglobin switching refers to the normal transitions in gene expression among embryonic, fetal, and adult
globins that occur before and after birth (Fig. 138.1). Fetal hemoglobin
(HbF) is the predominant hemoglobin molecule produced during late
gestation. Its increased oxygen affinity compared with maternal adult
hemoglobin (HbA) facilitates oxygen transfer in the hypoxic in utero
environment, which lacks direct atmospheric gas exchange. Relative in
utero hypoxia explains the elevated hemoglobin levels normally seen
in newborns, which can be exacerbated by pathologic chronic intrauterine hypoxia.

NORMAL RED BLOOD CELL INDICES IN NEONATES
AND INFANTS

Diagnosing anemia or polycythemia in infants also relies on comparisons to normal reference ranges, which vary based on gestational and
postnatal age. Normal reference ranges for hemoglobin, hematocrit,
and other erythrocyte indices are based on measurements from more

than 25,000 preterm and term infants through the first 28 days of life
(Fig. 138.2). Hemoglobin and hematocrit levels exhibit linear increases
between 22 and 40 weeks of gestation.
Erythrocyte mean corpuscular volume (MCV) in neonates is typically higher than toddlers or older children, with normal values ranging
from approximately 100-­115 fL at birth (see Fig. 138.2C). Reasons for
this finding are multifactorial. An elevated MCV can reflect an increase
in circulating reticulocytes (immature erythrocytes), although a relative reticulocytosis in neonates is inadequate to fully explain the MCV
elevation. Indeed, mature erythrocytes are larger in neonates than in
adults. The size discrepancy may be related to the presence of different hemoglobin molecules, as mature erythrocytes containing HbF
(termed F cells) may be larger than HbA-­containing cells. Conversely,
MCV <100 fL in a neonate should prompt suspicion for underlying α-­
thalassemia/thalassemia trait, maternal iron deficiency, or chronic fetal
to maternal blood loss.
At any age, increased MCV can indicate hemolysis or other processes that enhance erythropoietic drive. Persistent microcytic anemia
can result from thalassemia or iron deficiency.

Platelet Count Abnormalities in Pediatric Patients

Hematopoiesis, megakaryopoiesis, and thrombopoiesis produce ∼1011
platelets per day to facilitate normal blood clotting and fulfill important vascular functions (see Chapter 495). Processes that disrupt platelet production or consumption can significantly alter steady-­
state
platelet quantities in circulation. This can be clinically relevant and
require intervention, although many etiologies are transient and/or
benign. Here we describe common etiologies that increase or decrease
platelet counts. Chapter 533 includes a full description of these and
other platelet defects.
Thrombocytosis is defined as >450 × 109 platelets/L blood, although for
neonates this limit can be raised to >600 × 109 platelets/L. Thrombocytosis
can be stratified from mild to extreme, the latter defined as >1,000 × 109

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 138 u Blood Disorders

1117

25

100

20

A
60
HGB

15

40
z2e2
20

A—a2b2

z2g2

Globin subunits: % of total

A 0

B

10

F

5

A2—a2d2

a2e2

0

50

a

40

A

b

Gg

20
e

10
0

z

70

Ag
b

0
3

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41
Gestational Age (weeks)
Mean
95%ile
5%ile

80

30

10
20
30
BIRTH
Crown–Rump
5 10 15 20 5 cm
FETUS

60

d
10

20

30

40WK

50
HCT

Hemoglobins: % of total

F—a2g2
80

NEWBORN

40
30

Fig. 138.1 Developmental changes in (A) hemoglobin tetramers and

(B) globin subunit expression from early gestation through infancy.
(From Polin RA, Fox WW. Fetal and Neonatal Physiology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1998. p. 1769.)

20
10
0

NEUTROPENIA

White blood cells provide innate and adaptive immune functions. The
neutrophil is a key component of innate immune surveillance, and disorders that affect neutrophil number and function can result in varied
clinical consequences (see Chapter 168).
Neutropenia is defined as an absolute neutrophil count (ANC)
<1,500/μL blood, but typically increases infection risk only when ANC
falls <500/μL. Many processes affecting the survival of neutrophils and
their precursor cells can cause neutropenia, including situations wherein
antineutrophil antibodies increase neutrophil destruction and clearance.
Autoimmune neutropenia results from a patient’s own neutrophil-­
targeted antibodies. It is among the most common etiologies of neutropenia in infants and toddlers, rarely results in significant infections
or complications, and generally resolves by the time the child is school
age. Neonatal isoimmune neutropenia results from transplacental passage of maternal antineutrophil antibodies in a process akin to red
blood cell (RBC) antigen-­targeted antibodies in hemolytic disease of
the fetus and newborn (see Chapter 140). Importantly, these scenarios
do not typically incur additional infection risks for patients. In fact,

B

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41
Gestational Age (weeks)
Mean
95%ile
5%ile

140
135
130
125
MCV (fL)

platelets/L. Immature immune or hematopoietic systems may underlie an
increased rate of thrombocytosis in infants and young children.
Myeloproliferative disorders can cause primary thrombocytosis, but
this is rare in children. More often, thrombocytosis reflects a secondary or reactive process as part of an acute phase response. This is usually due to an inflammatory process and does not increase thrombotic
risk in children. Extreme thrombocytosis is rare, and it can be more
worrisome for infection, iron deficiency, or other inflammatory pathology. However, even extremely elevated platelet counts do not seem to
increase risk of hemorrhage or thrombosis. Thus most often, thrombocytosis will resolve spontaneously, or after treatment of the inciting
etiology, without adverse sequelae.
Thrombocytopenia is defined as platelets count <150 × 109 platelets/L
blood. However, increased bleeding risk does not typically occur unless
platelet counts decline to <20 × 109 platelets/L. Congenital and acquired
processes underlie a broad differential diagnosis for thrombocytopenia
that is described in Chapter 533. Different immune and nonimmune processes can cause thrombocytopenia at different stages of infancy or later
childhood, with wide-­ranging health implications.

120
115
110
105
100
95
90

C

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
Weeks Gestation

Fig. 138.2 Reference range for hematocrit (HCT) and hemoglobin
(HGB) concentration according to gestational age. A and B, Reference
ranges (5th percentile, mean, and 95th percentile) are shown for blood
HGB (A) and HCT (B). Concentrations were obtained during the first 6
hours after birth, among patients at 22-­42 weeks of gestation. Values
were excluded if the diagnosis included abruption, placenta previa, or
known fetal anemia, or if a blood transfusion was given before the first
HGB was measured. C, Reference ranges for mean corpuscular volume
(MCV) in neonates on first day after birth. The lower line shows the 5th
percentile values, the middle line shows the mean values, and the upper
line shows the 95th percentile values. (From Christensen RD, Jopling
HE, Jopling J, Wiedmeier SE. The CBC: Reference ranges for neonates.
Semin Perinatol. 2009;33[1]:3–11.)

they are typically diagnosed incidentally after noting abnormalities on
a complete blood count obtained for other reasons. Reassurance, with
or without repeat laboratory testing, is typically all that is required.
Counts will virtually always normalize spontaneously.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1118 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Chapter 139

Anemia in the Newborn
Infant
Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert
Anemia is extremely common worldwide, affecting an estimated 25%
of the global population, and carries a broad differential diagnosis in
infants and children. Etiologies may be acute or chronic, with clinical
manifestations ranging from an asymptomatic laboratory finding to
life-­threatening signs and symptoms. Because anemia can result from
decreased erythrocyte production, increased erythrocyte destruction,
erythrocyte dysfunction, or blood loss, the differential diagnosis of
anemia can be complex (Table 139.1). Careful consideration of details
related to the patient’s history and presentation can facilitate rapid diagnosis. Additional relevant details in neonates include gestational age and
general health, perinatal course and delivery, and maternal health from
early pregnancy through delivery and the postpartum period.

THE PHYSIOLOGIC NADIR DURING INFANCY

An abrupt increase in oxygen tension and arterial hemoglobin saturation,
a shift in the oxygen dissociation curve due to a switch from high oxygen
affinity fetal hemoglobin (HbF) to low oxygen affinity adult hemoglobin
(HbA), increased postnatal 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate (increasing oxygen
delivery through cooperativity), and adaptive cardiovascular mechanisms all contribute to increased oxygen delivery to tissues and can rapidly reduce erythropoietin levels postnatally. These mechanisms result in
reduced erythropoiesis in the bone marrow after a week of life. Combined
with the shorter half-­life of neonatal erythrocytes compared to adult erythrocytes (60 days vs 120 days), full-­term infants normally experience a slow
decline in hemoglobin to 9-­11 g/dL over 6-­10 weeks (Fig. 139.1). Eventually, the reduction in hemoglobin concentration reduces oxygen delivery
enough to stimulate erythropoietic drive, and hemoglobin levels subsequently rebound to “normal” levels for later life (see Fig. 139.1). These typical developmental and physiologic processes culminating in a decreased
hemoglobin level are termed the physiologic nadir.
Preterm infants experience a more pronounced, earlier nadir, with
hemoglobin levels falling to 8-­9 g/dL over 4-­8 weeks. One reason for the
more dramatic nadir in preterm infants is reduced iron stores, because
most iron is normally transferred to the fetus during the third trimester.
The nadir in preterm infants is also a consequence of a reduced starting
hemoglobin at birth; iatrogenic blood loss; and more significant cardiorespiratory disease, inadequate nutrition, and infections. Still, a hemoglobin
level <8 typically prompts a transfusion and/or hematologist consultation.

Normal physiologic changes in hemoglobin concentration should be
considered when diagnosing anemia in neonates and early infants. For
example, a neonate may be considered anemic if the hemoglobin level
declines below the 5th percentile for age (see Fig. 139.1, lower dashed
lines). Interventions should occur only in response to clinical signs and
symptoms that occur as disease sequelae with referral to subspecialty care
for further evaluation and management as appropriate.

ANEMIA CLASSIFICATIONS AND KEY DIAGNOSTIC
MODALITIES

Anemia can result from blood loss, erythrocyte destruction (hemolysis), or underproduction of erythrocytes. Common etiologies are summarized in Table 139.1. In many cases, the clinical context, physical
examination, and medical history, including review of the patient’s
history and clinical course, can be diagnostic. However, a simple and
efficient laboratory workup can facilitate rapid definitive diagnosis and
suggest an effective treatment strategy (Fig. 139.2).
In many cases, a CBC and the reticulocyte count can identify the diagnosis. Additional testing that is particularly helpful in neonatal diagnosis includes a direct antiglobulin test, serum bilirubin, infant blood type,
and maternal blood type (ABO and Rh). Prenatal screening routinely
includes indirect (serum) antiglobulin testing for maternal erythrocyte
alloantibodies. The infant’s peripheral blood smear can identify nucleated
erythrocytes secondary to compensatory active erythropoiesis, as well as
distinct erythrocyte morphologies (e.g., elliptocytes, acanthocytes) reflecting hemolytic anemia. Spherocytes and microspherocytes can suggest
immune-­mediated hemolysis or hereditary spherocytosis (HS), which can
be differentiated by the direct antiglobulin test (DAT; formerly the direct
Coombs test; Fig. 139.3). Importantly, neonatal blood smears often include
atypical erythrocyte morphology with macrocytosis, poikilocytosis, and
anisocytosis, which can result from normal erythropoiesis at that age and
preclude definitive diagnosis. An experienced hematology-­pathologist is
needed to identify truly pathologic features (Table 139.2; see Chapter 496).
Specialized testing to diagnose various red cell membrane disorders
and enzyme deficiencies, as well as hemoglobin quantitation for evaluation for specific hemoglobin disorders, may be performed in consultation
with a specialist. Some states routinely screen newborns for glucose-­6-­
phosphate-­dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Further, universal screening in the United States for sickle cell disease has markedly improved health
outcomes by facilitating early penicillin prophylaxis, although much work
remains to be done.

Inadequate Red Blood Cell Production

Whereas normal RBC underproduction after birth results in the physiologic nadir, this process can be more significant in preterm infants, requiring transfusions and other supportive therapy. Anemia of prematurity is
largely due to iatrogenic losses (phlebotomy) and is exacerbated by acute
or chronic illness, comorbidities of prematurity, and decreased iron stores.
Iron-­deficiency anemia is the most common cause of anemia worldwide, and can occur during infancy or in older children. Iron is required

Table 139.1  Differential Diagnosis of Neonatal Anemia
BLOOD LOSS
• Iatrogenic blood loss (phlebotomy)
• Placental hemorrhage
• Placental previa
• Injury of umbilical or placental vessels
• Fetomaternal transfusion
• Fetoplacental transfusion
• Twin-­twin transfusion
• Acute perinatal hemorrhage (e.g., cesarean
birth, other obstetric trauma)
• Chronic in utero blood loss

↑ RBC DESTRUCTION
Immune-­Mediated Hemolysis
• Rh incompatibility
• ABO incompatibility
• Minor antigen incompatibility
RBC Membrane Disorders
• Hereditary spherocytosis
• Hereditary elliptocytosis
• Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis
• Hereditary stomatocytosis
RBC Enzyme Disorders
• G6PD deficiency
• Pyruvate kinase deficiency

↓ RBC PRODUCTION
• Physiologic anemia and anemia of
prematurity
• Infection (rubella, CMV, parvovirus B19)
• Bone marrow suppression (acute stress in
perinatal period)
• Hemoglobinopathy (γ-­globin mutation,
unstable β-­hemoglobinopathy,
α-­thalassemia major)
• Bone marrow suppression (CMV, EBV)
• Diamond-­Blackfan anemia
• Schwachman-­Diamond syndrome
• Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia
• Fanconi anemia
• Pearson syndrome
• Congenital leukemia

CMV, Cytomegalovirus, EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

70

60

60

50

50

40
30

Hemoglobin, g/dL

40
30

20

20

10

10

0

0

A

B

Hematocrit, %

70

Day of life

C

Day of life

25

25

20

20

Hemoglobin, g/dL

Hematocrit, %

Chapter 139 u Anemia in the Newborn Infant 1119

15

10

15

10

5

5

0

0
Day of life

D

Day of life

Fig. 139.1 Reference range for hematocrit and hemoglobin concentration during the first 28 days of life. A and B, Late preterm and term infants

(35-­42 weeks’ gestation). C and D, Preterm infants (29-­34 weeks’ gestation). The reference ranges are shown for hematocrit (A and C) (41,957 patients) and blood hemoglobin (B and D) (39,559 patients) during the 28 days after birth. Values were divided into two groups (A/B and C/D) on the
basis of gestational age at delivery. Patients were excluded when their diagnosis included abruption, placenta previa, or fetal anemia, or when a
blood transfusion was given. Analysis was not possible for patients <29 weeks’ gestation because virtually all these had repeated phlebotomy and
erythrocyte transfusions. (From Jopling J, Henry E, Wiedmeier SE, Christensen RD. Reference ranges for hematocrit and blood hemoglobin concentration during the neonatal period: data from a multihospital health care system. Pediatrics. 2009;123[2]:e333–e337.)

for hemoglobin tetramer construction, so erythropoiesis demands ample
iron be present to form hemoglobinized RBCs. Insufficient iron stores,
either through chronic blood loss or inadequate iron intake, hinder erythropoiesis. RBCs will be uniformly microcytic (mean corpuscular volume
[MCV] <80 fL) and hypochromic on the blood smear. Ferritin, transferrin,
and reticulocyte quantities will be low. In addition to anemia, iron deficiency predisposes to thrombocytosis. This is a result of effects on hematopoietic progenitor cell lineage commitment, among potential mechanisms.
Iron supplementation at doses of 3-­6 mg/kg/day can effectively treat this
condition; once-­daily treatment is better than divided doses due to potential induction of hepcidin with frequent iron supplementation.
Acquired conditions may also suppress bone marrow erythrocyte
production in neonates and older children (Table 139.3). Numerous
bacterial and viral infections may suppress erythropoiesis and contribute to anemia, from prenatal TORCH (toxoplasmosis, other viral agents,
rubella, cytomegalovirus [CMV], herpes simplex) infections and parvovirus B19 to sepsis. Congenital conditions may result in anemia due to
decreased red cell production. These rare disorders may manifest early in
the neonatal period, but more commonly present in later infancy or early
childhood. Etiologies include the bone marrow failure syndromes (Fanconi anemia, Schwachman-­
Diamond syndrome, Diamond-­
Blackfan
anemia, Aase syndrome congenital dyserythropoietic anemia, dyskeratosis congenita, Pearson syndrome), the thalassemias (α, β, or HbE), and
infant leukemias, among others (see Tables 139.1 and 139.3).

Increased Red Cell Destruction: The Hemolytic
Anemias

Increased rates of RBC destruction cause hemolytic anemia. This most
often occurs via immune-­
mediated mechanisms, when RBC antigen
incompatibilities exist between infants and mothers, or as a result of

autoimmune disease in later childhood. However, intrinsic abnormalities in the erythrocyte membrane, hemoglobin, or other enzymes can also
increase hemolysis. Severe hemolytic anemias can cause hyperbilirubinemia necessitating intervention (Fig. 139.4). For example, hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN), also known as erythroblastosis
fetalis, results in often severe alloimmune hemolysis from maternal antibodies targeting paternally derived RBC antigens (see Chapter 140).
Congenital erythrocyte membrane disorders can cause clinically
significant hemolytic anemia and jaundice in the neonatal period and
beyond. Key structural proteins and lipid components are necessary to
produce durable, flexible, biconcave erythrocyte membranes capable of
deforming and squeezing through tiny capillaries. Genetic abnormalities in integral membrane proteins (e.g., ankyrin, band 3, α-­spectrin,
β-­spectrin, protein 4.2) destabilize the RBC membrane and decrease
cellular deformability, increasing splenic entrapment. HS is the most
common RBC membrane disorder, affecting 1 in 2,500-­5,000 individuals of European descent. HS is most often caused by pathogenic variants in genes coding for ankyrin or spectrin and is characterized by
spherical erythrocytes on the blood smear (see Fig. 139.3; see Chapter
507). Most infants born with HS will develop jaundice early in the newborn period. Treatment is largely supportive. Most patients with mild
disease require little intervention, whereas those with more severe hemolysis sometimes require RBC transfusions or splenectomy. Hereditary
elliptocytosis (HE), another erythrocyte membranopathy, is typically
less severe than HS. HE is characterized by elliptical-­shaped erythrocytes on the peripheral blood smear and may be underdiagnosed given
the extremely mild clinical presentation.
A more clinically significant membranopathy is hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (HPP), an autosomal recessive disorder with striking dysmorphology (poikilocytosis) on the peripheral blood smear. HPP is most common

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1120 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Hemoglobin concentration

Reticulocyte count

Low

Normal or high

Congenital hypoplastic
anemias
Congenital infections
Congenital leukemia

Coombs test

Negative

Positive

MCV

Immune hemolytic anemia
• ABO
• Rh
• Minor blood
group (e.g., Kell)

Low
• Chronic intrauterine blood loss
• -Thalassemia syndromes

Normal or high
Peripheral
blood smear
Abnormal

Normal
Rare misc.
causes (e.g.,
hexokinase
deficiency)

Hereditary spherocytosis
Hereditary elliptocytosis
Stomatocytosis
Pyropoikilocytosis
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
G6PD deficiency
DIC

Infection

Blood loss
a) Iatrogenic (sampling)
b) Fetomaternal/fetoplacental
Twin to twin
Internal hemorrhage
c) Placental hemorrhage
d) Umbilical cord hemorrhage

Fig. 139.2 Diagnostic algorithm showing the approach to anemia in

newborn infants. DIC, Disseminated intravascular coagulation; G6PD,
glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; MCV, mean corpuscular volume.
(Modified from Blanchette VS, Zipursky A. Assessment of anemia in
newborn infants. Clin Perinatol. 1984;11:489–510.)

in infants of African descent and can be associated with severe anemia and
hemolysis during infancy and throughout life. There is substantial clinical
and genetic overlap between HPP and HE, because infants with HPP often
have a family history of HE and may develop a milder condition resembling HE later in childhood (see Chapter 508).
In infants with significant jaundice in the first day of life without a
blood type mismatch, a family history of hemolytic anemia should prompt
clinical suspicion for an erythrocyte membranopathy. Beyond a negative
DAT, diagnostic evaluation should include serial bilirubin and reticulocyte monitoring, along with a peripheral blood smear. Previously, osmotic
fragility testing was the only way to establish the diagnosis, but it is significantly impacted by hemoglobin F concentrations. Some laboratories can
instead diagnose certain membranopathies by flow cytometry based on
binding of eosin-­5-­maleimide (EMA). Treatment is directed by the degree
of anemia and hyperbilirubinemia, which can be highly variable.
Erythrocyte enzymopathies can also cause neonatal anemia. Circulating RBC survival relies on critical metabolic pathways to limit oxidative
stress. Inadequate antioxidant systems can result in membrane instability
and cell lysis that manifest clinically as hemolytic anemia. For example,
G6PD is abundant in RBCs to limit oxidative stress. G6PD deficiency, the
most common RBC enzymopathy, is an X-­linked disorder affecting >400
million people worldwide. Different classes of G6PD deficiency vary in
clinical severity. Although affected individuals are generally asymptomatic, some are prone to develop acute hemolytic anemia in the setting of
oxidative stress triggered by sulfa drugs, infections, or certain foods like
fava beans. There is an increased incidence of clinically significant jaundice
in G6PD deficient neonates, who sometimes have severe and prolonged
hyperbilirubinemia that can present in the first few days of life. Although
severe anemia with reticulocytosis is uncommon, many infants require
increased monitoring or therapy. Newborn screening for G6PD deficiency
varies across the United States. G6PD activity can be tested in erythrocytes
(<1–2% suggests G6PD deficiency). However, testing may be inaccurate
during acute hemolysis or reticulocytosis because, for the most common
variants, reticulocytes have higher enzyme activity.
Another common RBC enzymopathy is pyruvate kinase deficiency
(PKD), which affects an estimated 3.2-­8.5 per million individuals of European descent. Pyruvate kinase is a critical glycolytic enzyme. In its absence,
metabolic derangements can cause RBC lysis and hemolytic anemia.
Though clinical severity varies, PKD may be associated with sometimes
life-­threatening complications, prolonged jaundice, and lifelong blood
transfusions.

HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES

Microspherocytes
ABO hemolytic
disease

Microspherocytes
hereditary
spherocytosis

Hemoglobinopathies result from genetic variants in γ-­globin, β-­globin, or
α-­globin genes. The clinical presentation of hemoglobin variants reflects
aberrant biochemical properties of the mutated hemoglobin molecule.
Individuals can be anemic (most commonly), cyanotic, polycythemic,
prone to hemolysis, have high methemoglobin levels, or asymptomatic.
Thousands of variants have been identified, with wide-­ranging clinical
severity.
Hemoglobin variants can also clinically manifest at different times
according to when the affected globin chain is produced (see Fig.
138.1). The common β-­hemoglobinopathies, sickle cell disease and β-­
thalassemia, do not typically present in the neonatal period due to protective effects from high HbF levels. In fact, novel therapeutic approaches
aim to maintain HbF persistence in sickle cell patients. In contrast,
infants with rare γ-­globin variants can present with complications in the
neonatal period that resolve in the first few months of life as normal gene
expression changes to reduce or abrogate γ-­globin expression.

Hemorrhage and Red Blood Cell Loss
A

B

Fig. 139.3 Microspherocytes. A, Neonate with ABO hemolytic dis-

ease. B, Neonate with hereditary spherocytosis. (From Christensen
RD. Neonatal erythrocyte disorders. In Gleason CA, Juul SE, eds.
Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018:
Fig. 81-­8.)

Blood loss or hemorrhage in utero or in the newborn period can also result
in anemia. In fact, iatrogenic or pathologic blood loss is the most common
cause of neonatal anemia. For critically ill and/or premature infants in the
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), laboratory monitoring can require
phlebotomy of 15–30% of an infant’s blood volume every week (∼11-­22
mL/kg/week). Most other blood loss etiologies occur just before or during delivery, often from placental abruption or fetal hemorrhage (see Table
139.1). Infants can also become anemic from occult gastrointestinal blood
losses due to milk protein allergy. Other causes of blood loss are restricted

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 139 u Anemia in the Newborn Infant 1121
Table 139.2  Morphologic Abnormalities of Erythrocytes in Neonates with Jaundice
ABNORMAL ERYTHROCYTE
MORPHOLOGY
Microspherocytes

SUGGESTED LABORATORY
TESTING/FINDINGS

MOST LIKELY CAUSES
Hereditary spherocytosis

ABO hemolytic disease

OTHER FEATURES

DAT (−)
EMA flow (+)
Persistent spherocytosis
Reticulocytosis
DAT (+)
Transient spherocytosis
Reticulocytosis

MCHC/MCV elevated (>36,
likely >40)
MCHC/MCV normal (<36, likely
<34)

Elliptocytes

Hereditary elliptocytosis

DAT (−)

MCHC normal
MCV normal

Bite and blister cells

G6PD deficiency
Unstable hemoglobin

G6PD enzyme activity
Heinz body preparation

Typically affects males, but rarely
females are also affected
Ethnicity of equatorial origin

Echinocytes

PK deficiency
Other glycolytic enzyme deficiency

PK enzyme activity
Quantify activity of other glycolytic
enzymes

Autosomal recessive, likely to
have no family history

Schistocytes

DIC and/or perinatal asphyxia

Low levels of FV and FVIII, elevated
levels of D-­dimers
Positive result of Heinz body
preparation
Severely decreased ADAMTS-­13
activity (<0.1 U/mL) high levels of
LDH
Acute renal failure
Severely decreased functional
protein C activity (<1%)
May be internal or external

Low or falling platelet count
Normal to high IPF
Normal to high MPV DIC,
perinatal asphyxia
ADAMTS-­13 deficiency, early
neonatal HUS, and giant
hemangiomas all involve
platelet consumption from
endothelial injury and all have a
similar neonatal presentation

Heinz body HA
ADAMTS-­13 deficiency (TTP)
Neonatal hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
Homozygous protein C deficiency
Giant hemangioma

DAT, Direct antiglobulin test; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; EMA, eosin 5-­maleimide; FV, factor V; FVIII, factor VIII; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; HA,
hemolytic anemia; HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome; IPF, immature platelet fraction; LDH, lactic dehydrogenase; MCHC, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean
corpuscular volume; MPV, mean platelet volume; PK, pyruvate kinase; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
From Christensen RD, Yaish HM. Hemolytic disorders causing severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42:515–527. Table 3.

Table 139.3  Syndromes Associated with Congenital Hyporegenerative Anemia
SYNDROME

PHENOTYPIC FEATURES

GENOTYPIC FEATURES

Adenosine deaminase
deficiency

Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, reduced erythrocyte adenosine
deaminase activity

AR, 20q13.11

Congenital
dyserythropoietic
anemias

Type I (rare): megaloblastoid erythroid hyperplasia and nuclear chromatin
bridges between nuclei
Type II (most common): hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity with
positive acidified serum test result, increased lysis to anti-­I antibodies
Type III: erythroblastic multinuclearity (“gigantoblasts”), macrocytosis

Type I: 15q15.1-­q15.3
Type II: 20q11.2
Type III: 15q21

Diamond-­Blackfan
syndrome

Steroid-­responsive hypoplastic anemia, often macrocytic after 5 mo of age

AR; sporadic gene variants and AD
inheritance described; 19q13.2,
8p23.3-­p22

Dyskeratosis congenita

Hypoproliferative anemia usually presenting between 5 and 15 yr of age

X-­linked recessive, locus on Xq28;
some cases with AD inheritance

Fanconi syndrome

Steroid-­responsive hypoplastic anemia, reticulocytopenia, some
macrocytic RBCs, shortened RBC life span
Cells are hypersensitive to DNA cross-­linked agents

AR, multiple genes: complementation;
group A 16q24.3; group B Xp22.3;
group C 9q22.3; group D2 3p25.3;
group E 6p22-­p21; group F 11p15;
group G 9p13

Osler hemorrhagic
telangiectasia syndrome

Hemorrhagic anemia

AD, 9q34.1

Osteopetrosis

Hypoplastic anemia from marrow compression; extramedullary
erythropoiesis

AR, 16p13, 11q13.4-­q13.5; AD, 1p21;
lethal, reduced levels of osteoclasts

Pearson syndrome

Hypoplastic sideroblastic anemia, marrow cell vacuolization

Pleioplasmatic rearrangement of
mitochondrial DNA; X-­linked or AR

Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome

Iron-­deficiency anemia from chronic blood loss

AD, 19p13.3

ATR-­X and ATR-­16
syndromes

ATR-­X: hypochromic, microcytic anemia; mild form of hemoglobin H
diseaseATR-­16: more significant hemoglobin H disease and anemia are present

ATR-­16, 16p13.3, deletions of α-­globin
locus

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ATR-­16, chromosome 16–related α-­thalassemia/mental retardation; ATR-­X, X-­linked α-­thalassemia/mental retardation.
From Christensen RD. Neonatal erythrocyte disorders. In: Gleason CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 81-­2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1122 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Problematic neonatal jaundice?
Is phototherapy needed for >2 days? To evaluate potential
underlying causes, obtain blood type on mother and infant baby,
DAT, CBC with peripheral blood smear, and reticulocyte count.

DAT positive
In ABO hemolytic
disease, if the
jaundice is severe or
atypical, consider
the possibility of a
coexisting condition;
consider additional
diagnostic testing
and sequencing.

DAT negative

RBC enzymology
or other
intrinsic defect

Suspicious for HS?
(MCHC/MCV >0.36)

G6PD
pyruvate kinase
other

Fig. 139.5 Acid elution technique of Kleihauer (Kleihauer-­Betke test).
Osmotic fragility
or ektacytometry
testing

Pathogenesis still unclear?

• Additional diagnostic testing
• Next-generation DNA sequencing
• Hematology consultation

Fetal red blood cells stain with eosin and appear dark. Adult RBCs do not
stain and appear as “ghosts.” (From Liley HG, Gardener G, Lopriore E,
Smits-­Wintjens V. Immune hemolytic disease. In Orkin SH, Nathan DG,
Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of
Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Fig. 3-­2.)

Table 139.4  Suggested Transfusion Thresholds
PRESENCE OF
RESPIRATORY
SUPPORT

Fig. 139.4 Algorithm for the evaluation of the neonate with prob-

lematic jaundice of unclear cause. Not all neonates who receive phototherapy for 2 days or more have hemolytic jaundice. However, if hemolytic jaundice is suspected, this algorithm for stepwise evaluation of the
cause might be useful. DAT, Direct antiglobulin test; G6PD, glucose
6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase; HS, hereditary spherocytosis; MCHC,
mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean corpuscular
volume. (From Christensen RD. Neonatal erythrocyte disorders. In Gleason CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 81-­15.)

to older children, including celiac disease or menstrual bleeding. Diagnosis and treatment of hemorrhage in the newborn period are discussed in
Chapter 142.
Fetomaternal hemorrhage (FMH) is caused by abnormal bleeding
from fetal to maternal circulation before or during delivery. Although
small amounts of FMH can be normal, more substantial pathologic
FMH (>30 mL of fetal blood) occurs in 3 per 1,000 births. In comparison, large (>80 mL) or massive (>150 mL) FMH occurs in 0.9 and
0.2 per 1,000 births, respectively. Clinical signs of FMH vary due to
differential fetal compensation. Decreased or absent fetal movement
is the most common antenatal presentation and should prompt clinical suspicion. Postnatally, infant pallor, tachycardia, hypotension, and
poor perfusion can indicate clinically significant anemia.
A standard diagnostic modality for FMH is the Kleihauer-­Betke test,
which leverages the differential stability of HbF vs HbA on acid exposure to identify fetal erythrocytes in the maternal circulation from a
maternal blood smear (Fig. 139.5). However, this test requires technical skill, expert interpretation, and may not be available in a timely
manner. Some laboratories now offer flow cytometry–based assays to
quantify fetal RBCs in maternal circulation.

ANEMIA MANAGEMENT PRINCIPALS
Red Blood Cell Transfusions

The decision to transfuse packed RBC for anemia depends on the
severity of symptoms, the hemoglobin concentration, and the presence of comorbidities that can alter oxygen delivery, such as pulmonary hypertension, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, cyanotic congenital
heart disease, or other respiratory pathology. Benefits should be balanced against risks, including volume overload, hemolytic and nonhemolytic reactions, exposure to blood product preservatives and toxins,
graft-­versus-­host reaction, and transfusion-­acquired infections such as

ABSENCE OF
RESPIRATORY
SUPPORT

POSTNATAL AGE

HEMOGLOBIN CONCENTRATION g/dL
(HEMATOCRIT %)

Week 1

11.0 (33%)

10.0 (30%)

Week 2

10.0 (30%)

8.5 (25%)

Week 3

8.5 (25%)

7.0 (21%)

Values based on thresholds described in Kirpalani H, Bell EF, Hintz SR, et al. Higher
or lower hemoglobin transfusion thresholds for preterm infants. N Engl J Med.
2020;383(27):2639–2651.

CMV, HIV, parvovirus, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C (see Chapter 523).
Transfusion decisions should also consider the time course in which
anemia developed, whether ongoing blood loss or hemolysis are anticipated, and if there are any planned surgical interventions.
Many neonates in the NICU require RBC transfusions, particularly
among premature and very low birthweight (VLBW) infants. Several trials to compare restrictive (lower) to liberal (higher) transfusion thresholds
have shown no significant differences in death or serious morbidity, with
restrictive thresholds modestly reducing blood product exposure. These
studies provide the basis for neonatal transfusion guidelines based on postnatal age and respiratory support needs (Table 139.4). In full-­term anemic
infants, RBC transfusions should be similarly based on hemodynamic stability, respiratory status, clinical status, and expected clinical trajectory.
To reduce blood product-­associated CMV transmission to vulnerable
infants, it is important that transfused RBCs are leukocyte reduced or
CMV seronegative. There remains a small risk of transfusion-­associated
graft versus host disease even after RBC irradiation. Although data do
not support specific transfusion volumes, the typical range is from 10-­20
mL/kg. Infants at risk of volume overload, including neonates with congenital cardiac disease or who were born in the setting of chronic abruption, are typically given smaller volume transfusions (often 5 mL/kg).
One logical goal of RBC transfusions is to target a specific goal hemoglobin concentration. Each 5 mL/kg of transfused RBCs is expected to
raise the hemoglobin concentration by 1 g/dL.
Transfusion of RBCs is typically delivered at a rate of 3-­5 mL/kg/
hr, with a slower rate preferred for very small, acutely ill infants with
a tenuous fluid status. Each transfusion should be completed within 4
hours, or before a given blood product expires.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 140 u Hemolytic Disease of the Fetus and Newborn

Chapter 140

Hemolytic Disease of the
Fetus and Newborn
Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert
Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN), also known as
erythroblastosis fetalis, is a broad diagnosis that applies to any fetus
or neonate who develops alloimmune hemolysis caused by the transplacental passage of maternal antibodies directed against paternally
derived red blood cell (RBC) antigens. Although more than 60 different RBC antigens can elicit a maternal antibody response, clinically significant disease is most often associated with incompatibility in ABO
blood groups or rhesus (Rh) antigen (Table 140.1). HDFN caused by
anti-­RhD antibodies, occurring in RhD-­positive infants born to RhD-­
negative mothers, is the most severe form because of the highly immunogenic nature of the RhD antigen. Less frequently, hemolytic disease
may be caused by differences in other Rh system antigens, or by other
RBC antigens such as CW, CX, DU, K (Kell), M, Duffy, S, P, MNS, Xg,
Lutheran, Diego, and Kidd. Early recognition and diagnosis facilitate
timely interventions to prevent adverse sequelae.

HDFN CAUSED BY Rh INCOMPATIBILITY
Pathogenesis

Rh antigenic determinants are genetically transmitted from each parent
and determine Rh blood type by directing the production of Rh C, c, D, E,
or e proteins to be expressed on the RBC surface. RhD alloimmunization
is responsible for 90% of HDFN cases involving the Rh antigen system,
but other Rh antigens, particularly E and c, can be causal. Rh sensitization usually occurs in the first pregnancy when small amounts of blood
(usually >1 mL) enter maternal circulation so that most instances of sensitization occur around the time of delivery. Although sensitization may
occur earlier in the first pregnancy resulting in some hemolysis, HDFN
rarely occurs during a first pregnancy. After sensitization, smaller doses
of antigen can stimulate antibody production, so all subsequent infants

Table 140.1

1123

expressing the cognate antigen are at risk for HDFN. For this reason, the
severity of HDFN also typically worsens with successive pregnancies. Routine administration of Rh immunoglobulin (RhoGAM) to mothers at risk
for Rh alloimmunization, both at 28 and 32 weeks’ gestation and within 72
hours after delivery of Rh-­positive infants, has reduced initial sensitization to
an estimated <0.1% of at-­risk pregnancies in high-­income countries.

Clinical Manifestations

The severity of HDFN is variable, ranging from mild hemolysis without
overt symptoms to severe anemia with compensatory hyperplasia of erythropoietic tissues, including massive hepatosplenomegaly. When hemolysis
exceeds the compensatory regenerative capacity of the hematopoietic system, profound anemia, thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy, cardiomegaly,
respiratory distress, massive anasarca, and circulatory collapse can result.
Perinatal hemoglobin concentrations may be as low as 3-­4 g/dL.
HDFN can also cause abnormal fluid collection in two or more fetal
compartments (skin, pleura, pericardium, placenta, peritoneum, amniotic
fluid), a clinical scenario termed hydrops fetalis, which frequently results
in significant clinical morbidity or death in utero or shortly after birth.
Hydrops results from heart failure along with subsequent hepatic congestion and dysfunction. This leads to reduced serum albumin and loss of
intravascular oncotic pressure. Consequent edema can lead to extravascular fluid accumulation in the lungs (pleural effusion), abdomen (ascites),
and elsewhere, which can compromise ventilation and lead to a range of
life-­threatening complications (Fig. 140.1). Hydrops is typically present
when the fetal hemoglobin level is <5 g/dL but can occur when hemoglobin levels are between 7 and 9 g/dL. Hydrops does not invariably occur
with low hemoglobin concentration, instead depending on the duration of
anemia and the gestational age when anemia developed.
Infants affected by HDFN may not be jaundiced at birth because of
effective placental clearance of lipid-­
soluble unconjugated bilirubin.
However, in severe cases, bilirubin pigments can stain the amniotic fluid,
cord, and vernix. In either case, hyperbilirubinemia is generally evident
within 24 hours of birth, as hemolysis overwhelms the infant’s bilirubin
clearance system. Extremely high levels of unconjugated bilirubin levels
present a risk of bilirubin encephalopathy (kernicterus), which is worsened in patients with concomitant hypoxia or acidosis.
Hypoglycemia may further complicate clinical management of
infants with severe HDFN. This may be related to islet cell hypertrophy and hyperinsulinism due to growth stimulatory effects of anti-­RhD
antibodies on the pancreas.

Etiologies of Hemolytic Disease of the Fetus and Newborn
Rh

ABO

KELL

BLOOD GROUPS
Mother

Rh-­negative

O (occasionally B)

K1-­negative

Infant

Rh-­positive (D is most common)

A (sometimes B)

K1-­positive

CLINICAL FEATURES
Occurrence in firstborn

5%

40–50%

Rare

Severity in subsequent
pregnancies:

Predictable

Difficult to predict

Somewhat predictable

Stillbirth/hydrops

Frequent (less with Rh-­
immunoglobulin use)

Rare

10%

Severe anemia

Frequent

Rare

Frequent

Jaundice

Prominent, severe

Mild-­moderate

Mild

LABORATORY TESTS
Direct antiglobulin test (infant)

Positive

Positive or negative

Positive or negative

Reticulocyte count

Elevated

Elevated

Variable

RBC antibodies (mother)

Usually detectable
Antibody titers may help predict
severity of fetal disease

May not be detectable
Antibody titers may not correlate
with fetal disease

Usually detectable
Antibody titers may not correlate
with fetal disease; fetus can be
affected at titers lower than for
Rh-­mediated hemolysis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1124 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Fig. 140.1 Hydrops fetalis. Longitudinal sonographic image of the

fetus, with ascitic fluid outlining the liver (large arrow). The small arrow
shows pleural effusion above the diaphragm. (From Wilkins I: Nonimmune hydrops. In Creasy RK, Resnick R, Iams JD, et al., eds. Creasy &
Resnik’s Maternal-­Fetal Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014:
Fig. 37-­2.)

Diagnosis, Prevention, and Treatment

Definitive diagnosis of HDFN requires demonstration of blood group
incompatibility between mother and infant, and corresponding maternal antibody bound to the infant’s RBCs. However, severe clinical presentations strongly suggest the diagnosis. Emergent interventions may
be required before definitive test results become available.
During pregnancy, expectant parents should have blood tested for
potential blood type incompatibility, including ABO and Rh antigens.
If RhD incompatible, maternal anti-­RhD IgG titers should be measured early in pregnancy. Paternal blood can be tested to determine
the fetal risk of inheriting the cognate antigen, typically either 50% or
100% depending on whether the father is heterozygous or homozygous. However, as paternal serologic testing alone is not fully accurate,
molecular genotyping may be recommended for both parents.
Fetal genotyping provides an accurate prediction for the development of HDFN in sensitized mothers. Fetal Rh status is available by
isolating fetal cells or cell-­free fetal DNA from the maternal circulation.
These methods are replacing amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling methods and associated risks. Elevated antibody titers, or rising
titers, correspond to increased HDFN risk.
Without Rh immunoglobulin prophylaxis, any Rh-­negative woman
with a previous pregnancy or abortion, prior exposure to transfused
blood products, or receipt of an organ transplant is at risk for Rh sensitization. If a mother has had a previously affected infant or stillbirth,
the Rh-­positive infant is usually equally or more severely affected than
the previous infant. Although there can be poor correlation between the
anti-­RhD titer level and disease severity, Rh-­negative mothers found to
have RhD antibody titers of ≥1:16 (15 IU/mL in Europe) at any time during a subsequent pregnancy warrant close monitoring for fetal anemia.
Pregnancies at risk for HDFN should be managed by maternal-­fetal
specialists. In some cases, monitoring must begin at 16-­24 weeks’ gestation. This is typically done via noninvasive Doppler ultrasonography of
middle cerebral artery (MCA) flow velocity, which can be used to monitor for increased vascular resistance in fetal arteries indicative of fetal
anemia (Fig. 140.2). Moderate to severe anemia increases MCA blood
flow, so peak MCA flow velocity can be a quantitative correlate for anemia severity. Real-­time ultrasound is used to detect signs of hydrops (skin
or scalp edema, pleural or pericardial effusions, and ascites) and fetal
heart rate monitoring. Early ultrasonographic signs of hydrops include
organomegaly (liver, spleen, heart), the double–bowel wall sign (bowel
edema), and placental thickening. Progression to polyhydramnios, ascites, pleural or pericardial effusions, and skin or scalp edema may then
follow. In the setting of concerning ultrasonographic findings, percutaneous
umbilical blood sampling (PUBS) can provide more direct assessment of
fetal hemoglobin level and facilitate intrauterine transfusions.
Although cord blood hemoglobin content typically varies in proportion
to disease severity, hemoglobin may be within the normal range due to

Fig. 140.2 Middle cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler study of elevated

peak systolic velocity (PSV). MCA-­PSV can predict fetal anemia with sufficient accuracy to determine management, including the need for intrauterine transfusion or, in the mid to late third trimester, early delivery.
Fetal hemoglobin is typically measured at the start and end of intravascular transfusion to validate the prediction from MCA-­PSV results. The
reliability of MCA-­PSV can decrease after intrauterine transfusion because of the altered rheostatic characteristics of transfused adult blood.
This is now the method of choice for detecting fetal anemia. (From
Liley HG, Gardener G, Lopriore E, Smits-­Wintjens V. Immune hemolytic
disease. In Orkin SH, Nathan DG, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and
Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier’ 2015: Fig. 3-­6.)

compensatory bone marrow and extramedullary hematopoiesis. Reticulocytosis will be present and a peripheral blood smear will show polychromasia with abundant nucleated RBCs. Thrombocytopenia may develop in
severe cases. Umbilical cord bilirubin levels are generally between 3 and 5
mg/dL, including elevated direct bilirubin levels from cholestasis. Indirect-­
reacting bilirubin content rises rapidly in the first 6-­12 hours of life.
Indications for delivery include fetal distress, complications during
in utero interventions, and pulmonary maturity. Many affected infants
are delivered preterm due to concerns for fetal well-­being, after balancing risks of prematurity. The birth should be attended by a skilled
neonatal resuscitation team familiar with the infant’s prenatal course.
Because severe hemolytic anemia can cause rapid cardiovascular compromise, a team skilled in evaluation in management of HDFN should
be involved when the diagnosis is suspected or confirmed, especially when
there is a history of prior infants affected by HDFN. Small packed RBC
(PRBC) transfusions can be used to partially correct anemia, although
volume expansion (e.g., large transfusions) risks worsening cardiac
failure. Phototherapy may be necessary to treat hyperbilirubinemia in
the first 24 hours of life if bilirubin levels exceed safe limits on an age-­
based nomogram (see Chapter 137). Although it is the indirect bilirubin fraction that crosses the blood-­brain barrier to cause kernicterus,
clinical decision-­making is often based on total serum bilirubin levels.
Despite adequate resuscitation, phototherapy, and/or other empiric
treatments, some infants with HDFN require exchange transfusions to
treat anemia and/or hyperbilirubinemia. The decision to proceed with
exchange transfusion is typically based on clinical status and trajectories
in hemoglobin or serum bilirubin values, specifically the likelihood that
serum bilirubin, plotted against postnatal hours of life, will reach a dangerous level (see Chapter 137). Signs and symptoms of kernicterus are absolute indications for exchange transfusion. Previous kernicterus or severe
HDFN in a sibling, severe reticulocytosis >15%, or prematurity (with
increased kernicterus risk) are additional factors to be considered in the
decision to proceed with exchange transfusion (see Chapter 137).
Complications related to HDFN can also present weeks after birth,
irrespective of the prenatal or perinatal course. Late anemia can present
after 4-­6 weeks of life, sometimes clinically manifesting as poor feeding
or growth. This can result from ongoing hemolysis caused by persistent
circulating maternal alloantibodies, or from hyporegenerative anemia
caused by suppression of bone marrow erythropoiesis. These etiologies can be distinguished by reticulocyte count and bilirubin level, with
ongoing hemolysis driving reticulocytosis and hyperbilirubinemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 140 u Hemolytic Disease of the Fetus and Newborn
Neutropenia may also be observed in association with hyporegenerative anemia. Outpatient blood and reticulocyte counts should be
monitored serially under the supervision of an expert hematologist
to determine the need for interventions through bone marrow recovery. Iron supplementation or erythropoietin therapy can be helpful. In
some cases, PRBC transfusions can be required for months after birth,
until the infant’s own erythropoietic system becomes more robust.
Hemolysis and hyperbilirubinemia can also cause late-­onset complications. Jaundice typically resolves spontaneously within a few weeks or
months with conservative management. Portal vein thrombosis and portal
hypertension may occur in children who have been subjected to exchange
transfusion as newborn infants. This complication is thought to be seen in
infants with prolonged, traumatic, or septic umbilical vein catheterization.
Inspissated bile syndrome is another rare complication, associated with
persistent icterus and significant elevations in both direct and indirect bilirubin levels.
The outcome for Rh-­incompatible fetuses varies greatly, depending on the characteristics of both the RBC antigen and the maternal
antibodies. Although fetal transfusions and prenatal interventions can
ameliorate some complications, those with severe hydrops remain at
risk for cerebral palsy, developmental delay, and deafness, requiring
medical and procedural interventions for hydrops prenatally or after
birth. Infants should be monitored closely for late complications by
pediatric hematologists in the outpatient setting.

HDFN CAUSED BY ABO INCOMPATIBILITY

ABO incompatibility is the most common cause of HDFN, with approximately 20% of live births at theoretical risk. Of at-­risk infants, clinical
manifestations develop in 1–10% and are usually less severe than Rh
disease, rarely requiring aggressive clinical management or therapeutic
intervention aside from phototherapy. This is because naturally occurring maternal antibodies against ABO blood group antigens are mostly
IgM and therefore do not cross the placenta. However, some group O
mothers will naturally produce anti-­A or anti-­B IgG antibodies that
can cross the placenta to cause immune-­mediated hemolysis. For this
reason, ABO incompatibility can cause hemolysis even in a firstborn
infant. Another reason for mild disease manifestations is that fetal and
neonatal RBCs have relatively low ABO expression, limiting binding
sites for maternal antibodies.

Clinical Manifestations

Affected infants will typically develop jaundice in the first day of
life. Severe clinical manifestations, such as hydrops, severe anemia,
or hepatosplenomegaly, are rare. Diagnosis requires serologic ABO
Table 140.2

1125

incompatibility between the mother and infant, a positive DAT, and
hyperbilirubinemia with or without anemia. Affected infants often have
mild anemia and reticulocytosis, with peripheral blood smears showing
polychromasia, nucleated RBCs, and spherocytes. Phototherapy may be
required based on bilirubin level and postnatal age, and is typically effective in lowering serum bilirubin levels (see Chapter 137). In some cases,
hemolysis can persist for weeks until maternal antibodies are cleared.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) administration can help to limit
hemolysis and potentially avoid exchange transfusion and/or PRBC
transfusions in cases with dangerous levels of hyperbilirubinemia or
anemia, respectively. Rarely, affected infants who also have hyporegenerative anemia can require PRBC transfusions several weeks after birth.
For this reason, outpatient monitoring is essential for newborns with
ABO hemolytic disease. However, the persistence of hemolytic anemia
or spherocytosis beyond 2 weeks of age can indicate an alternative diagnosis, such as hereditary spherocytosis (see Fig. 139.3).

OTHER ETIOLOGIES OF HDFN

Incompatibility in blood group antigens other than Rh or ABO
account for <5% of HDFN. Minor RBC antigen mismatch is emerging as a common cause of HDFN in the developed countries in
which anti-­R hD immune globulin is routinely used. The likelihood of minor antigen mismatches is a function of population frequency, antigen surface density on RBCs, and immunogenicity in
the mother. In most cases, the infant’s direct antiglobulin test (DAT)
will be positive and maternal serum will have alloantibodies against
infant (and paternal) erythrocytes. Elution techniques can identify
the antigen specificity.
Common RBC antigens that can lead to clinically relevant incompatibility include those in the Kell, Duffy, and MNS blood groups. Kell
incompatibility can be the most clinically relevant, as the severity of the
hemolytic anemia is difficult to predict based on previous obstetric history, amniotic fluid bilirubin determinants, or maternal antibody titer
(Table 140.2). Kell-­alloimmunized infants often have inappropriately
low numbers of circulating reticulocytes caused by erythroid suppression, and even low maternal titers of anti-­Kell antibodies may cause
significant anemia due to loss of precursors expressing the antigen as
well as mature erythrocytes. No pharmacologic therapies are available
to prevent sensitization with these minor antigens. As with cases of Rh
and ABO incompatibility, treatment is supportive, including exchange
transfusion for severe presentations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Red Cell Antigens That Cause Hemolytic Disease of the Fetus and Newborn (HDFN)

MILD HDFN

MODERATE HDFN

SEVERE HDFN

ABO (A, B)

Rh (EW, hrs, Tar, Rh32, HrBE, Hro)

Rh (D, c, f, Ce, Cw, cE)

Rh (C, e, Cx, VS, CE, Bea, JAL)

Diego (Dia, Dib, Wra, ELO)

Kell (K, k, Ku, Jsb)

Kell (Kpa, Jsa, Ula)

Duffy (Fya)

Globoside (PP1Pk)

Junior (Jra)

Gerbich (Ge3)

MNSs (Vw, Mur, MUT)

Kidd (Jka, Jkb, Jk3)

H (H)

Mittenberger (Mia)

Duffy (Fyb)

Kell (K, k, Ku, Jsb)

MNSs (Vw, Mur, MUT)

Langereis (Lan)

MNSs (U, Ss S, s, Mta, Mv)

Gerbich (PP1Pk)

MNSs (M, N, Hil, Or)

Colton (Coa)

(HJK)

Colton (Cob, Co3)

(Kg)

—

Scianna (Rd, SC2)

(Sara)

—

Xg (Xga)

—

—

(Ata)

—

—

Mild HDFN, published reports of needing phototherapy for postnatal jaundice; moderate HDFN, published reports of needing postnatal exchange transfusion; severe HDFN,
published reports of hydrops fetalis or intrauterine transfusions.
Note that some antigens have no system as per International Society of Blood Transfusion classification.
From Jackson ME, Baker JM. Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:133–151. Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1126 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Chapter 141

Chapter 142

Neonatal Polycythemia

Hemorrhage in the
Newborn Infant

Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert
Neonatal polycythemia is broadly defined as an elevated hemoglobin
or hematocrit level. This can be due to primary myeloproliferative
disorders (e.g., polycythemia vera) or reactive processes, such as from
chronic hypoxemia or living at high altitudes.
In infants, polycythemia is inferred from a hematocrit level >2 standard
deviations above the normal value for gestational and postnatal age (Figs.
138.2 and 139.1). Full-­term infants are therefore considered polycythemic
with a hemoglobin level above ∼22 g/dL or hematocrit >65%. It is important that these values are obtained from a “central” venous or arterial puncture, as heelstick or capillary samples can report artificially elevated values.
Due to fluid shifts in the newborn period, hematocrit levels typically peak
at 2-­3 hours of life.
Although most polycythemic individuals are asymptomatic, symptomatic blood hyperviscosity from polycythemia can cause sluggish
blood flow that decreases tissue perfusion and leads to metabolic disturbances. Signs and symptoms are vague, including irritability, lethargy,
tachypnea, respiratory distress, cyanosis, feeding disturbances, hyperbilirubinemia, hypoglycemia, and thrombocytopenia. Thus a high index
of suspicion is often required for diagnosis and coincident respiratory,
cardiovascular, and neurologic disorders should be investigated. Severe
complications include seizures, stroke, pulmonary hypertension, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), renal vein thrombosis, and renal failure in
newborns. Related symptoms often appear in the first hours of life but
can be delayed by up to 2-­3 days depending on clinical context.
Dehydration should be considered as a potential contributing cause
in symptomatic polycythemic infants. Neonatal polycythemia can also
result from processes that lead to passive RBC transfusion into the fetus
or increased intrauterine erythropoiesis. Passive fetal RBC transfusions
may occur from prolonged delayed umbilical cord clamping but can
also present in recipients of twin-­twin transfusions or unrecognized
maternal-­fetal transfusions from the placenta.
Most cases of increased fetal erythropoiesis are thought to result
from chronic intrauterine hypoxia, which stimulates erythropoietin
and RBC production. Increased fetal erythropoiesis is associated with
polycythemia in postterm (3%) and term (1–2%) infants; small-­for-­
gestational-­age (8%) or large-­for-­gestational-­age (3%) infants; infants
of diabetic mothers; infants of hypertensive mothers or those taking
propranolol; and infants with trisomy 13, 18, or 21, adrenogenital
syndrome, neonatal Graves disease, hypothyroidism, or Beckwith-­
Wiedemann syndrome. Delayed cord clamping does not increase the
incidence of polycythemia. Contraindications to delayed cord clamping include suspected chronic intrauterine hypoxia (e.g., severe growth
restriction) and maternal diabetes, which independently increase RBC
production. The frequency of neonatal polycythemia is also increased
for births at higher altitudes (5% at high altitude vs 1–2% at sea level).
Asymptomatic polycythemia can be treated conservatively, with consideration for supplemental enteral or intravenous hydration. Treatment for
symptomatic infants should also begin with supplemental hydration, after
considering potential comorbidities (e.g., heart failure). All polycythemic
infants should have intake and output, blood glucose, and bilirubin levels
followed closely. Infants with hyperviscosity symptoms may benefit from
partial exchange transfusions, particularly if the hematocrit reaches ≥75%
and symptoms worsen despite aggressive intravenous hydration.
Outcomes are more closely determined by etiologies contributing
to chronic intrauterine hypoxia than polycythemia per se. Although
infants treated with partial exchange transfusion may be at increased
risk of NEC, it is unclear whether adverse long-­term speech, fine motor,
cognitive, and behavioral outcomes are affected.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert
Congenital and acquired bleeding disorders can manifest at varying times in infants and older children. Hemorrhage in an otherwise
healthy newborn may suggest an inherited coagulation defect (e.g.,
hemophilia) or concurrent thrombocytopenia. Bleeding in otherwise
sick neonates is frequently caused by underproduction or consumption of coagulation factors and/or platelets. Common acquired hemorrhagic disorders include hemorrhage due to vitamin K deficiency
(see Chapter 71 and below), disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC: see Chapter 532), or immune-­mediated thrombocytopenia (see
Chapter 533).
The neonatal hemostatic system differs from older children and
adults. This impacts bleeding risk and laboratory assessment, and
should enter into management considerations. Plasma levels of vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors (II, VII, IX, X, protein C, protein S) and antithrombin are initially low at birth and do not reach
adult ranges until approximately 6 months of age. Note that overall
the neonatal hemostatic system tends toward hypercoagulability, given
low levels of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin. This may explain
why neonatal platelets are hypofunctional in response to some agonists, and why neonatal platelet content differs from adults (Chapters
525 and 526).

HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE OF THE NEWBORN

Bleeding from vitamin K deficiency, otherwise known as hemorrhagic
disease of the newborn, results from transient but profound deficiencies in vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors. Vitamin K normally
facilitates carboxylation of factors II, VII, IX, and X, which is necessary
for enzymatic activities. Decarboxylated factors are biologically inactive. Without vitamin K, decarboxylated proteins induced in vitamin K
absence (PIVKA) are secreted. The classic form of this disease can be
prevented with intramuscular injection of vitamin K (phytonadione)
just after birth.
The disease process most often affects exclusively breastfed infants
who did not receive intramuscular vitamin K prophylaxis at birth.
Maternal breastmilk lacks free vitamin K, and newborns lack the intestinal flora normally responsible for vitamin K synthesis. Premature
infants with nutritional deficiencies are also at risk of vitamin K deficiency and bleeding.
Laboratory testing typically reveals prolonged prothrombin time
(PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) in affected infants, with
low plasma levels of prothrombin (II) and factors VII, IX, and X.
Soluble PIVKA measurement can also act as a laboratory marker for
vitamin K status. Factors V and VIII, fibrinogen, bleeding time, clot
retraction, platelet count, and platelet function will be within normal
newborn ranges.
Intramuscular administration of 1 mg vitamin K1 (phytonadione) soon after birth can prevent bleeding complications from
vitamin K deficiency in most full-­term infants. Low birthweight
infants may be given 0.5 mg phytonadione, although weight-­
based dosing varies between institutions. Phytonadione is the only
form of vitamin K available in the United States. Vitamin K2, also
known as menaquinones, constitutes a minority of the vitamin K
consumed by humans or produced by intestinal flora. Vitamin K
prophylaxis does not prevent all hemorrhagic disease of the newborn. Although rare, cases can occur in full-­term infants, preterm
infants with significant nutritional deficiencies, and infants with
malabsorption.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1126 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Chapter 141

Chapter 142

Neonatal Polycythemia

Hemorrhage in the
Newborn Infant

Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert
Neonatal polycythemia is broadly defined as an elevated hemoglobin
or hematocrit level. This can be due to primary myeloproliferative
disorders (e.g., polycythemia vera) or reactive processes, such as from
chronic hypoxemia or living at high altitudes.
In infants, polycythemia is inferred from a hematocrit level >2 standard
deviations above the normal value for gestational and postnatal age (Figs.
138.2 and 139.1). Full-­term infants are therefore considered polycythemic
with a hemoglobin level above ∼22 g/dL or hematocrit >65%. It is important that these values are obtained from a “central” venous or arterial puncture, as heelstick or capillary samples can report artificially elevated values.
Due to fluid shifts in the newborn period, hematocrit levels typically peak
at 2-­3 hours of life.
Although most polycythemic individuals are asymptomatic, symptomatic blood hyperviscosity from polycythemia can cause sluggish
blood flow that decreases tissue perfusion and leads to metabolic disturbances. Signs and symptoms are vague, including irritability, lethargy,
tachypnea, respiratory distress, cyanosis, feeding disturbances, hyperbilirubinemia, hypoglycemia, and thrombocytopenia. Thus a high index
of suspicion is often required for diagnosis and coincident respiratory,
cardiovascular, and neurologic disorders should be investigated. Severe
complications include seizures, stroke, pulmonary hypertension, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), renal vein thrombosis, and renal failure in
newborns. Related symptoms often appear in the first hours of life but
can be delayed by up to 2-­3 days depending on clinical context.
Dehydration should be considered as a potential contributing cause
in symptomatic polycythemic infants. Neonatal polycythemia can also
result from processes that lead to passive RBC transfusion into the fetus
or increased intrauterine erythropoiesis. Passive fetal RBC transfusions
may occur from prolonged delayed umbilical cord clamping but can
also present in recipients of twin-­twin transfusions or unrecognized
maternal-­fetal transfusions from the placenta.
Most cases of increased fetal erythropoiesis are thought to result
from chronic intrauterine hypoxia, which stimulates erythropoietin
and RBC production. Increased fetal erythropoiesis is associated with
polycythemia in postterm (3%) and term (1–2%) infants; small-­for-­
gestational-­age (8%) or large-­for-­gestational-­age (3%) infants; infants
of diabetic mothers; infants of hypertensive mothers or those taking
propranolol; and infants with trisomy 13, 18, or 21, adrenogenital
syndrome, neonatal Graves disease, hypothyroidism, or Beckwith-­
Wiedemann syndrome. Delayed cord clamping does not increase the
incidence of polycythemia. Contraindications to delayed cord clamping include suspected chronic intrauterine hypoxia (e.g., severe growth
restriction) and maternal diabetes, which independently increase RBC
production. The frequency of neonatal polycythemia is also increased
for births at higher altitudes (5% at high altitude vs 1–2% at sea level).
Asymptomatic polycythemia can be treated conservatively, with consideration for supplemental enteral or intravenous hydration. Treatment for
symptomatic infants should also begin with supplemental hydration, after
considering potential comorbidities (e.g., heart failure). All polycythemic
infants should have intake and output, blood glucose, and bilirubin levels
followed closely. Infants with hyperviscosity symptoms may benefit from
partial exchange transfusions, particularly if the hematocrit reaches ≥75%
and symptoms worsen despite aggressive intravenous hydration.
Outcomes are more closely determined by etiologies contributing
to chronic intrauterine hypoxia than polycythemia per se. Although
infants treated with partial exchange transfusion may be at increased
risk of NEC, it is unclear whether adverse long-­term speech, fine motor,
cognitive, and behavioral outcomes are affected.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert
Congenital and acquired bleeding disorders can manifest at varying times in infants and older children. Hemorrhage in an otherwise
healthy newborn may suggest an inherited coagulation defect (e.g.,
hemophilia) or concurrent thrombocytopenia. Bleeding in otherwise
sick neonates is frequently caused by underproduction or consumption of coagulation factors and/or platelets. Common acquired hemorrhagic disorders include hemorrhage due to vitamin K deficiency
(see Chapter 71 and below), disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC: see Chapter 532), or immune-­mediated thrombocytopenia (see
Chapter 533).
The neonatal hemostatic system differs from older children and
adults. This impacts bleeding risk and laboratory assessment, and
should enter into management considerations. Plasma levels of vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors (II, VII, IX, X, protein C, protein S) and antithrombin are initially low at birth and do not reach
adult ranges until approximately 6 months of age. Note that overall
the neonatal hemostatic system tends toward hypercoagulability, given
low levels of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin. This may explain
why neonatal platelets are hypofunctional in response to some agonists, and why neonatal platelet content differs from adults (Chapters
525 and 526).

HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE OF THE NEWBORN

Bleeding from vitamin K deficiency, otherwise known as hemorrhagic
disease of the newborn, results from transient but profound deficiencies in vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors. Vitamin K normally
facilitates carboxylation of factors II, VII, IX, and X, which is necessary
for enzymatic activities. Decarboxylated factors are biologically inactive. Without vitamin K, decarboxylated proteins induced in vitamin K
absence (PIVKA) are secreted. The classic form of this disease can be
prevented with intramuscular injection of vitamin K (phytonadione)
just after birth.
The disease process most often affects exclusively breastfed infants
who did not receive intramuscular vitamin K prophylaxis at birth.
Maternal breastmilk lacks free vitamin K, and newborns lack the intestinal flora normally responsible for vitamin K synthesis. Premature
infants with nutritional deficiencies are also at risk of vitamin K deficiency and bleeding.
Laboratory testing typically reveals prolonged prothrombin time
(PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) in affected infants, with
low plasma levels of prothrombin (II) and factors VII, IX, and X.
Soluble PIVKA measurement can also act as a laboratory marker for
vitamin K status. Factors V and VIII, fibrinogen, bleeding time, clot
retraction, platelet count, and platelet function will be within normal
newborn ranges.
Intramuscular administration of 1 mg vitamin K1 (phytonadione) soon after birth can prevent bleeding complications from
vitamin K deficiency in most full-­term infants. Low birthweight
infants may be given 0.5 mg phytonadione, although weight-­
based dosing varies between institutions. Phytonadione is the only
form of vitamin K available in the United States. Vitamin K2, also
known as menaquinones, constitutes a minority of the vitamin K
consumed by humans or produced by intestinal flora. Vitamin K
prophylaxis does not prevent all hemorrhagic disease of the newborn. Although rare, cases can occur in full-­term infants, preterm
infants with significant nutritional deficiencies, and infants with
malabsorption.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 142 u Hemorrhage in the Newborn Infant 1127
Table 142.1

Vitamin K Deficiency Bleeding (Hemorrhagic Disease of the Newborn)
EARLY-­ONSET DISEASE

CLASSIC DISEASE

LATE-­ONSET DISEASE

Age

0-­24 hr

2-­7 days

1-­6 mo

Potential sites of
hemorrhage

Cephalohematoma
Subgaleal
Intracranial
Gastrointestinal
Umbilicus
Intraabdominal

Gastrointestinal
Ear-­nose-­throat-­mucosal
Intracranial
Post circumcision
Cutaneous
Injection sites

Intracranial
Gastrointestinal
Cutaneous
Ear-­nose-­throat-­mucosal
Injection sites
Thoracic

Etiology/risks

Maternal drugs (phenobarbital, phenytoin,
warfarin, rifampin, isoniazid) that interfere
with vitamin K levels or absorption
Inherited coagulopathy

Vitamin K deficiency
Exclusive breastfeeding

Cholestasis: malabsorption of
vitamin K (biliary atresia, cystic
fibrosis, hepatitis)
Abetalipoprotein deficiency
Idiopathic in Asian breastfed infants
Warfarin ingestion

Prevention

Avoidance of high-­risk medication
Possibly antenatal vitamin K to treatment of
mother (20 mg) before birth and postnatal
administration to infant soon after birth

Prevented by parenteral vitamin K at
birth
Oral vitamin K regimens require
repeated dosing

Prevented by parenteral and high-­
dose oral vitamin K during periods
of malabsorption or cholestasis

Incidence

Very rare

∼2% if infant not given vitamin K soon
after birth

Dependent on primary disease

Infants who present with hemorrhage should be given 1-­5 mg of vitamin K1 intravenously, typically on 3 consecutive days. This regimen generally improves coagulation defects and bleeding ceases within hours.
Serious bleeding, particularly in premature infants or those with liver
disease, may also require intravenous transfusion of fresh-­
frozen
plasma to correct coagulopathy. Packed RBCs (PRBCs) or whole blood
transfusions may also be required to correct anemia.
Bleeding episodes most frequently occur between days of life 2 and
7. Mild bleeding may precede more severe manifestations, which are
most frequently gastrointestinal, nasal, subgaleal, intracranial, or occur
after circumcision.
Early-­onset vitamin K deficiency bleeding can occur in the first day
of life in infants born to mothers chronically treated with drugs that
interfere with vitamin K absorption or function, including warfarin,
phenytoin, phenobarbital, or some cholesterol-­lowering medications.
Usually, bleeding is promptly ameliorated by vitamin K administration, although some infants can have poor or delayed improvements
in bleeding. Thus infants born to mothers who took these medications
late in gestation should be given 1-­2 mg intravenous vitamin K immediately after birth, and serial newborn PT monitoring should begin
using cord blood. If the PT is greatly prolonged and fails to improve, or
significant hemorrhage presents, fresh-­frozen plasma administration
can temporarily correct factor deficiencies.
Late-­onset vitamin K deficiency bleeding after 2 weeks of life is
most often associated with conditions that cause fat-­soluble vitamin
malabsorption, including cystic fibrosis, neonatal hepatitis, or biliary
atresia (Table 142.1). Bleeding can be severe and is not responsive to
vitamin K treatment if there is hepatocellular injury; bleeding will
respond to intravenous vitamin K if there is malabsorption.
Bleeding unresponsive to vitamin K should prompt consideration
for congenital clotting factor deficiencies (see Chapter 525). These
conditions may present with hematomas, melena, post circumcision
bleeding, or bleeding from the umbilicus. Up to 70% cases of hemophilia (factor VIII or IX deficiency) are clinically apparent in the newborn period. Congenital factor deficiency treatment requires specific
factor replacement, or fresh-­frozen plasma if factor concentrate is not
available.
Although oral vitamin K administration has been investigated as an
alternative to intramuscular prophylaxis, oral regimens do not prevent
late-­onset vitamin K deficiency bleeding. Thus intramuscular vitamin
K prophylaxis remains the method of choice.

Prompt recognition of infants who do present with bleeding from
vitamin K deficiency is critical. A presumptive diagnosis can often be
made based on a complete history, even before laboratory confirmation, facilitating rapid treatment initiation. With timely therapy and
supportive care, the associated mortality rate is low.

DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR COAGULOPATHY

Critical illness that results in consumption of circulating coagulation
factors and platelets is termed disseminated intravascular coagulation.
In neonates and other patients, DIC can result in either bleeding or
thrombosis. DIC occurs secondary to an array of primary processes,
including but not limited to sepsis or asphyxia. Rarely, hemangiomas
will cause consumption of coagulation factors and initiate this process.
In addition to clinical context, coagulation studies, factor levels, and
platelet counts can provide evidence of ongoing DIC. Management
centers on treatment of the underlying etiology, although supportive
care may include blood, plasma, vitamin K, or platelet transfusions to
replace consumed factors. Usually, affected infants are critically ill, with
evidence of end-­organ damage. Those with DIC can have high rates of
morbidity and mortality, dependent on the underlying etiology (see
Chapter 532).

Diagnosis and Treatment

Diagnostic modalities for hemorrhage in neonates vary based on clinical suspicion. For example, noninvasive imaging can be used to identify hemorrhage or bleeding sequelae. Premature infants who become
acutely anemic out of proportion to phlebotomy are frequently monitored for intraventricular hemorrhage or investigated for bleeding elsewhere. These diagnostic measures can help to explain the pathology
leading to anemia and any related risks. In turn, diagnosis can facilitate
prognostication, and in rare cases lead to potentially definitive interventions (e.g., for some vascular malformations).
Treatment for blood loss typically includes transfusion of cross-­
matched PRBCs, which should be given more slowly in the setting
of chronic blood loss or in patients at risk of volume overload. Therapies and interventions should also focus on correcting coexisting
coagulopathy and/or comorbidities that increase further bleeding
risk.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1128 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Chapter 143

Nonimmune Hydrops
Dalal Taha
Nonimmune hydrops, a significant contributor to neonatal morbidity
and mortality, is the leading cause of fetal hydrops. Hydrops fetalis is
defined by ≥2 abnormal fetal fluid collections, such as ascites, pleural,
pericardial, or cutaneous edema (>5 mm) (Fig. 143.1). In addition, there
may be associated placental edema (>6 mm), polyhydramnios (50%),
and the rare occurrence of mirror syndrome, in which the mother
becomes edematous. In cases in which hydrops is not caused by red
cell alloimmunization, it is referred to as nonimmune hydrops. Nonimmune hydrops is the result of a range of underlying etiologies, such
as high-­output cardiac failure secondary to anemia or fetal arrhythmia,
alterations in lymphatic development, fetal inflammation, and capillary leak or elevated central venous pressure due to structural cardiac
disease. Despite advances in recognition of the underlying cause, mortality remains high with prognosis dependent on the underlying cause,
degree of prematurity, and extent of disease burden at birth.

INCIDENCE AND ETIOLOGY

Estimates of incidence range between 1 in 1,700 pregnancies and 1 in
4,000 pregnancies. Population studies provide lower estimates, but this
may be an underrepresentation due to a lack of information on fetuses
who died in utero.
The etiologies are broad; cardiovascular, lymphatic, hematologic, and
chromosomal disorders are the most common identifiable underlying
causes (Table 143.1). The etiology is unknown in approximately 10–20%
of cases. However, improved understanding of the lymphatic system and
its contribution to the development of nonimmune hydrops has led to
increased identification of the underlying etiology. Lymphatic causes of
nonimmune hydrops are congenital lymphovenous atresia, in which the
thoracic duct outlet is not connected to the venous circulation, and complete absence of the thoracic duct or pulmonary lymphatic perfusion syndrome, in which the pulmonary lymphatic channels abnormally conduct
to the pleural space resulting in chylothorax. Other mechanisms for the
development of nonimmune hydrops are not well established (Fig. 143.2).

PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Hydrops fetalis is identified in utero by ultrasonographic findings of excess fluid. After ruling out immune-­mediated hydrops (Rh

Fig. 143.1 Hydrops fetalis. Longitudinal sonographic image of the

fetus, with ascitic fluid outlining the liver (large arrow). The small arrow
shows pleural effusion above the diaphragm. (From Wilkins I. Nonimmune hydrops. In Creasy RK, Resnick R, Iams JD, et al., eds. Creasy &
Resnik’s Maternal-­Fetal Medicine, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014:
Fig. 37-­2.)

alloimmunization), other diagnostic testing may include screening for hemoglobinopathies, testing for fetal-­maternal hemorrhage
(Kleihauer-­Betke test), and testing for infection (i.e., TORCH infections, syphilis, and parvovirus B19). Fetal echocardiography should be
performed to assess for structural heart defect or arrhythmia. Commonly diagnosed causes of nonimmune hydrops in fetuses greater
than 24 weeks’ gestation are cardiac disorders. Amniotic fluid can be
obtained for fetal genetic testing to evaluate for chromosomal and specific gene abnormalities. In cases with fetal pleural effusions, a fluid
sample may be collected via thoracentesis and tested for lymphocyte
count to determine whether the underlying cause of hydrops is due to
lymphatic dysfunction.
In utero treatment has been successful for fetal supraventricular
tachycardia (SVT), twin-­
twin transfusion syndrome, nonimmune
fetal anemias, large vascular masses, congenital diaphragmatic hernia,
and other chest occupying lesions, such as congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM) and pulmonary sequestration. In cases
in which initial ultrasound is not useful in identifying a cause, repeat
ultrasound or fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be used
to reassess fetal anatomy, monitor progression of hydrops, determine
an underlying diagnosis, and direct fetal intervention. The finding of
nutmeg lung on fetal MRI signifies abnormal pulmonary lymphatic
flow that results in chylothorax. To treat fetal pleural effusions, in the
absence of an infectious etiology, fetal thoracentesis and/or thoracoamniotic shunt placement can be performed.

POSTNATAL DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Postnatal therapy includes a team approach to the delivery room
management that often requires immediate endotracheal tube intubation for predicted respiratory failure secondary to pleural, peritoneal,
or pericardial effusions, pulmonary hypoplasia, surfactant deficiency,
pulmonary edema, or poor chest wall compliance due to soft tissue
edema. Immediate transfusion of packed red blood cells (RBCs) may
also be required in the delivery room in the presence of anemias.
Drainage of large pleural, peritoneal, or pericardial effusions may aid
in achieving effective mechanical ventilation and ensure successful
resuscitation. High ventilatory pressures may be needed to overcome
poor chest compliance but may result in pneumothoraces or pulmonary interstitial emphysema, especially in cases with pulmonary
hypoplasia.
Once the infant is stabilized, additional intensive care includes fluid
and electrolyte management. Maintenance fluids should be restricted
as much as possible with the goal of resolving or improving the degree
of hydrops. In cases with ongoing drainage of pleural or peritoneal
fluid, fluid replacement may be necessary to replete serum sodium levels and maintain hemodynamic stability. If the fluid drained is secondary to a lymphatic disorder, albumin may need to be administered to
maintain adequate serum levels.
Diagnostic testing should be performed if an underlying etiology of
hydrops is unknown at the time of birth to direct additional therapies.
Whole exome (or genome) sequencing and microarray duplication/
deletion studies are recommended to establish a diagnosis. Analysis
of fluid from the pericardial, pleural, or peritoneal space may confirm
an underlying lymphatic disorder if there is a lymphocyte predominance. Hypoalbuminemia and the presence of soft tissue edema is also
suggestive of a lymphatic disorder. Additional evaluation of the lymphatic system includes the use of T2 weighted MRI, dynamic contrast-­
enhanced magnetic resonance lymphangiogram (DCMRL), and direct
or conventional lymphangiogram. Interventions for congenital lymphatic disorders include ethiodized oil injection to treat pulmonary
lymphatic perfusion syndrome and lymphovenous anastomosis for
lymphovenous atresia.

OUTCOMES

Mortality from nonimmune hydrops remains high at approximately
50% despite recent advances in diagnosis and treatment. Predictors of
survival include gestational age at birth and degree of illness at the time
of birth. Infants with parvovirus, isolated neonatal chylothorax, and
SVT have the highest survival.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 143 u Nonimmune Hydrops

1129

Table 143.1  Principal Diagnoses Associated with Nonimmune Hydrops Fetalis
CARDIOVASCULAR (21%)
STRUCTURAL
• Hypoplasias (left or right heart)
• AV canal defect
• Single ventricle
• Transposition of great arteries
• Septal defects (VSD/ASD)
• Tetralogy of Fallot
• Ebstein anomaly
• Ductus arteriosus closure
• Truncus arteriosus
• Valvular (stenosis/insufficiency)
ARRYTHMIAS
• Atrial (flutter/tachyarrhythmia)
• Wolff-­Parkinson-­White
• Supraventricular tachycardia
• Long QT interval
• Heart block
CARDIOMYOPATHY
• Tumors
• Neoplasias
• Myopathies
• Cardiosplenic syndromes
• Hereditary cardiomyopathies
INFECTION (6.7%)
• Cytomegalovirus
• Parvovirus B19
• Syphilis
• Herpes simplex
• Rubella
• Coxsackievirus
• Leptospirosis
• Trypanosoma cruzi
INBORN STORAGE DISEASE (1.1%)
• Gaucher disease
• GM1 gangliosidosis
• Sialidosis
• MPS IVA and VII
• Mucolipidosis type I+II
• Galactosialidosis
• Niemann-­Pick type C
TTTS-­PLACENTAL (5.6%)
Twin
• TTTS
• Acardiac twin
Placental
• Umbilical vein thrombosis
• Umbilical cord angiomyxoma
• True cord knot
• Chorionic vein thrombosis
• Rare placenta disorders

THORACIC/EXTRATHORACIC MASS/LYMPHATIC (12.4%)
Mass Effect
• Diaphragmatic hernia
• Congenital pulmonary adenomatoid malformation
• Intrathoracic mass
• Pulmonary sequestration
• Chylothorax
• Airway obstruction
• Pulmonary lymphangiectasia
• Bronchogenic cyst
Other
• Milroy syndrome
• Generalized lymphatic dysplasia
• Lymphedema-­distichiasis syndrome
Skeletal Dysplasias
• Thanatophoric dysplasia
• Short rib polydactyly
• Hypophosphatasia
• Osteogenesis imperfecta chondrogenesis
• Campomelic dysplasia
• Lethal achondroplasia
• Nager syndrome
IDIOPATHIC (17.8%)
CHROMOSOMAL (13.4%)
TRISOMY
• 21
• 18
• 13
MONOSOMY
• 45, X
• 45, X (mosaic)
DUPLICATIONS
• 18 q +
• 11p
DELETIONS
• 13 q −
• 17 q −
TRIPLOIDY

HEMATOLOGIC (10.4%)
• Alpha-­thalassemia
• Hereditary stomatocytosis
• Fetomaternal hemorrhage
• Glucose-­6-­phosphate deficiency
• Leukemia
• Pyruvate kinase deficiency
• Red blood cell aplasias
• Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome
GASTROINTESTINAL (0.5%)
• Duodenal atresia
• Duodenal diverticulum
• Jejunoileal atresia
• Volvulus
• Imperforate anus
• Meconium peritonitis
• Intestinal malrotation
• Intestinal duplication
• Hepatic fibrosis
• Cholestasis
• Biliary atresia
• Hepatic vascular malformations
• Hepatitis
• Hepatic necrosis
• Liver tumor or cysts
SYNDROMIC/MISCELLANEOUS (8.1%)
• Noonan syndrome and other RASopathies
• Arthrogryposis
• Multiple pterygium syndrome
• Neu-­Laxova syndrome
• Pena-­Shokeir syndrome
• Myotonic dystrophy
• Saldino-­Noonan syndrome
• Francois syndrome, type III
• Familial nuchal bleb
• Elejalde syndrome
• Thoracoabdominal syndrome
URINARY TRACT MALFORMATION (2.3%)
• Urethral stenosis
• Urethral atresia
• Posterior urethral valve
• Finnish type nephrosis
• Edwards (prune belly) syndrome
OTHER
• HLH
• IPEX
• Nemaline myopathy
• Multiple pterygium syndrome
• Hyper IgE syndrome

ASD, Atrial septal defect; AV, arteriovenous; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; IPEX, immune dysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-­linked, MPS,
mucopolysaccharide; TTTS, twin-­twin transfusion syndrome; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
Modified from Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds. Fanaroff & Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table
23.4, p 381.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1130 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Chromosomal
syndrome

Various
associated
malformations

Cardiovascular
disorders

Renal
disorders

Obstructed outflow
diverted blood flow
abnormal venous return
abnormal ventricular filling
decreased inotropic force
reversed blood flow in IVC

Imbalance
interstitial
fluid
production

Decreased cardiac
output

Fluid accumulation

Disturbed
neurologic
functioning
Possible

Cardiac failure
increased umbilical
venous pressure

Twinning

Placental
disorders

Receptor

Donor

Hematologic
disorders

Infections

Inborn
errors of
metabolism

Gastrointestinal
disorders

Anemia
Hypoxia

Hyperviscosity
reduced
perfusion
Volume
overload

Congestive
heart failure

Hypotonia or
hypomobility
decreased
movements chest wall

Increased oxygen
extraction
redistribution
blood flow
increased cardiac
output

Protein-losing
enteropathy

Liver
failure

Possible

Possible

Lymphatic
dysplasia

Increased
intrathoracic pressure

Obstruction
venous flow

Increased
central
venous
pressure

Reduced
lymph
flow

Low
plasma
oncotic
pressure

Increased interstitial
fluid accumulation
Cystic adenomatoid
malformation
Extralobar sequestration
Mediastinal teratoma
Skeletal dysplasia

NIHF

Fig. 143.2 Impact of various etiologies for nonimmune hydrops on fluid homeostasis. IVC, Inferior vena cava; NIHF, nonimmune hydrops fetalis. (Adapted from Bellini C, Hennekam RCM. Non-­immune hydrops fetalis: a short review of etiology and pathophysiology. Am J Med Genet.
2012;158A:597–605.)

Chapter 144

The Umbilicus
Eric C. Eichenwald
The umbilical cord typically consists of two umbilical arteries, the umbilical vein, and a gelatinous substance called Wharton jelly, all contained
within a sheath derived from the amnion and coiled into a helical shape.
The muscular umbilical arteries carry deoxygenated blood from the fetus
to the placenta and are contiguous with the fetal internal iliac arteries. The
umbilical vein carries oxygenated blood from the placenta back to the
fetus, where it flows into the inferior vena cava by way of the ductus venosus. The placenta contains an estimated 20 mL/kg of blood; current recommendations are to delay clamping of the cord at delivery for 30-­60 seconds
in both term and preterm infants, to facilitate placental transfusion. At
term, a normal umbilical cord is approximately 55 cm long. Abnormally
short cords are associated with conditions causing decreased fetal movement, including fetal hypotonia, oligohydramnios, and uterine constraint,
and lead to increased risk for complications during labor and delivery for
both mother and infant. Long cords (>70 cm) increase the risk for true
knots, wrapping around the fetus, and/or prolapse. Straight uncoiled cords
are associated with anomalies, fetal distress, and intrauterine fetal demise.
When the cord is cut after birth, portions of these structures remain in
the base but gradually become obliterated. The blood vessels are functionally closed but anatomically patent for 10-­20 days. The umbilical arteries
become the lateral umbilical ligaments; the umbilical vein, the ligamentum
teres; and the ductus venosus, the ligamentum venosum. The umbilical

cord stump usually sloughs within 2 weeks. Delayed separation of the cord,
after more than 1 month, has been associated with neutrophil chemotactic
defects and overwhelming bacterial infection (see Chapter 168).
A single umbilical artery is present in approximately 5-­10/1,000 births;
the frequency is higher (35-­70/1,000) in twin births. It is estimated that
20–30% of infants with a single umbilical artery have other (and often multiple) congenital structural abnormalities. The presence of multiple anomalies is suggestive of an abnormal karyotype, including trisomies. Infants
with an isolated single umbilical artery are not thought to be at increased
risk of having a chromosomal anomaly, and no specific evaluation is indicated for these infants aside from a thorough physical examination.
The omphalomesenteric duct (OMD) is an embryonic connection
between the developing midgut and the primitive yolk sac. It typically
involutes at 8-­9 weeks’ gestation, but failure of this process can leave an
abnormal connection between the umbilical cord and the gastrointestinal
(GI) tract. The most common remnant of the OMD is a Meckel diverticulum (see Chapter 377), whereas abnormalities that would become symptomatic in the neonatal period include a sinus or fistula that would drain
mucus or intestinal contents through the umbilicus. An umbilical polyp
is one of the least common OMD remnants and represents exposed GI
mucosa at the umbilical stump. The tissue of the polyp is bright red, firm,
and has a mucoid secretion. Therapy for all OMD remnants is surgical
excision of the anomaly.
A persistent urachus (urachal cyst, sinus, patent urachus, or diverticulum) is a result of failure of closure of the allantoic duct and may be associated with bladder outlet obstruction. Patency should be suspected if a
clear, light-­yellow, urine-­like fluid is being discharged from the umbilicus.
Symptoms include drainage, a mass or cyst, abdominal pain, local erythema, and infection. Urachal anomalies should be investigated by ultrasonography and a cystogram. Therapy for a persistent urachus is surgical
excision of the anomaly and correction of any bladder outlet obstruction
if present.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 144 u The Umbilicus

1131

UMBILICAL HEMORRHAGE

Hemorrhage from the umbilical cord may be the result of trauma, inadequate ligation of the cord, or failure of normal thrombus formation. It
may also indicate hemorrhagic disease of the newborn or other coagulopathies (especially factor XIII deficiency), septicemia, or local infection. The infant should be observed frequently during the first few days
of life so that if hemorrhage does occur, it will be detected promptly.

UMBILICAL GRANULOMA

The umbilical cord stump usually dries and separates within 1-­2 weeks
after birth. The raw surface becomes covered by a thin layer of skin; scar
tissue forms, and the wound is usually healed within 12-­15 days. The presence of saprophytic organisms delays separation of the cord and increases
the possibility of invasion by pathogenic organisms. Mild infection or
incomplete epithelialization may result in a moist, granulating area at the
base of the cord with a slight mucoid or mucopurulent discharge. Good
results are usually obtained by cleansing with alcohol several times daily.
Persistence of granulation tissue at the base of the umbilicus is common. The tissue is soft, 3-­10 mm in size, vascular and granular, colored
dull red or pink, and may have a seropurulent discharge. Granulation
tissue is treated by cauterization with silver nitrate, repeated at intervals
of several days until the base is dry.

A

UMBILICAL INFECTIONS

The devitalized umbilical cord provides an ideal medium for bacterial
growth and a potential portal of entry for microbes. The term omphalitis
refers to infection of the umbilical cord stump, navel, or the surrounding
abdominal wall. Omphalitis must be distinguished from local irritation
from the umbilical cord clamp. Erythema that extends to the abdominal
wall, particularly tracking superiorly is concerning. Most term infants
with mild localized omphalitis appear well and are afebrile. However,
∼10–15% are acutely ill and at risk for bacteremia, spreading cellulitis, necrotizing fasciitis, and extension into the portal vein and liver.
Necrotizing fasciitis (which is often polymicrobial) is associated with a
high mortality rate and is often associated wth neutropenia. Treatment
of omphalitis includes prompt antibiotic therapy with agents effective
against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli, such as an antistaphylococcal penicillin or vancomycin in combination with an aminoglycoside. If abscess formation or necrotizing fasciitis has occurred, surgical
consultation for incision and drainage or debridement may be required.
In community and primary care settings in developing countries,
topical application of chlorhexidine to the umbilical cord has been
shown to reduce omphalitis and neonatal mortality. In hospital settings
in developed countries, there is no convincing evidence that application
of antiseptics (including triple dye, alcohol, or chlorhexidine) is superior
to dry cord care in minimizing the risk of omphalitis for infants in these
settings, although these treatments do reduce bacterial colonization.

UMBILICAL HERNIA

Often associated with diastasis recti, an umbilical hernia is caused by
incomplete closure or weakness of the muscular umbilical ring. Predisposing factors include Black race and low birthweight. The hernia appears as
a soft swelling covered by skin that protrudes during crying, coughing, or
straining and can be reduced easily through the fibrous ring at the umbilicus. The hernia consists of omentum or portions of the small intestine.
The size of the defect varies from <1 cm in diameter to as much as 5 cm
(2 inches), but larger defects are rare. Most umbilical hernias that appear
before age 6 months disappear spontaneously by 1 year. Even large hernias
(5-­6 cm in all dimensions) have been known to disappear spontaneously
by 5-­6 years. Strangulation of intestinal contents is extremely rare. Surgery
is not advised unless the hernia persists to age 4-­5 years, causes symptoms,
becomes strangulated, or becomes progressively larger after age 1-­2 years.
Defects exceeding 2 cm are less likely to close spontaneously.

CONGENITAL OMPHALOCELE

An omphalocele is a herniation or protrusion of the abdominal
contents into the base of the umbilical cord (Fig. 144.1). In contrast to the more common umbilical hernia, the sac is covered with
peritoneum without overlying skin, and the insertion of the distal
umbilical cord into the sac itself distinguishes this condition from
other abdominal wall defects such as gastroschisis. The size of the

B
Fig. 144.1 A, Omphalocele with umbilical cord insertion into the sac
and intestine visible. B, Omphalocele with sac containing liver. (Courtesy Dr. Foong Lim, Cincinnati Fetal Center at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.)

sac that lies outside the abdominal cavity depends on its contents.
Herniation of intestines into the cord occurs in approximately
1/5,000 births, and herniation of liver and intestines in 1/10,000
births. The abdominal cavity may be proportionately small because
of the lack of space-­occupying viscera. Treatment for an omphalocele consists of covering the sac with moist, sterile dressings, then
initiating prompt surgical repair if the abdomen is able to accommodate the eviscerated organs. If the omphalocele is too large to
allow immediate repair, continued dressings may temporize and
encourage epithelialization of the sac. Occasionally, mesh or similar
synthetic material may be used to cover the viscera if the sac has
ruptured or if excessive mobilization of the tissues would be necessary to cover the mass and its intact sac.
Many infants with omphalocele (50–70%) have associated malformations, and about 30% have chromosomal abnormalities. The
likelihood of an abnormal karyotype is increased when the liver is
intracorporeal (not within the sac). Omphalocele can be part of well-­
defined syndromes, including Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome,
characterized by omphalocele, macrosomia, and hypoglycemia. The
survival rate for affected infants is largely determined by the presence of associated malformations or chromosomal abnormalities.
For patients with isolated omphalocele, the survival rate is >90%.

UMBILICAL TUMORS

Tumors of the umbilicus are rare and include angioma, enteroteratoma, dermoid cyst, myxosarcoma, and cysts of urachal or OMD
remnants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1132 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
currently by illicitly produced fentanyl. For pregnant women opioid use
disorder (OUD), or continued use of an opioid despite adverse consequences, often begins before pregnancy and is associated with myriad
social risks including trauma and physical abuse. Treatment of OUD,
especially with medications for OUD (MOUD), is effective in improving pregnancy outcomes. MOUD, including buprenorphine and methadone, has been shown to reduce risk of relapse, overdose death, HIV
and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and preterm birth. Methadone is a full μ-­
opioid agonist, generally given once daily, and is administered through
highly regulated opioid treatment programs. Buprenorphine is a partial μ-­opioid agonist and a partial k-­antagonist, can be prescribed in the
outpatient setting, and is more widely available. Accessing treatment
can be challenging for pregnant women, with studies showing they are
nearly 20% less likely to be accepted for treatment than nonpregnant
women. Notably, MOUD such as methadone and buprenorphine can
cause NAS; however, this is generally thought of as a preferable outcome when compared to preterm birth or overdose.
The clinical signs of NAS are generally associated with neurologic (e.g.,
tremor), gastrointestinal (e.g., poor feeding), and autonomic signs (e.g.,
tachypnea) and can be documented using the NAS score (Fig. 145.1)
as well as the Eat, Sleep, Console (ESC) assessment tool (Table 145.1).

Chapter 145

Neonatal Abstinence
Syndrome
Stephen W. Patrick
Neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) is a drug withdrawal syndrome
that occurs among some substance-­exposed infants shortly after birth.
The syndrome most commonly occurs after in utero exposure to opioids and is also called neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome (NOWS).
Between 2000 and 2017, the rate of NAS in the United States increased
sixfold reaching 7.2 per 1,000 hospital births, which mirrors the rise
of other population-­wide opioid-­related complications including overdose deaths. The opioid overdose crisis in the United States was first
driven by prescription opioids (e.g., oxycontin), then heroin, and more

NEONATAL ABSTINENCE SCORE
Weight:

Date:
System

Signs & Symptoms

Score

Gastrointestinal
Disturbances

Metabolic / Vasomotor /
Respiratory Disturbances

Central Nervous System Disturbances

AM
Excessive High Pitched Cry
Continuous High Pitched Cry

2
3

Sleeps < 1 Hour After Feeding

3

Sleeps < 2 Hours After Feeding

2

Sleeps < 3 Hours After Feeding

1

Hyperactive Moro Reflex

2

Markedly Hyperactive Moro Reflex

3

Mild Tremors Disturbed

1

Moderate - Severe Tremors Disturbed

2

Mild Tremors Undisturbed

3

Moderate - Severe Tremors Undisturbed

4

Increased Muscle Tone

2

Excoriation (Specific Area)

1

Myoclonic Jerks

3

Generalized Convulsions

5

Sweating

1

Fever < 101° F (37.2° - 38.2° C)

1

Fever ≥ 101.1° F (≥38.4° C)

2

Frequent Yawning ( > 3 - 4 Times/Interval)

1

Mottling

1

Nasal Stuffiness

1

Sneezing ( > 3 - 4 Times/Interval)

1

Nasal Flaring

2

Respiratory Rate - 60/min

1

Respiratory Rate - 60/min with Retractions

2

Excessive Sucking

1

Poor Feeding

2

Regurgitation

2

Projectile Vomiting

3

Loose Stools

2

Watery Stools

3

Comments

Time
PM

TOTAL SCORE
Initials of Scorer

Fig. 145.1 Data from Amin A, Frazie M, Thompson S, Patel A. Assessing the Eat, Sleep, Console model for neonatal abstinence syndrome man-

agement at a regional referral center. J Perinatol. 2023 Apr 25:1–7; Blount T, Painter A, Freeman E, et al. Reduction in length of stay and morphine
use for NAS with the “Eat, Sleep, Console” Method. Hosp Pediatr. 2019;9:615–623; Glait M, Moyer A, Saudek K, et al. Addressing drivers of healthcare utilization for neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome. J Perinatol. 2023;43):392–401; Grossman M. Eat, Sleep, Console (ECS) care tool. 2017 ESC
3rd ed. 1.30.20; Young LW, Ounpraseuth ST, Merhar SL, et al. Eat, sleep, console approach or usual care for neonatal opioid withdrawal. N Engl J
Med. 2023;388:2326–2336.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 145 u Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome
Table 145.1  Eat, Sleep, Console (ESC) Assessment
Approach to Neonatal Opioid Withdrawl
EATS
Takes > 10 min to coordinate feeding with hunger cues
< 10 min for breastfeeds
< 10 mL of a feed
SLEEPS
< 1 hr after a feed
CONSOLES
Takes > 10 min to be consoled
Cannot stay consoled for 10 min
Nonpharmacologic interventions include rooming in, caregiver
presence, skin to skin contact, holding/cuddling, safe swaddling
(avoid face), feed on demand after hunger cues, breastfeeding,
non-nutritive sucking, quiet low stimulation low-light environment,
rhythmic motion, additional caregiver support, minimal disruptions
in environment, cluster care to awake times, safe sleep, caregiver
self-care and rest.
These parameters suggest withdrawl.
Data from Amin A, Frazie M, Thompson S, Patel A. Assessing the Eat, Sleep, Console
model for neonatal abstinence syndrome management at a regional referral center.
J Perinatol. 2023 Apr 25:1–7; Blount T, Painter A, Freeman E, et al. Reduction in length
of stay and morphine use for NAS with the “Eat, Sleep, Console” Method. Hosp Pediatr.
2019;9:615–623; Glait M, Moyer A, Saudek K, et al. Addressing drivers of healthcare
utilization for neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome. J Perinatol. 2023;43):392–401;
Grossman M. Eat, Sleep, Console (ECS) care tool. 2017 ESC 3rd ed. 1.30.20; Young LW,
Ounpraseuth ST, Merhar SL, et al. Eat, sleep, console approach or usual care for neonatal
opioid withdrawal. N Engl J Med. 2023;388:2326–2336.

The timing of NAS onset can be related to several factors, including the
last maternal use and half-­life of the opioid. NAS signs can rarely begin
within 24 hours of birth but more commonly occur within 48 hours
after short-­acting opioids, and 72-­96 hours after exposure to long-­acting
or maintenance opioids (e.g., methadone). For these reasons, it is recommended to observe opioid-­exposed infants for at least 3 days after
birth for an infant exposed to short-­acting opioids and 5 days for longer
half-­life opioids such as buprenorphine. Tremors, poor feeding, excessive crying, poor sleeping, and hyperirritability are the most prominent
signs of NAS. Other signs include sneezing, yawning, hiccups, myoclonic
jerks, skin breakdown and abrasions, vomiting, loose stools, nasal stuffiness, and seizures. Many prenatal and postnatal factors can influence the
severity and duration of withdrawal. Polysubstance use, particularly with
cigarettes, gabapentin, benzodiazepines, and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors, has been associated with a higher risk or more severe NAS,
whereas breastfeeding after delivery, rooming-­in, and standardizing care
processes (i.e., following protocols) have been associated with lower risk
or less severe NAS (see Table 145.1 for nonpharmacologic interventions).
Identifying substance use as early as possible in pregnancy is critical
to improving pregnancy outcomes. For that reason, it is recommended
to perform universal screening for substance use using a standardized
and validated tool such as the four Ps:
• Parents: Did any of your parents have problems with alcohol or
other drug use?
• Partner: Does your partner have a problem with alcohol or drug
use?
• Past: In the past, have you had difficulties in your life because of
alcohol or other drugs, including prescription medications?
• Present: In the past month, have you drunk any alcohol or used
other drugs?
Screening can be augmented with toxicology testing of the mother
or infant; it is important to recognize that toxicology testing has
limitations and for some substances may only capture a short window of exposure. Toxicology testing of pregnant women requires
informed consent but is not needed for infants if done as part of
routine care.
Testing urine of mothers or infants can capture recent exposures, whereas umbilical cord and meconium testing will capture
a longer window of substance use. Toxicology testing may not be

1133

needed if women are in treatment and receive routine testing in
pregnancy.

TREATMENT AND SETTING

Hospitals should have standardized protocols for the observation, scoring, and treatment of the opioid-­exposed infant. The first
line of treatment for all opioid-­exposed infants is nonpharmacologic support, including rooming-­in, breastfeeding, and tailoring
the environment to not overstimulate the infant. Importantly, care
for opioid-­exposed infants and those diagnosed with NAS does not
require admission to a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU); admission to a NICU may cause undue separation of the maternal–infant
dyad as well as exacerbate clinical signs of withdrawal by placing the
infant in a loud environment. Breastfeeding, in addition to its well-­
documented benefits, can also reduce NAS severity and can safely
occur with maternal treatment using MOUD. Although there are no
evidence-­based guidelines, consensus guidelines suggest breastfeeding can be encouraged if there has been no relapse within 30 days of
birth and should be encouraged if there has been no relapse within 90
days of birth. Untreated HIV is a contraindication to breastfeeding;
however, breastfeeding is safe with HCV unless there are cracked or
bleeding nipples.
The decision for pharmacologic treatment has been traditionally
based on the nursing scoring assessment tool, and the most widely
used tool is a modification of the Finnegan scoring tool (see Fig.
145.1). Other scoring tools include the Neonatal Narcotic Withdrawal Index, Neonatal Withdrawal Inventory, and MOTHER NAS
Scale.
The ESC model is very useful and is an evidenced-based approach
for improved outcomes and fewer pharmacologic interventions (Table
145.1). An inability to eat, sleep, or be consoled in at least two of the
three parameters in the presence of nonpharmacologic interventions
warrants pharmacologic therapy, usually with oral liquid morphine
plus continued nonpharmacologic interventions. Other etiologies of
poor eating, sleeping, and consolability must be evaluated. The main
objectives when initiating pharmacologic treatment is to control clinical signs of withdrawal and to prevent adverse events (e.g., seizure).
Excessive weight loss may be an indication for pharmacotherapy
regardless of other clinical signs.
Pharmacologic treatment for NAS, when necessary, should be done
with an opioid, and the most commonly used are morphine or methadone (Table 145.2). Morphine is a short-­acting opioid given every 3
hours as a weight-­based or clinical sign-­based regimen. Methadone
is a long-­acting opioid that can generally be given twice a day after
loading doses. Buprenorphine is an effective agent that may be superior to morphine; its use may be associated with a short duration of
treatment and length of stay, as well as few adverse effects and less use
of additional medications. Clinical trials have shown methadone and
buprenorphine to decrease length of treatment when compared with
morphine. Buprenorphine and some methadone formulations contain high ethanol levels, which may be deleterious to the infant and
should be avoided. Closely adhering to NAS treatment protocols with
guidelines on initiation and weaning have been shown to decrease both
length of treatment and length of stay.
Adjuvant therapy is generally initiated in the unusual situation
when the primary opioid is not effective in controlling the signs of
NAS. The two medications used as adjuvant therapy are phenobarbital and clonidine. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) guidelines
suggest clonidine be used as adjuvant therapy; phenobarbital should be
avoided if possible as some studies suggest long-­term use can be associated with developmental delay.
Long-­term studies of opioid-­exposed infants are lacking, and many
are confounded by co-­exposures (e.g., alcohol), maternal health (e.g.,
poor nutrition), or social risk (e.g., trauma), all of which could influence developmental outcomes. Still, infants should be closely monitored to optimize developmental trajectory. In many states a diagnosis
of NAS qualifies for early intervention services, which are part of the
Individuals with Disability and Education Act Part C, and infants
should be referred to this service. Other supportive referrals should be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1134 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 145.2

Medications Used in Pharmacologic Treatment of Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome

DRUG

INITIAL DOSING

DOSING INCREASES

WEANING SCHEDULE

ADD ADJUVANT THERAPY

Morphine

0.05 mg/kg/dose q3h

Increase dose 10–20%

10% of stabilizing dose q24h

>1 mg/kg/day of morphine
Unable to wean for 2 days

Methadone

0.1 mg/kg/dose q6h for
4 doses

Increase to q4h if unable to
capture

0.7 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2 doses,
then 0.05 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2
0.04 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2
0.03 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2
0.02 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2
0.01 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2
0.01 mg/kg/dose q24h × 1

Unable to wean for 2 days

Buprenorphine

4 μg/kg q8h

2 μg/kg until maximum of
15 μg/kg

3 μg/kg/dose q8h × 3 doses
2 μg/kg/dose q8h × 3
2 μg/kg/dose q8h × 2
2 μg/kg/dose q24h × 1

Unable to wean for 2 days

Phenobarbital

20 mg/kg

—

5 mg/kg daily

N/A

Clonidine

1.5 μg/kg/dose q3h

25% dose escalation q24h

10% every day

N/A

N/A, Not available; q24h, every 24 hours.

considered, including home visitation programs and Early Head Start.
Further, in the discharge process clinicians should also assess other
risk, including HIV and HCV exposure, which must be followed in
the outpatient setting. Hospitals should standardize the discharge process for opioid-­exposed infants to ensure connection to postdischarge
services.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

According to the CDC, approximately 1 in 7 pregnant women report
consuming alcohol within the past 30 days. Approximately 20-30%
report drinking at some point during the pregnancy, and more than 5%
report binge drinking. consuming alcohol within the last 30 days, with
∼20% reporting binge drinking. Because almost 50% of pregnancies in
the United States are unplanned, unintentional PAE can occur before a
woman knows she is pregnant.

PREVALENCE

Chapter 146

Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder
Susan A. Friedman and Hallam Hurt
Alcohol is a known teratogen that can cause irreversible central
nervous system (CNS) damage. Injury can include reduced brain
volume, particularly for the frontal lobe, and thinning of the corpus callosum. These injuries can lead to CNS dysfunction that can
range from relatively mild to severe. Prenatal alcohol exposure
(PAE) affects all stages of brain development from neurogenesis to
myelination, through mechanisms that include disrupted cell-­cell
interactions, altered gene expression, and oxidative stress leading
to abnormalities such as reduced brain volume in the frontal lobe,
striatum and caudate nucleus, thalamus, and cerebellum; thinning of the corpus callosum; and abnormal functioning of the
amygdala.
PAE can result in a spectrum of outcomes. The term fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is the umbrella term that encompasses a group of conditions associated with PAE. The FASD
group of disorders includes fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), partial
fetal alcohol syndrome (pFAS), alcohol-­related neurodevelopmental disorder (ARND), alcohol-­related birth defect (ARBD), and
neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure (ND-­PAE).

FASDs are the most common causes of preventable developmental delay and intellectual disability. Prevalence rates vary across
reports. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
FAS Surveillance Network reported prevalence rate across several
populations of 0.3 out of 1,000 children from 7 to 9 years of age.
This prevalence rate is much lower than that obtained by active case
ascertainment studies in the United States and Western Europe,
which have estimated prevalence rates of 2–5%. Another study
reported similar rates, 24-­48 cases per 1,000 children (2.4–4.8%) for
all FASDs, and 6-­9 cases per 1,000 (0.6–0.9%) for FAS specifically.
Studies that have examined PAE by anonymous meconium testing
demonstrate 4.26 times greater identification of alcohol use during pregnancy compared with maternal self-­report. Rates of FASDs
have been reported to be higher in children living in poverty, in
Indigenous populations, and in children living in foster care. The
rate of FASDs for children in foster care has been found to be 10
to 15 times higher than that for children in the general population. FASDs often go undetected in these children, and as many
as 86.5% of foster and adopted youth with FASDs go undiagnosed
or are diagnosed incorrectly within the FASD spectrum. Children
adopted internationally represent another high-­risk group, particularly those adopted from Eastern Europe. Children adopted from
orphanages and other children with a history of early trauma, such
as those in foster care, may also exhibit symptoms of posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and other neurobehavioral and developmental issues that can overlap with those of FASD, including those
without physical features (ARND or ND-­PAE). The impairments
seen in children with an FASD may also include the negative impact
of additional prenatal and postnatal risk factors.

DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEMS

The most widely used diagnostic guidelines are the Hoyme FASD
diagnostic guidelines (revised 2016), the University of Washington
4-­Digit Diagnostic Code (2004), the CDCFAS guidelines (revised

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 146 u Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder
2004, only includes FAS), and the Canadian FASD guidelines
(revised 2016).
These FASD diagnostic guidelines overlap but also have important distinctions. The Hoyme system uses more stringent alcohol exposure criteria than the 4-Digit Diagnostic Code. Both the
Hoyme system (2016), and the 4-Digit Diagnostic Code system
use the three diagnostic criteria of facial findings, growth restriction, and CNS abnormalities and both include a spectrum of disorders under the umbrella term of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
(FASD). However, they do differ in diagnostic tools, specific criteria used to define each category, and in diagnostic nomenclature.
The result of these differences and others is that there may not be
total agreement between the two in the diagnosis of a given patient.
The CDC guidelines establish criteria only for FAS and require
the three diagnostic criteria of facial findings, growth restriction,
and CNS abnormalities, with or without documented PAE. In the
updated Canadian guidelines, “fetal alcohol spectrum disorder” is
considered a diagnostic term with two categories: FASD with sentinel facial features and FASD without sentinel facial features. These
guidelines eliminate growth restriction as a required diagnostic criterion. They include an at-risk category for children with confirmed
PAE who were too young to meet the criteria for neurodevelopmental deficits, or in whom assessment was incomplete. They also
include a category for children with cardinal facial features without
documentation or evidence of severe impairment in neurodevelopmental domains. There is no universal acceptance of one system. If
less stringent criteria are used, the sensitivity increases, which may
lead to overdiagnosis. Additional expert evaluation is then needed
to confirm a diagnosis. In contrast, using more stringent criteria
leads to greater specificity but may underdiagnose FASD.

Historical and Clinical Features

The historical and clinical features shared by all previously described
diagnostic systems (although not required by all of the disorders)
include five categories: (1) PAE, (2) three key facial features, (3) prenatal/postnatal growth restriction, (4) deficient brain growth and/or
significant structural brain abnormalities, and (5) neurobehavioral
impairment.

Prenatal Alcohol Exposure

A safe threshold or pattern of alcohol consumption during pregnancy has not been identified, and any PAE at any stage of gestation
is believed to present a risk to a developing fetus. Significant alcohol
exposure has been carefully defined in the 2016 updated Hoyme guidelines as follows.
One or more of the following exposures, beginning 3 months before
pregnancy and continuing until delivery, with a standard drink defined
as 1.5 oz of hard liquor, 5 oz of wine, or 12 oz of beer or wine cooler:
• ≥6 drinks/week for ≥2 weeks during pregnancy
• ≥3 drinks per occasion on ≥2 occasions

A

B

1135

• Documented alcohol-­related social or legal problems before or during pregnancy or a history of treatment for an alcohol-­related condition
• Documentation of intoxication of blood, breath, or urine alcohol
testing
• Positive testing with an established biomarker of alcohol exposure
during pregnancy or at birth
• Positive finding on a validated screening tool for drinking during
pregnancy
Information can be obtained from a variety of sources in addition
to the birth mother, including family members, foster or adoptive parents, social service agencies who observed maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy, or medical records that document PAE, alcohol
treatment, or social, legal, or medical problems related to drinking
during pregnancy. Binge drinking (4 or more drinks per occasion) has
been shown to be the most harmful to fetal development. PAE in the
first trimester leads to the classic facial dysmorphia associated with
FAS and other structural defects. PAE can have other deleterious effects
(e.g., spontaneous abortion, growth defect, CNS effects) on the fetus
throughout the pregnancy.
Several well-­validated screens are used to identify alcohol use in
pregnant and nonpregnant women of childbearing years, including
the assessments of Tolerance, Annoyance, Cut Down, Eye-­Opener (T-­
ACE), Cut Back, Annoyed, Guilty, Eye-­Opener (CAGE); Car; Relax;
Alone; Forget; Friends; Trouble (CRAFFT); Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test (Audit-­C); and Tolerance, Worried, Eye-­Opener,
Amnesia, Kut Down (TWEAK). There are, however, no well-­validated
screens designed to ask about past consumption of alcohol. Pediatricians can ask the following two questions to determine the likelihood
of significant PAE: “In the 3 months before you knew you were pregnant, how many times did you have 4 or more alcohol drinks in a day?”
and “During your pregnancy, how many times did you have any alcohol?” If a positive response is given to either question, the clinician can
follow up to determine the level of PAE by asking the following: (1)
“During your pregnancy, on average, how many days per week did you
have any alcohol?”; (2) “During your pregnancy, on a typical day when
you had an alcoholic beverage, how many drinks did you have?”; and
(3) “During your pregnancy, what was the maximum number of drinks
that you had in a day?”

Dysmorphologic Facial Features

The three key, facial dysmorphologic features include short palpebral fissures, a thin vermilion border of the upper lip, and a smooth
philtrum (Fig. 146.1). Measurement of the palpebral fissure length
(PFL) is shown in Figure 146.2. There are several different PFL
charts that can be used to plot this measurement. That of Hall is
included here (Fig. 146.3), with additional charts listed under
Additional Resources for Healthcare Providers. In addition, different diagnostic systems have different cutoffs to define the criteria.
Evaluation of the philtrum and upper lip utilizes the Lip-­Philtrum

C

D

Fig. 146.1 Examples of facial features of FAS in children of different ethnicities. A, White. B, Native American. C, Black. D, Asian. (Copyright 2021
Susan (Astley) Hemingway PhD, University of Washington.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1136 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Deficient Brain Growth and Significant Structural
Brain Abnormalities

Deficient brain growth is defined as an occipitofrontal head circumference (OFC) <10% for age, abnormal morphogenesis, or abnormal neurophysiology. The criteria additionally state that if the child has weight
and height <10th percentile, then the OFC should be at or below the
3rd percentile. Structural brain abnormalities seen on brain imaging
may include abnormalities of the corpus callosum, the cerebellum, or
basal ganglia.

ex

en

Fig. 146.2 The palpebral fissure length is defined by the distance
between the endocanthion (en) and exocanthion (ex) landmarks. (Copyright 2021 Susan (Astley) Hemingway PhD, University of Washington.)

34
+2SD

32

1.3

+1SD
Mean

30

1.2

–2SD

28
26

1.1

1.0

24

Inches

Palpebral fissure length (mm)

–1SD

0.9
22
0.8

20
18

0.7

16
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Age from birth (years)

Fig. 146.3 Palpebral fissure measurements. (From Hall JG, Froster-­
Iskenius UG, Allanson J, eds. Handbook of Normal Physical Measurements. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1989: p. 150.)

Neurobehavioral/Neurodevelopmental Impairment

These criteria can include abnormal findings on neurologic exam or
seizures, and/or functional neurobehavioral or neurodevelopmental abnormalities. There is tremendous variability in the presentation
of the neurobehavioral and neurocognitive features of children with
FASD due to the timing and amount of PAE and unique characteristics
of the birth mother and the child. The assessment of neurobehavioral
impairment is also different for children under 3 years of age than for
children 3 years or older.
The degree of developmental impairment can range from relatively
mild delays to severe intellectual disability, although approximately
75% of individuals with an FASD do not have intellectual disability. In
infants, the symptoms can be nonspecific and may include irritability,
poor feeding, sleep difficulties, a tendency to become easily overstimulated, or difficulty forming attachments with caregivers. Young children
may demonstrate developmental delays, inattention, impulsivity, internalizing and externalizing problems, social impairments and difficulty
with peers, and behavioral difficulties such as mood lability, frequent
tantrums, or aggression. The neurocognitive profile of children with
an FASD that emerges at elementary or middle school age includes
challenges with processing speed, memory, visual-­spatial reasoning,
math, auditory comprehension, use of pragmatic language, and executive functioning skills. In adolescents, difficulties with abstract reasoning, time and money management, and social and adaptive skills may
become more pronounced.
The most common comorbid mental health condition seen in children with an FASD is attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD;
see Chapter 50), which occurs in >50% of children. Individuals with
FASD may also present with problems of self-­regulation, impulse control, and adaptive functioning. Additional mental health disorders typically seen in children and adolescents include oppositional defiant and
conduct disorder, anxiety disorder, adjustment disorder, sleep disorder,
mood disorders (e.g., depression, bipolar disorder), and disinhibited
social engagement disorder. FASD may increase the severity or complexity of these conditions.

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA

Guide developed at the University of Washington (Fig. 146.4),
which can be obtained on request in digital format or as a laminated card from the University of Washington. Although this guide
includes norms for White and Black children, additional work is
needed on establishing norms for the three facial features across a
wider range of racial groups.
Additional minor anomalies may also occur in association with PAE
but are not included in the diagnostic criteria: mid-­face hypoplasia,
epicanthal folds, ptosis, strabismus, altered palmar crease (“hockey
stick” and clinodactyly of the fifth finger [Fig. 146.5], “railroad track
ears” [Fig. 146.6], hypoplastic nails, limited elbow supination, camptodactyly, hypertrichosis).

Prenatal/Postnatal Growth Deficiency

This is defined as ≤10th percentile for age (Hoyme and CDC) or ≤3rd
percentile (4-­Digit Diagnostic Code) for either height or weight. The
systems also vary in the timing of the growth problems (prenatal/at
birth, or at any point in life).

Five diagnoses included under the FASD umbrella include the
following:
1.	Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS)
2.	Partial fetal alcohol syndrome (pFAS)
3.	Alcohol related neurodevelopmental disorder (ARND)
4.	Neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure
(ND-­PAE)
5.	Alcohol related birth defects (ARBD)
The previously described clinical features with or without a history
PAE are used to define the disorders within the FASD spectrum (Tables
146.1-­146.5). As noted earlier, the criteria do vary somewhat depending upon which diagnostic system is used.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

It is important to consider other causes of the facial features of FAS and
pFAS, as each of these can be seen in certain genetic and teratogenic
exposure conditions. Genetic conditions can include Williams syndrome,
Dubowitz syndrome, Noonan syndrome, 22q11.2 deletion (velocardiofacial syndrome), Cornelia de Lange syndrome, chromosome 15q duplication syndrome, and others. Teratogenic exposure conditions include fetal
valproate syndrome, fetal hydantoin syndrome, maternal phenylketonuria

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 146 u Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder

1137

FASD 4-Digit Diagnostic Code
© 2014 Susan Astley, University of Washington fasdpn.org
5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

A

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

B
Lip-Philtrum Guide 1

Philtrum Guide

For use as a digital image on a smartphone or tablet.
Printing invalidates Guide.
Square ensures length by width ratio of image is correct.

Lip-Philtrum Guide 2

Philtrum Guide

For use as a digital image on a smartphone or tablet.
Printing invalidates Guide.
Square ensures length by width ratio of image is correct.

Fig. 146.4 University of Washington Lip-­Philtrum Guides 1 (A) and 2 (B) are used to rank upper lip thinness and philtrum smoothness. The philtrum

is the vertical groove between the nose and upper lip. The guides reflect the full range of lip thickness and philtrum depth with Rank 3 representing
the population mean. Ranks 4 and 5 reflect the thin lip and smooth philtrum that characterize the FAS facial phenotype. Guide 1 is used for Whites
and all other races with lips like Whites. Guide 2 is used for Blacks and all other races with lips like Blacks. Free digital images of these guides for use
on smartphones are available from astley@uw.edu. (Copyright 2021 Susan (Astley) Hemingway PhD, University of Washington.)

(PKU) effects, toluene embryopathy, and others. Therefore a genetics evaluation may be warranted, especially when there is unconfirmed PAE.
The neurobehavioral issues associated with FASD can be difficult
to distinguish from those of other behavioral health disorders, such
as autism spectrum disorder, ADHD, intellectual disability, reactive
attachment disorder, PTSD, exposure to other maternal substance use
during pregnancy, and others. This is particularly the case when the
FASD facial features are not present. Children who experience “adverse
childhood experiences” (ACEs), such as neglect, abuse, poverty, and
parental substance abuse, can have similar findings of hyperactivity,
poor impulse control, emotional dysregulation, deficits in executive
function, and memory weaknesses as children with FASD. Furthermore, these disorders are not mutually exclusive and more than one
underlying disorder can result in the neurobehavioral issues found.

OUTCOMES

Children with an FASD are at higher risk for victimization and bullying, often due to poor social judgment. Children and adolescents

who are not identified early and treated aggressively are significantly
more likely to have secondary disabilities, including encounters
with juvenile justice and incarceration, substance abuse problems,
severe mental health problems, sexual promiscuity and other inappropriate sexual behaviors, high rates of school failure, dropout and
under-­or unemployment, health problems, and premature death.
Children and adolescents with an FASD have a 95% lifetime likelihood of having a mental health diagnosis and are at higher risk for
suicide. Although an FASD cannot be cured, the long-­term negative
effects of the brain injury caused by PAE can be reduced through
aggressive, sustained intervention initiated early. Factors associated
with a better outcome include early diagnosis (under age 6 years),
a stable and nurturing home, lack of exposure to violence, full
assessment for disabilities and adequate provision of appropriate
education, therapies, and social services. Prevention of FASD and
early identification and interventions for children with an FASD is
essential and has become an important goal of the CDC and other
organizations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1138 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 146.1  Diagnostic Criteria for Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome
ALL of the following, with or without documented prenatal alcohol
exposure:
Facial features (Hoyme system requires two or more, 4-­D igit
Diagnostic Code requires all three):

• Palpebral fissures ≤10th percentile (Hoyme system) or ≤3rd percentile
(4-­Digit code)
• Thin upper lip (ranking of 4 or 5 on racially normed Lip-­Philtrum Guide*)
• Smooth philtrum (ranking of 4 or 5 on racially normed Lip-­Philtrum Guide*)

Prenatal and/or postnatal growth deficiency:

• Height and/or weight ≤10% for age and sex at any point of time
(prenatal or postnatal)
• Adjust for gestational age if preterm. (4-­Digit Diagnostic Code puts
emphasis on short stature)

Deficient brain growth, abnormal brain formation or neurophysiology:
one or more of following:

• Head circumference ≤10th % (Hoyme system) or ≤3rd percentile (4-­Digit
Diagnostic Code)
• Structural brain abnormalities
• Recurrent nonfebrile seizures with other causes excluded (Hoyme system)

Neurobehavioral impairment:

Fig. 146.5 Characteristic hand findings that can be seen in a child

with an FASD: curved fifth finger (clinodactyly) and upper palmar crease
that widens after the bend and ends between the second and third
fingers (“hockey stick” crease). (Courtesy Darryl Leja, NHGRI, National
Institutes of Health.)

• For children <3 y/o: Developmental delay ≥1.5 SD below the mean
• For children 3 y/o or older (either of the following):
• Cognitive impairment: Scores ≥1.5 SD below mean (Hoyme) or ≥2 SD
below mean (4-­Digit Diagnostic Code) either for global abilities or
for at least one neurobehavioral domain (executive function, specific
learning impairment, memory impairment, or visual-­spatial impairment).
The Hoyme system defines impairment domain as normal or abnormal.
The 4-­Digit Diagnostic Code has three domains defined: normal,
moderate, severe.
• Behavioral impairment without cognitive impairment: ≥1.5SD below
mean in self-­regulation (mood or behavioral regulation), attention
deficit, or impulse control.

*The Hoyme system and the 4-­Digit Diagnostic Code have different Lip-­Philtrum
Guides.
SD, Standard deviation.

Fig. 146.6 Ear findings that can be seen in a child with an FASD: “rail-

road track” appearance of ear creases. (Courtesy Darryl Leja, NHGRI,
National Institutes of Health.)

INTERVENTIONS AND TREATMENTS

Given the heterogeneity of presenting problems associated with the
FASDs, interventions need to be tailored to address each individual
child’s or adolescent’s profile of strengths and difficulties. Studies support that the most successful interventions begin early and continue
across the life span, include a preventive focus, are intensive and individualized, address multiple domains of functioning, include parent
education and training, and are coordinated across systems of care.
Behavioral issues seen in children with FASD can be difficult for
parents to manage and can cause significant stress within the home.
These children often have impaired cause-­
and-­
effect understanding and therefore may not respond to traditional behavior modification strategies. Pediatricians can help support families by providing
parenting tips suggested by the CDC, such as providing a structured
environment and stable routines, using simple concrete language

and lots of repetition, viewing the difficult behaviors as brain based
rather than willful misbehavior, focusing on strengths, and providing
an abundance of positive reinforcement. Specific programs include
Families Moving Forward and Parents and Children Together teaching parents strategies designed to improve self-­regulation and executive function, and decreasing child behavior problems. Children with
FASD often have significant difficulties with social functioning, such
as interpreting social cues and communicating in social settings. Programs such as Children’s Friendship Training provides group-­based,
parent-­assisted intervention that teaches social skills, which have been
shown to improve standardized rating of social skills. Programs such
as Good Buddies provide classes that address issues related to impaired
social skills. Children with FASD may have decreased safety awareness,
poor judgement, and impulsivity, which can place them at increased
risk for unintentional injuries. A video-­based intervention, Fire and
Street Safety, was developed to address this. Children who participated
showed significant improvement in safety-­
related knowledge and
appropriate behavioral responses following the training and were also
able to apply this training to real-­world situations.
Young children with FASD are generally eligible for early intervention therapies (occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy,
and developmental instruction) and should be referred for these services as needed. Older children with an FASD often have difficulties
with verbal and spatial learning, executive functioning, adaptive skills,
social skills and peer relations, and mental health, which can interfere
with academic performance. High rates of school failure and disruption are reported for this population. Difficulties with memory often
require simplification of instructions, repetition, and patience. A home
and school environment that is structured and predictable can also help
to address this issue. To enhance generalizability of skills and to ensure
they are encoded into memory, children with an FASD require consistent and predictable interventions, simplified directions, repeated
instructions, and reduced distractions in the classroom. Classroom
intervention programs such as Cognitive Control Therapy have been
found to result in significant improvements in classroom behavior
and academic achievement. Programs have also been developed that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 146 u Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder
Table 146.2  Diagnostic Criteria for Partial Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome
• WITH documented prenatal alcohol exposure (requires A and B):
A.	Facial features (at least two of three)
B.	Neurobehavioral impairment (same as for FAS), i.e., leaves out
brain abnormalities and growth deficiency
• WITHOUT documented prenatal alcohol exposure (requires A, B,
and C):
A.	Facial features (at least two of three)
B.	Growth deficiency OR deficient brain growth/structural brain
abnormalities/recurrent seizures (at least one of these)
C.	Neurobehavioral impairment (same as for FAS), i.e., same as
FAS except it is EITHER growth deficiency OR brain growth/
structural brain abnormalities/recurrent seizures (does not
require both)
Note that the diagnosis of FAS and pFAS are the only FASDs that can be diagnosed in
the absence of a confirmed maternal history of PAE.
FAS, Fetal alcohol syndrome; FASD, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder; pFAS, partial fetal
alcohol syndrome.

Table 146.3  Diagnostic Criteria for Alcohol-­Related
Neurodevelopmental Disorder
Requires A and B:
Note: Cannot be diagnosed definitively in children <3 yr old
A.	Documented prenatal alcohol exposure
B.	Neurobehavioral impairment:

• WITH cognitive impairment: Global delay OR deficit in at least TWO
neurobehavioral domains (executive function, specific learning
impairment, memory impairment, visual-­spatial impairment)
• WITHOUT cognitive impairment: Behavioral deficit in at least TWO
domains (behavioral regulation, attention, impulse control)

Table 146.4  Diagnostic Criteria for Neurobehavioral
Disorder Associated with Prenatal Alcohol
Exposure
ND-­PAE is a mental health disorder (rather than a medical disorder)
included in the DSM-­5 (2013) as a “new clarifying term” that
encompasses the range of developmental disabilities associated
with PAE that affect function and are not due to other conditions.
This diagnosis requires:

• ≥1 deficit in neurocognition
• ≥2 deficits in adaptive functioning (at least one in communication or
social communication and interaction)
• ≥1 deficit in self-­regulation
• History of maternal consumption of more than 13 alcoholic drinks in any
30-­day period of the pregnancy or more than 2 alcoholic drinks in one
sitting
• Onset of the disorder in childhood
• The findings cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
important areas of functioning and are not better explained by
other causes (medication, medical conditions, genetic disorders, or
environmental neglect)

Although the diagnosis of ND-­PAE overlaps with ARND, ND-­PAE aims to describe
the behavioral and mental health effects on an individual with PAE. Unlike ARND, a
diagnosis of ND-­PAE can be given with or without the physical characteristics of FAS
(ARND does not include physical characteristics) and the diagnosis of ND-­PAE can be
given in addition to FAS or pFAS.
ARND, Alcohol-­related neurodevelopmental disorder; DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition; FAS, fetal alcohol syndrome; ND-­PAE,
neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure; pFAS, partial
fetal alcohol syndrome.

address specific areas of learning, such as Language and Literacy Training Math Interactive Learning Experience. A cognitive-­based intervention, the Alert Program has been adapted to address self-­regulation and
executive function difficulties in children with FAS or ARND living
in foster care or adoptive homes. A video game, GoFar, was developed by to address issues of self-­regulation. An intervention that uses
rehearsal training interventions has been shown to result in improvement in working memory. Children with FASD have been found to
show deficits in adaptive functioning more significant than expected

1139

Table 146.5  Alcohol-­Related Birth Defects
This diagnosis refers to a pattern of structural birth defects and other
congenital abnormalities that can be characteristic of FASD.
Requires both A and B
A.	Documented prenatal alcohol exposure
B.	One or more specific major malformations found to be the result
of prenatal alcohol exposure:
• Cardiac: ASD, VSD, aberrant great vessels, conotruncal heart defects
• Skeletal: radioulnar synostosis, vertebral segmentation defects, large
joint contractures, scoliosis
• Renal: kidney/ureteral malformations
• Eyes: strabismus, ptosis, retinal vascular abnormalities, optic nerve
hypoplasia
• Ears: conductive or neurosensory hearing loss

ASD, Atrial septal defect; FASD, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder; VSD, ventricular septal
defect.

based on their cognitive testing. Occupational therapy to address this
issue can help to decrease the significant level of supervision and support required of parents and caregivers.
There are no medications that are approved specifically for FASDs, but
some medications may be used for symptom management. These can
include stimulants (for hyperactivity, inattention, and poor impulse control), antidepressants, neuroleptics, and antianxiety drugs. Children with
an FASD are often treated with a higher number of drugs and at higher
doses, likely because of atypical or less favorable responses. Such atypical
responses may require an adjustment in medication or discontinuation.
Stimulant medication use in patients with FASD is controversial but is
often considered, since there is a high prevalence of ADHD-like symptoms
in this population. Stimulants can lead to some improvement in hyperactivity but may be less helpful for impulsivity and attention, and the rate of
efficacy in general is not as high as in idiopathic ADHD. A diagnosis in
the FASD spectrum should, in fact, be considered in a child with ADHD
who has an atypical response to such medications. The efficacy of nonstimulant medications used for ADHD, such as alpha-2 agonists is being
studied and may be shown to be helpful. Studies are also underway for use
of choline supplementation and treatment with atomoxetine (a selective
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor). Data regarding the use of SSRI (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) medications, antipsychotics, and mood
stabilizers are limited in terms of efficacy and safety.

THE PEDIATRICIAN/PRIMARY CARE PROVIDER’S
ROLE

Pediatricians and other primary care providers need to document findings
related to PAE and refer the child for a full evaluation. Indications for referral for further evaluation for FASD include confirmed history of significant
PAE, concern raised by the caregiver about the possibility of FASD, all three
facial features present, one or more facial features plus growth deficits, and
one or more facial features along with one or more CNS abnormalities ±
growth deficits. Evaluation for an FASD is best done by a multidisciplinary
team that can provide a medical, genetic, and neuropsychologic assessment. This team might include a developmental behavioral pediatrician,
psychologist/psychiatrist, geneticist, social worker, speech therapist, occupational therapist, physical therapist, and educational therapist/special
education teacher. Evaluations by audiology and ophthalmology should be
included if not already completed.
Once a diagnosis of an FASD is made, the pediatrician’s/primary
care providers role is important in establishing a medical home for
the child that provides coordinated care between medical and mental
health professionals, therapists, and educators who can help and support the child and family. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
has developed an FASD toolkit (https://www.aap.org/en-­us/advocacy-­
and-­policy/aap-­health-­initiatives/fetal-­alcohol-­spectrum-­disorders-­
toolkit/Pages/default.aspx) that includes a “Flow Diagram for Medical
Home Evaluation of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders” to assist primary
care providers in identifying children with an FASD and managing their
challenges in an effort to reduce the lifelong adverse consequences.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1140 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Chapter 147

Infants of Diabetic
Mothers
Kesi C. Yang
Diabetes (type 1, type 2, or gestational) in pregnancy increases the risk
of complications and adverse outcomes in the mother and the baby.
Complications related to diabetes are milder in gestational vs pregestational (preexisting type 1 or type 2) diabetes. Pregnancy outcomes
are correlated with onset, duration, and severity of maternal hyperglycemia. Preconception planning and tight glycemic control (hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c] <6.5%) is crucial in pregestational diabetes to achieve
the best outcomes for the mother and the baby. The risk of diabetic
embryopathy (neural tube defects, cardiac defects, caudal regression
syndrome) and spontaneous abortions is highest in those with pregestational diabetes who have poor control (HbA1c >7%) in the first trimester. The risk of congenital malformations in gestational diabetes
is only slightly increased compared to the general population, because
the duration of diabetes is less and hyperglycemia occurs later in gestation (typically >25 weeks).
Mothers with pregestational and gestational diabetes have a high
incidence of complications during the pregnancy. Polyhydramnios,
preeclampsia, preterm labor (induced and spontaneous), and chronic
hypertension occur more frequently in mothers with diabetes. Accelerated fetal growth is also common, and 36–45% of infants of diabetic
mothers (IDMs) are born large for gestational age (LGA). Restricted
fetal growth is seen in mothers with pregestational diabetes and vascular disease, but it is less common. Fetal mortality rate is greater in both
pregestational and gestational diabetic mothers than in nondiabetic
mothers, but the rates have dropped precipitously over the years. Fetal
loss throughout pregnancy is associated with poorly controlled maternal diabetes, especially diabetic ketoacidosis. The neonatal mortality
rate of IDMs is >5 times that of infants of nondiabetic mothers and is
higher at all gestational ages and in every birthweight for gestational
age category. The rate is higher in women with pregestational diabetes,
smoking, obesity, hypertension, and poor prenatal care.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The probable pathogenic sequence is that maternal hyperglycemia
causes fetal hyperglycemia, and the fetal pancreatic response leads to
fetal hyperinsulinemia, or hyperinsulinism. It is important to recognize that while maternal glucose crosses the placenta, maternal and
exogenous insulin does not. Fetal hyperinsulinemia and hyperglycemia
then cause increased hepatic glucose uptake and glycogen synthesis,
accelerated lipogenesis, and augmented protein synthesis (Fig. 147.1).
Related pathologic findings are hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the
pancreatic β cells, increased weight of the placenta and infant organs
(except the brain), myocardial hypertrophy, increased amount of cytoplasm in liver cells, and extramedullary hematopoiesis. Hyperinsulinism and hyperglycemia produce fetal acidosis, which may result in an
increased rate of stillbirth. Separation of the placenta at birth suddenly
interrupts glucose infusion into the neonate without a proportional
effect on hyperinsulinism, leading to hypoglycemia during the first few
hours after birth. The risk of rebound hypoglycemia can be diminished
by tight blood glucose control during labor and delivery.
Hyperinsulinemia has been documented in infants of mothers with
pregestational and gestational diabetes. The infants of mothers with pregestational diabetes have significantly higher fasting plasma insulin levels than normal newborns, despite similar glucose levels, and respond
to glucose with an abnormally prompt elevation in plasma insulin.
After arginine administration, they also have an enhanced insulin
response and increased disappearance rates of glucose compared with

Maternal
hyperglycemia
Placenta
Fetal hyperglycemia

Fetal hyperinsulinemia

Fetal hyperglycemia and
hyperinsulinemia

1. Congenital
anomalies
(peri-conceptional)

1. Neonatal
hypoglycemia
(0-7 days postnatal)

1. Fetal macrosomia
(20 weeks
gestation)

2. Decreased
early growth
(0-20 weeks
gestation)

2. Surfactant deficiency
(neonatal)

a. Birth asphyxia
b. Cardiomyopathy
c. TTN

3. Hyperinsulinemia
(20 weeks
gestation)

3. Immature
liver metabolism
(neonatal)

a. Jaundice

b. Stroke, RVT

2. Fetal hypoxia
(30 weeks
gestation)

a. Polycythemia

c. Iron
abnormalities

Poor neurodevelopmental outcome

Fig. 147.1 The fetal and neonatal events attributable to fetal hy-

perglycemia (column 1), fetal hyperinsulinemia (column 2), or both in
synergy (column 3). Time of risk is denoted in parentheses. RVT, Renal
vein thrombosis; TTN, transient tachypnea of the newborn. (From Nold
JL, Georgieff MK. Infants of diabetic mothers. Pediatr Clin North Am.
2004;51:619–637.)

normal infants. In contrast, fasting glucose production and utilization
rates are diminished in infants of mothers with gestational diabetes.
Although hyperinsulinism is probably the main cause of hypoglycemia, the diminished epinephrine and glucagon responses that occur
may be contributing factors. Infants of mothers with pregestational
and gestational diabetes are at risk for neonatal hypoglycemia in the
first hours of life, with an increased risk in both large-­and small-­for-­
gestational-­age infants. Aggressive screening and treatment is recommended as outlined later.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infants of mothers with pregestational diabetes and those of mothers
with gestational diabetes often bear a surprising resemblance to each
other (Fig. 147.2). They tend to be macrosomic as a result of increased
body fat and enlarged viscera, with puffy, plethoric facies resembling
those of patients who have been receiving corticosteroids. These infants
may also be of normal birthweight if diabetes is well controlled or low
birthweight if they are delivered before term or if their mothers have
associated diabetic vascular disease. Infants that are macrosomic or
LGA are at high risk of birth trauma (brachial plexus injury) and birth
asphyxia because of not only their large size but also their decreased
ability to tolerate stress, especially if they have cardiomyopathy and
other effects of fetal hyperinsulinemia (Table 147.1).
Hypoglycemia develops in approximately 25–50% of infants of
mothers with pregestational diabetes and 15–25% of infants of mothers
with gestational diabetes, but only a small percentage of these infants
become symptomatic. The probability that hypoglycemia will develop
in such infants increases with higher cord or maternal fasting blood
glucose levels. The nadir in an infant’s blood glucose concentration is
usually reached between 1 and 3 hours of age. Hypoglycemia can persist for 72 hours and in rare cases last up to 7 days. Frequent feedings
can be used to treat the hypoglycemia, but some infants require intravenous (IV) dextrose.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 147 u Infants of Diabetic Mothers 1141

Fig. 147.2 Macrosomic, plethoric infant of a mother with gestational

diabetes. The baby was born at 38 weeks of gestation but weighed 9
lb, 11 oz (4,408 g). Mild respiratory distress was the only symptom other
than appearance.

Table 147.1  	 Morbidity in Infants of Diabetic Mothers
Congenital anomalies
Heart failure and septal hypertrophy of heart
Surfactant deficiency, respiratory distress syndrome, transient
tachypnea of the newborn, persistent pulmonary hypertension
Hyperbilirubinemia
Hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia
Macrosomia, nerve injury related to birth trauma
Renal vein thrombosis
Small left colon
Unexplained intrauterine demise
Polycythemia
Visceromegaly
Predisposition to later-­life obesity, insulin resistance, and diabetes
From Devaskar SU, Garg M. Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism in the neonate.
In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds. Fanaroff & Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal
Medicine, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Box 95-­3.

The infants tend to be jittery, tremulous, and hyperexcitable during
the first 3 days after birth, although hypotonia, lethargy, and poor feeding may also occur. Early appearance of these signs is more likely to be
related to hypoglycemia but can also be caused by hypocalcemia and
hypomagnesemia, which also occur in the first 24-­72 hours of life due
to delayed response of the parathormone system. Perinatal asphyxia
is associated with increased irritability and also increases the risk of
hypoglycemia, hypomagnesemia, and hypocalcemia.
Tachypnea develops in many IDMs during the first 2 days after birth
and may be a manifestation of hypoglycemia, hypothermia, polycythemia, cardiac failure, transient tachypnea, or cerebral edema from birth
trauma or asphyxia. IDMs have a higher incidence of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) than do infants of nondiabetic mothers born
at comparable gestational age. The greater incidence is likely related
to an inhibitory effect of insulin on surfactant protein expression.
Polycythemia often occurs with RDS as they are both a result of fetal
hyperinsulinism.
Cardiomegaly is common, and heart failure occurs in 5–10%
of IDMs. Interventricular septal hypertrophy may occur and may

Fig. 147.3 Caudal dysplasia sequence. Newborn male infant with a
normal upper body and a short lower segment. (Modified from Jones
KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 1, p. 897.)

manifest as transient idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis.
This is thought to result from chronic hyperglycemia and chronic
hyperinsulinism leading to glycogen loading in the heart. Inotropic
agents worsen the obstruction and are contraindicated. β-­Adrenergic
blockers have been shown to relieve the obstruction, but ultimately the
condition resolves spontaneously over time.
Acute neurologic abnormalities (lethargy, irritability, poor feeding) can be seen immediately after birth. The symptoms will resolve
with treatment of the underlying cause but may persist for weeks if
caused by birth asphyxia. Neurologic development and ossification
centers tend to be immature and to correlate with brain size (which
is not increased) and gestational age rather than total body weight
in infants of mothers with gestational and pregestational diabetes. In
addition, IDMs have an increased incidence of hyperbilirubinemia,
polycythemia, iron deficiency, and renal vein thrombosis. Renal vein
thrombosis should be suspected in the infant with a flank mass, hematuria, and thrombocytopenia.
There is a fourfold increase in congenital anomalies in infants of
mothers with pregestational diabetes, and the risk varies with HbA1c
during the first trimester when organogenesis occurs. The recommended goal for periconceptual HbA1c is <6.5%. Although the risk of
congenital malformations increases with increasing HbA1c levels, there
may still be an increased risk in the therapeutic goal range. Congenital
anomalies of the central nervous system and cardiovascular system are
most common, including failure of neural tube closure (encephalocele,
meningomyelocele, and anencephaly), transposition of great vessels,
ventricular septal defect (VSD), atrial septal defect (ASD), hypoplastic
left heart, aortic stenosis, and coarctation of the aorta. Other less common anomalies include caudal regression syndrome (Fig. 147.3), intestinal atresia, renal agenesis, hydronephrosis, and cystic kidneys. Small
left colon syndrome is a rare anomaly that develops in the second and
third trimester because of rapid fluctuations in maternal and therefore
fetal glucose, leading to impaired intestinal motility and subsequent
intestinal growth. Prenatal ultrasound and a thorough newborn physical examination will identify most of these anomalies. High clinical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1142 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
suspicion and a good prenatal history will help identify needed screening for subtle anomalies.

TREATMENT

Preventive treatment of IDMs should be initiated before birth by means
of preconception and frequent prenatal evaluations of all women with
preexisting diabetes and pregnant women with gestational diabetes.
This involves evaluation of fetal maturity, biophysical profile with nonstress testing (NST), Doppler velocimetry, and planning of the delivery
of IDMs in hospitals where expert obstetric and pediatric care is continuously available. Preconception glucose control reduces the risk of
anomalies and other adverse outcomes in women with pregestational
diabetes, and glucose control during labor reduces the incidence of
neonatal hypoglycemia. Women with type 1 diabetes who have tight
glucose control during pregnancy (average daily glucose levels <95
mg/dL and HgbA1c <6.5%, if safely achievable without hypoglycemia)
deliver infants with birthweight and anthropomorphic features similar
to those of infants of nondiabetic mothers. Treatment of gestational
diabetes (diet, glucose monitoring, insulin, and oral antihyperglycemic
treatment with metformin or glyburide as needed) decreases the rate
of serious perinatal outcomes (death, shoulder dystocia, bone fracture,

or nerve palsy). Continuous glucose monitoring has been increasingly
used in pregnancy to achieve these purposes. In these mothers, the
incidence of macrosomia and neonatal hypoglycemia is similar to that
in mothers with insulin-­treated gestational diabetes.
Regardless of size, IDMs should initially receive close observation
and care. All infants should initiate feedings within 1 hour after birth.
A screening glucose test should be performed no sooner than 30 minutes of life but no later than 2 hours and should be performed immediately in symptomatic infants. Defining precise glucose thresholds in
neonates remains a challenge. The American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP) and the Pediatric Endocrine Society (PES) have both published
guidelines based on observational data and expert opinion. These
guidelines are adapted within individual institutions, with one example
included in Figure 147.4. The AAP recommends maintaining a blood
glucose level greater than 40 mg/dL (2.2 mmol/L) in the first 4 hours of
life and greater than 45 mg/dL in the first 4 to 24 of life (2.5 mmol/L).
In comparison, the PES recommends maintain a threshold of greater
than 50 mg/dL (2.8 mmol/L) in the first 48 hours.
Feeding is the initial treatment for asymptomatic hypoglycemia.
Oral or gavage feeding with breast milk or formula per maternal preference can be given. Dextrose gel has been shown to be a safe and

Infants at risk for hypoglycemia

Initiate feeds within 1 hour of birth
Check glucose no sooner than 30 minutes but no later than 2 hours after birth

Glucose ≥ 50 (2.8)*

Glucose 30-49 (1.7-2.7)

Glucose < 30 (1.7)

Offer feeding
Feed on cue 8-12 times for
24 hours
Check prefeed glucose
before next feed

Administer 40% dextrose gel
and then feed per maternal
preference, continue skin
to skin
Check glucose 30 min after
feed

Intervention d/w team: IV
dextrose bolus OR
dextrose gel if asymptomatic
If gel: administer and feed
per maternal preference
Check glucose 30 min after
feed

Repeat glucose level

Glucose ≥ 50 (2.8)

Glucose 30-49 (1.7-2.7)

Glucose < 30 (1.7)

Check next prefeed and can
stop if ≥ 50
Continue feeding on cue

Administer 40% dextrose
gel and then feed per
maternal preference,
continue skin to skin
Check glucose 30 min after
feed
If <50, can consider transfer
to NICU
If ≥ 50 repeat another
prefeed

Plan for NICU transfer for IV
dextrose

Repeat glucose at 24 hours of life

Fig. 147.4 Neonatal hypoglycemia algorithm at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. This was derived from institutional consensus and

meant to serve as a sample management protocol as there is no defined threshold for neonatal hypoglycemia in the first day of life. IV, Intravenous;
NICU, neonatal intensive care unit. *Units are mg/dL (mmol/L).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 148 u Epidemiology of Infections
effective adjunct to feeding and should be administered if available.
Infants with persistent (and unresponsive to oral therapy) hypoglycemia should be treated with IV glucose (bolus followed by continuous
infusion), especially if symptomatic. If question arises about an infant’s
ability to tolerate oral feeding, a continuous peripheral IV infusion at a
rate of 4-­8 mg/kg/min should be given. Neurologic symptoms of hypoglycemia must be treated with IV glucose. Bolus injections of hypertonic (25%) glucose should be avoided because they may cause further
hyperinsulinemia and potentially produce rebound hypoglycemia (see
Chapter 113). For treatment of hypocalcemia and hypermagnesemia,
see Chapters 121.4 and 121.5; for RDS treatment, see Chapter 126; and
for treatment of polycythemia, see Chapter 141.

PROGNOSIS

The subsequent incidence of diabetes mellitus in IDMs is higher than
that in the general population because of genetic susceptibility in all
types of diabetes. Infants of mothers with either pregestational diabetes or gestational diabetes are at risk for obesity and impaired glucose
metabolism in later life as a result of intrauterine exposure to hyperglycemia. Disagreement persists about whether IDMs have a slightly
increased risk of impaired intellectual development because of the
many confounding factors (e.g., parental education, maternal age,
neonatal complications). In general, the outcomes have improved over
the last several decades due to increased awareness, screening, and
improved prenatal care for pregnant women with diabetes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 148

Epidemiology of
Infections
Dustin D. Flannery
Neonatal infections are often classified by their timing relative to birth
and include congenital, perinatal, early-­onset, and late-­onset disease.
This categorization is clinically useful because infectious mechanisms,
etiologies, and outcomes are fairly distinct for each, although there
is some overlap between the different types. Congenital infection
denotes infection acquired in utero. Such infections are often associated
with injury to developing organs, depending on the timing of infection during gestation (see Chapter 149). Perinatal infection indicates
acquisition around the time of delivery. Perinatally acquired organisms
include both bacteria and viruses, some of which are the same as those
causing congenital infection, but often manifest with different features.
Early-­onset infection occurs in the first 3 days after birth and is generally the consequence of infection caused by organisms acquired during
the perinatal period. Late-­onset infection occurs after 3 days and is
caused by organisms that are typically acquired in the postnatal period.
Notably, some studies categorize early-­onset and late-­onset infections
as within the first 7 days of age and after 7 days, respectively, particularly for infants not continuously admitted to the hospital from birth,
who are exposed to pathogens in the community.
Neonates are prone to infection for multiple reasons, namely because
of their lack of fully responsive innate immunity (Fig. 148.1). Attenuated immune responses often result in minimal or nonspecific clinical manifestations, and effective treatment requires attention to subtle
signs of infection and known risk factors. Compared with older infants,
neonates are often treated empirically with systemic antimicrobials
while awaiting results of laboratory investigations. Preterm infants are

1143

particularly susceptible to infection because of their decreased innate
immune and barrier defenses, need for invasive medical devices such
as central venous catheters, and prolonged hospitalizations. The term
“neonatal sepsis” typically refers to culture-­confirmed infection of the
blood, cerebrospinal fluid, and/or urine, though definitions vary across
studies.

INCIDENCE

Despite advances in maternal and neonatal care, infections remain a
frequent and important cause of neonatal and infant morbidity and
mortality. Neonatal infections are more common in areas with limited
access to healthcare than in areas with a well-­established healthcare
infrastructure. Estimated incidence rates vary based on the case definition, geographical region, and the population studied. The overall
global incidence of neonatal sepsis and other severe infections remains
unknown given the lack of data from many countries, though the
disease is common and often fatal. The global incidence is estimated
at 2,824 cases per 100,000 live births; ∼18% are fatal. For congenital
infections, the incidence varies greatly depending on the specific infectious etiology and geographic region, though low-­and middle-­income
countries have the greatest burden of disease.
The overall incidence of early-­onset infection in the United States is
approximately 1 per 1,000 live births and is dramatically higher among
infants born preterm. The incidence varies significantly by gestational
age (GA) and is highest among infants with a GA of 22 to 28 weeks
(18.5 cases per 1,000 births). A 2021 report of over 84,000 very preterm infants at centers in the United States estimated the incidence of
early-­onset infection at 13.5 per 1,000 births; the incidence again varied substantially by GA (Table 148.1) and was highest for infants born
<24 weeks (45.4 per 1,000 births). Similar to early-­onset infection, late-­
onset infection incidence is inversely related to the degree of prematurity with significant variation across centers and geography. Among
hospitalized newborns, 0.6–14% develop late-­onset infection, with up
to 40% of very preterm infants suffering from at least one episode.

MICROBIOLOGY

Infection microbiology is critically important to inform preventative
strategies, as well as empiric and targeted antimicrobial therapies. A
number of bacterial and nonbacterial pathogens can infect fetuses and
newborns. Although there is overlap, pathogen types may be distinguished by timing of infection (Table 148.2).
The TORCH pneumonic, although not all-­encompassing, is used
to describe common causes of most often congenital or perinatal but
also postnatal infection (see Table 148.2): toxoplasmosis, Treponema
pallidum (syphilis), rubella, cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex
virus (HSV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), HIV,
and other pathogens including parvovirus B19, varicella, and tuberculosis (TB). For pathogens causing congenital (prenatal), perinatal, and
postnatal infection, modes of transfer include transplacental infection,
exposure during labor and delivery through an infected or colonized
birth canal, or from contact with an infected caretaker and/or infected
breast milk (see Chapter 149). Some viral infections (e.g., CMV) can
be substantial causes of disease whether acquired during gestation or
acquired postpartum, whereas others (e.g., respiratory syncytial virus)
are typically acquired only in the postnatal period (Fig. 148.2).
The two most common bacterial causes of early-­onset infection are
group B Streptococcus (GBS) and Escherichia coli; GBS is most common
among term infants, whereas E. coli is the predominant pathogen among
preterm infants. Approximately 30% of early-­onset infections are caused
by organisms other than GBS or E. coli (see Table 148.2). Coagulase-­
negative staphylococci (CONS) are the predominant cause of late-­onset
infection in hospitalized neonates, often accounting for 50–80%. Other
common causes (see Table 148.2) include Staphylococcus aureus, gram-­
negative bacilli (E. coli, Klebsiella spp., Enterobacter spp., Pseudomonas
spp.), and fungi (Candida spp.). In Asia and Africa additional pathogens
cause early-onset sepsis (Acinetobacter spp., Klebsiella pneumoniae);
these pathogens are often resistant to first-line antibiotics.
Microorganisms causing pneumonia acquired during labor and delivery include GBS, gram-­negative enteric aerobes, Listeria monocytogenes,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1144 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant

Developmental
challenge:

Fetal/Preterm

Newborn/Full Term

Tolerance to noninherited
maternal alloantigens

Shield vs. infection
Controlled inflammation

Infant

Adult

Commensal tolerance/
Pathogen protection

Vernix
caseosa

SKIN
Epidermis

MUCOUS
MEMBRANES

Paneth cells

Maternal
antibodies

Innate
lymphocytes
T 1 polarizing
cytokines

Adenosine

BLOOD
MDSCs
Treg cells
APPs
Complement
proteins

Endothelial cells

Antimicrobial proteins
and peptides (APPs)

Adenosine

Colonizing bacteria
Maternal secretory IgA

Effector cytokines

Complement proteins

Adult-like cells
(bone marrow derived):
Monocytes
Innate lymphocytes

Maternal IgG

T 1 polarizing cytokines

Endogenous IgG

CD71+ Nucleated RBC

Myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSCs)

TLRs

Fetal cells (liver derived)

Treg cells

Fig. 148.1 Ontogeny of skin, soluble, and cellular innate defense systems. Host-­protective barrier functions include physical, chemical, and func-

tional components of the skin and mucous membrane epithelia of the fetus, neonate (birth to 28 days of age), and infant (1 month to 1 year of age).
Skin: while physical and chemical barriers are impaired in early in life, especially in the preterm newborn, the vernix caseosa and skin epithelia of
full-­term newborns robustly express antimicrobial proteins and peptides (APPs). Mucous membranes: in parallel with and induced by an increasingly complex microbiota, the newborn intestinal mucosal epithelium rapidly changes structurally, with an increase in the population of crypts and
crypt-­based Paneth cells, as well as functionally with increasing APP expression. Blood: the composition of neonatal blood is distinct, with relatively
low concentrations of complement components and APPs and high concentrations of the immunosuppressive purine metabolite adenosine. Plasma
also contains maternal antibodies that are transferred beginning midgestation and supplemented by postnatal factors derived from breast milk.
Innate immunity is detectable from the end of the first month of gestation, with changes driven largely by the increasing exposure to environmental
microbes. Neonatal antigen-­presenting cells such as blood monocytes express pattern recognition receptors (e.g., toll-­like receptors [TLRs]) with distinct functional responses, including limited Th1-­polarizing cytokine production, to most stimuli. Adaptive immunity develops from 4 weeks of gestation onward, with changes driven by an evolving chimerism reflecting fetal (liver-­derived, shaded cells) regulatory T (Treg)-­cell–rich lymphocytes, and
more adultlike (bone marrow derived, unshaded cells) lymphocytes with distinct, epigenetically encoded functional programs. Ig, Immunoglobulin;
RBC, red blood cell. (Modified from Kollmann TR, Kampmann B, Mazmanian SK, et al. Protecting the newborn and young infant from infectious
diseases: lessons from immune ontogeny. Immunity. 2007;46:350–363.)

Table 148.1  Incidence of Early-­Onset Infection Among
Very Preterm Infants
CATEGORY
Overall
Gestational age,
completed weeks
≤23
24-­25
26-­27
28-­29

INCIDENCE RATE PER 1,000 BIRTHS
(99% CI)
13.5 (12.5-­14.6)

45.4 (38.3-­53.7)
26.0 (22.6-­29.9)
15.5 (13.2-­18.2)
10.1 (8.5-­11.9)

Adapted from Flannery DD, Edwards EM, Puopolo KM, et al. Early-­onset sepsis among
very preterm infants. Pediatrics. 2021;148(4):e2021052456.

Mycoplasma, Chlamydia trachomatis, CMV, HSV, and Candida spp.
(Table 148.3). The most common bacterial causes of neonatal meningitis are GBS, E. coli, L. monocytogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae,
other streptococci, Haemophilus influenzae, both coagulase-­
positive
and coagulase-­negative staphylococci, and other gram-­negative bacilli.
Treponema pallidum and TB infection involving the central nervous system (CNS) may also result in meningitis.

PATHOGENESIS
Early-­Onset Infections

In most cases, the fetus or neonate is not exposed to potentially
pathogenic bacteria until the membranes rupture and the infant
passes through the birth canal and/or enters the extrauterine environment. The human birth canal is colonized with aerobic and anaerobic organisms that may result in ascending amniotic infection and/or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 148 u Epidemiology of Infections
Table 148.2  Most Common Pathogens Causing Neonatal
Infections, Grouped by Timing of Infection
CONGENITAL/PERINATAL
• Toxoplasmosis
• Treponema pallidum (syphilis)
• Rubella
• Cytomegalovirus
• Herpes simplex virus
• Hepatitis B and C
• Human immunodeficiency
virus
• Varicella
• Parvovirus B19
• Tuberculosis
• Zika virus
EARLY-­ONSET
• Group B Streptococcus
• Escherichia coli
• Haemophilus species
• Staphylococcus aureus
• Klebsiella species
• Enterococcus species
• Herpes simplex virus
• Streptococcus anginosus
• Listeria monocytogenes

• Enterobacter species
• Citrobacter species
• Streptococcus pneumoniae
• Morganella morganii
• Pseudomonas species
• Serratia species
• Bacteroides species
LATE-­ONSET
• Coagulase-­negative
staphylococci
• Staphylococcus aureus
• Escherichia coli
• Candida species
• Enterococcus species
• Group B Streptococcus
• Klebsiella species
• Enterobacter species
• Pseudomonas species
• Respiratory syncytial virus
• Herpes simplex virus
• Enteroviruses
• Listeria monocytogenes

1145

Table 148.3  Etiologic Agents of Neonatal Pneumonia
According to Timing of Acquisition
TRANSPLACENTAL
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Herpes simplex virus (HSV)
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Rubella virus
Treponema pallidum
Varicella-­zoster virus (VZV)
Listeria monocytogenes
PERINATAL
Anaerobic bacteria
Chlamydia
CMV
Enteric bacteria
Group B Streptococci
Haemophilus influenzae
HSV
Listeria monocytogenes
Mycoplasma

POSTNATAL
Adenovirus
Candida spp.*
Coagulase-­negative
staphylococci
CMV
Enteric bacteria*
Enteroviruses
Influenza viruses A, B
Parainfluenza
Pseudomonas*
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
Staphylococcus aureus
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Legionella

*More likely with mechanical ventilation or indwelling catheters, or after abdominal
surgery.

Amniotic Infection
Aspiration
Prenatal

Perinatal/intrapartum

Ingestion

Postnatal

In utero
Cytomegalovirus
Zika virus
Parvovirus B19
Varicella–zoster
Rubella
LCMV
HSV
HIV
Parechovirus
EBV
HHV-6, HHV-7
Hepatitis B, C

HSV
HIV
Hepatitis B, C
Enterovirus
Varicella–zoster
Cytomegalovirus
Adenovirus
Parechovirus

Respiratory syncytial virus
Enterovirus
Rotavirus
Cytomegalovirus
Varicella–zoster virus
Hepatitis
Adenovirus
Influenza

Intrapartum
6 Bacteremia

Ingestion

6 Bacteremia

Vaginal secretions

Fig. 148.3 Pathways of ascending or intrapartum infection.

70
Histological chorioamnionitis %

colonization of the neonate at birth. Vertical transmission of agents
that infect the amniotic fluid and vaginal canal, and contamination
from the gastrointestinal tract, may occur in utero or, more often, during labor and delivery (Fig. 148.3).
Chorioamnionitis results from microbial invasion of amniotic fluid,
often as a result of prolonged rupture of the chorioamniotic membrane.
Amniotic infection may also occur with apparently intact membranes
or with a relatively brief duration of membrane rupture. The term
chorioamnionitis refers to the clinical syndrome of intrauterine infection, which includes maternal fever, with or without local or systemic
signs of chorioamnionitis (uterine tenderness, foul-­smelling vaginal
discharge/amniotic fluid, maternal leukocytosis, maternal and/or fetal
tachycardia). Chorioamnionitis may also be asymptomatic, diagnosed
only by amniotic fluid analysis or pathologic examination of the placenta. The rate of histologic chorioamnionitis is inversely related to
GA at birth (Fig. 148.4) and directly related to duration of membrane

6 Invasion

Aspiration

Fig. 148.2 Relative importance of neonatal viral infections related to

the timing of acquisition of infection. Viruses are listed in declining order
of importance relative to prenatal, perinatal (intrapartum), and postnatal
timing of typical infection. Some neonatal virus infections (e.g., cytomegalovirus) can be substantial causes of disease whether acquired during
gestation or acquired postpartum, whereas others (e.g., respiratory syncytial virus) are typically acquired in the postnatal period. EBV, Epstein-­Barr
virus; HHV, human herpesvirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; LCMV, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. (From Schleiss MR, Marsh KJ. Viral infections
of the fetus and newborn. In: Gleason CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s Diseases
of the Newborn. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 37.1.)

Gastrointestinal
colonization

Pneumonia

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

20–24 25

26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33
Gestational Age (completed weeks)

34

Fig. 148.4 Histologic chorioamnionitis in liveborn preterm babies by
gestational age (n = 3,928 babies). (From Lahra MM, Jeffery HE. A fetal
response to chorioamnionitis is associated with early survival after preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2004;190:147–151.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1146 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
rupture. Chorioamnionitis increases the risk of neonatal sepsis; however, most infants exposed to chorioamnionitis do not develop sepsis.
Chorioamnionitis was thought to result from infection of the amniotic fluid but is now better defined by the term intrauterine inflammation or infection at birth (Triple I). This is defined by fetal tachycardia,
maternal leukocytosis (>15,000 cells in the absence of corticosteroids),
purulent fluid from the cervical os, biochemical or microbiologic
amniotic fluid changes consistent with infection, and fever (≥39.0°C)
(see Chapter 149.2).
Bacterial colonization does not always result in fetal or neonatal disease. Factors influencing which colonized infant will experience disease
are not well understood but include prematurity, underlying illness,
invasive procedures, inoculum size, virulence of the infecting organism, genetic predisposition, the innate immune system, host response,
and transplacental maternal antibodies (Fig. 148.5). Aspiration or
ingestion of bacteria in amniotic fluid may lead to congenital pneumonia or systemic infection, with manifestations becoming apparent
before delivery (fetal distress, tachycardia), at delivery (apnea, respiratory distress, shock), or after a latent period of a few hours (respiratory
distress, shock). Aspiration or ingestion of bacteria during the birth
process may lead to infection after an interval of 1-­2 days.
Resuscitation at birth, particularly if it involves endotracheal intubation, insertion of an umbilical vessel catheter, or both, is associated
with an increased risk of bacterial infection. Explanations include the
presence of infection at the time of birth or acquisition of infection
during the invasive procedures associated with resuscitation.

Late-­Onset Infections

After birth, neonates are exposed to infectious agents in the hospital or
in the community (including family and caretakers). Postnatal infections may be transmitted by direct contact with hospital personnel,
the mother, or other caretakers; from breast milk (e.g., HIV, CMV); or
from inanimate sources such as contaminated equipment or surfaces.
The most common source of postnatal infections in hospitalized newborns is hand contamination of healthcare personnel, underscoring the
importance of hand hygiene. Contaminated milk, especially powdered
formula (Cronobacter sakazakii, Salmonella), equipment, other objects,
or the environment are rare sources of neonatal infections but should
be suspected during outbreaks of single organism disease.
Most cases of meningitis result from hematogenous dissemination.
Less often, meningitis results from contiguous spread as a result of
contamination of open neural tube defects, congenital sinus tracts, or

EXPOSURE TO
ORGANISM

Gestation 37 wk
ROM 12 hr
No underlying illness
Effective local immunity/
mucosal and skin barriers
Transplacental antibody to
infecting strain
Less virulent organism
Low inoculum

HEALTH

penetrating wounds from fetal scalp sampling or internal fetal electrocardiographic monitors. Cerebral abscess formation, ventriculitis, septic infarcts, hydrocephalus, and subdural effusions are complications
of meningitis that occur more often in newborn infants than in older
children. Metabolic factors, including hypoxia, acidosis, hypothermia,
and inherited metabolic disorders (e.g., galactosemia), are likely to
contribute to risk for and severity of neonatal infection.

Infection in Premature Infants

The most important neonatal factors predisposing to infection are prematurity and low birthweight. Premature infants have a 3-­to 10-­fold
higher incidence of infection than full-­term normal birthweight infants.
Possible explanations include the following: (1) maternal genital tract
infection is considered to be an important cause of preterm labor, with
an increased risk of vertical transmission to the newborn; (2) the frequency of intraamniotic infection is inversely related to GA (see Figs.
148.1 and 148.5); (3) premature infants have documented immune dysfunction; and (4) premature infants often require prolonged intravenous access, endotracheal intubation, or other invasive procedures that
provide a portal of entry or impair barrier and clearance mechanisms,
putting them at continued risk for hospital-­acquired infections.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The maternal history and circumstances of delivery provide important
information about maternal exposures to infectious diseases, bacterial
colonization, immunity (natural and acquired), and obstetric risk factors (prematurity, prolonged ruptured membranes, maternal chorioamnionitis). Signs and symptoms in the neonate are often subtle and
nonspecific. Temperature instability, tachypnea, lethargy, apnea, and
poor feeding are common initial signs and should raise suspicion for
systemic or focal infection (Table 148.4).

Bacterial Sepsis

Neonates with bacterial sepsis may have either nonspecific manifestations or focal signs of infection (see Table 148.4), including
temperature instability, hypotension, poor perfusion with pallor
and mottled skin, metabolic acidosis, tachycardia or bradycardia,
apnea, respiratory distress, grunting, cyanosis, irritability, lethargy,
seizures, feeding intolerance, abdominal distention, jaundice, petechiae, purpura, and bleeding. Table 148.5 lists World Health Organization international criteria for sepsis. The initial manifestation
may involve only limited symptomatology and only one system,
such as apnea alone or tachypnea with retractions, or tachycardia,
or the infant may present with an acute catastrophic manifestation

Table 148.4  Initial Signs and Symptoms of Infection in
Newborn Infants

Gestation 37 wk
ROM 18 hr
Underlying illness
Decreased local and/or
systemic immune function
Inadequate transplacental
antibody to infecting strain
Ventilation, catheters
Virulent organism
High inoculum

DISEASE

Fig. 148.5 Factors influencing the balance between health and disease in neonates exposed to a potential pathogen. ROM, Rupture of
membranes. (Adapted from Baker CJ. Group B streptococcal infections. Clin Perinatol 1997;24:59–70.)

GENERAL
Fever, temperature instability
Hypothermia
“Not doing well”
Poor feeding
Edema

CARDIOVASCULAR
Pallor; mottling; cold, clammy
skin
Tachycardia
Hypotension
Bradycardia

GASTROINTESTINAL
Abdominal distention
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Hepatomegaly

CENTRAL NERVOUS
Irritability, lethargy
Tremors, seizures
Hyporeflexia, hypotonia
Abnormal Moro reflex
Irregular respirations
Full fontanel
High-­pitched cry

RESPIRATORY
Apnea, dyspnea
Tachypnea, retractions
Flaring, grunting
Cyanosis
RENAL SYSTEM
Oliguria

HEMATOLOGIC
Jaundice
Splenomegaly
Pallor
Petechiae, purpura
Bleeding

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 148 u Epidemiology of Infections
Table 148.5  Clinical Criteria for the Diagnosis of Sepsis
in the International Setting: IMCI and WHO
Criteria for Severe Infections in Children
• Neurologic: Convulsions, drowsy or unconscious, decreased activity,
bulging fontanel
• Respiratory: Respiratory rate >60 breaths/min, grunting, severe
chest indrawing, central cyanosis
• Cardiac: Poor perfusion, rapid and weak pulse
• Gastrointestinal: Jaundice, poor feeding, abdominal distention
• Dermatologic: Skin pustules, periumbilical erythema or purulence
• Musculoskeletal: Edema or erythema overlying bones or joints
• Other: Temperature >37.7°C (99.9°F; or feels hot) or <35.5°C
(95.9°F; or feels cold)
IMCI, Integrated Management of Childhood Illness; WHO, World Health Organization.
Adapted from WHO. Pocket Book Of Hospital Care for Children: Guidelines for the
Management of Common Childhood Illnesses. 2nd ed. Geneva: WHO. 2013. p 45–69.
http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/child_hospital_care/en/.

with multiorgan dysfunction and shock. Infants should be reevaluated over time to determine whether the symptoms have progressed
from mild to severe. Later complications of sepsis include respiratory failure, pulmonary hypertension, cardiac failure, shock, renal
failure, liver dysfunction, cerebral edema or thrombosis, adrenal
hemorrhage and/or insufficiency, bone marrow dysfunction (neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia), and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC).
A variety of noninfectious conditions can occur together with
neonatal infection or can make the diagnosis of infection more difficult. Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) secondary to surfactant
deficiency can mimic and/or coexist with bacterial pneumonia in
premature infants. Because bacterial sepsis can be rapidly progressive, the physician must be alert to the signs and symptoms of possible infection and must initiate diagnostic evaluation and empirical
therapy in a timely manner for infants at risk. The differential diagnosis of many of the signs and symptoms that suggest infection is
extensive; noninfectious disorders must also be considered (Table
148.6).

1147

Table 148.6  Serious Systemic Illness in Newborns:
Differential Diagnosis of Neonatal Sepsis
CARDIAC
Congenital: hypoplastic left heart syndrome, other structural disease,
persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN)
Acquired: myocarditis, hypovolemic or cardiogenic shock, PPHN
GASTROINTESTINAL
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Spontaneous gastrointestinal perforation
Midgut volvulus
Hepatic failure (inborn errors of metabolism, neonatal iron storage
disease)
HEMATOLOGIC
Neonatal purpura fulminans
Immune-­mediated thrombocytopenia
Immune-­mediated neutropenia
Severe anemia
Malignancies (congenital leukemia)
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Hereditary clotting disorders
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
METABOLIC
Hypoglycemia
Adrenal disorders: adrenal hemorrhage, adrenal insufficiency,
congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Inborn errors of metabolism: organic acidurias, lactic acidoses, urea
cycle disorders, galactosemia
NEUROLOGIC
Intracranial hemorrhage: spontaneous, caused by child abuse
Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy
Neonatal seizures
Infant botulism
RESPIRATORY
Respiratory distress syndrome
Aspiration pneumonia: amniotic fluid, meconium, or gastric contents
Lung hypoplasia
Tracheoesophageal fistula
Transient tachypnea of the newborn

Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome

The clinical manifestations of infection depend on the virulence
of the infecting organism and the body’s inflammatory response.
The term systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) is most
frequently used to describe this unique process of infection and
the subsequent systemic response (see Chapter 85). In addition to
infection, SIRS may result from trauma, hemorrhagic shock, other
causes of ischemia and inflammation, necrotizing enterocolitis, and
pancreatitis.
Patients with SIRS have a spectrum of clinical symptoms that represent progressive stages of the pathologic process. In adults, SIRS is
defined by the presence of two or more of the following: (1) fever or
hypothermia, (2) tachycardia, (3) tachypnea, and (4) abnormal white
blood cell (WBC) count or an increase in immature forms. In neonates and pediatric patients, SIRS manifests as temperature instability, respiratory dysfunction (altered gas exchange, hypoxemia, acute
RDS), cardiac dysfunction (tachycardia, delayed capillary refill, hypotension), and perfusion abnormalities (oliguria, metabolic acidosis)
(Table 148.7). Increased vascular permeability results in capillary leak
into peripheral tissues and the lungs, with resultant peripheral and pulmonary edema. DIC results in the more severely affected cases. The
cascade of escalating tissue injury may lead to multisystem organ failure and death.
There are neonates who appear to have sepsis or SIRS but no bacterial or viral pathogen has been recovered. Culture negative sepsis may
be due to a hard-­to-­culture bacteria (anaerobes) or virus, as well as
noninfectious inflammatory conditions. In addition, an undetected
localized source with transient bacteremia (osteomyelitis), prior antibiotic treatment, and poor culture technique (too small blood sample
for culture may miss bacteremia) may be responsible.

Table 148.7  Definitions of Systemic Inflammatory
Respiratory Response Syndrome (SIRS) and
Sepsis in Pediatric Patients
SIRS: The systemic inflammatory response to a variety of clinical
insults, manifested by two or more of the following conditions:
Temperature instability <35°C (95°F) or >38.5°C (101.3°F)
Respiratory dysfunction:
Tachypnea >2 SD above the mean for age
Hypoxemia (Pao2 <70 mm Hg on room air)
Cardiac dysfunction:
Tachycardia >2 SD above the mean for age
Delayed capillary refill >3 sec
Hypotension >2 SD below the mean for age
Perfusion abnormalities:
Oliguria (urine output <0.5 mL/kg/hr)
Lactic acidosis (elevated plasma lactate and/or arterial pH <7.25)
Altered mental status
Sepsis: The systemic inflammatory response to an infectious
process
SD, Standard deviation.
From Adams-­Chapman I, Stoll BJ. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Semin
Pediatr Infect Dis. 2001;12:5–16.

Temperature Instability

Fever or hypothermia may be the only initial manifestation of serious
infection in newborns. However, only approximately 50% of infected
newborn infants have a temperature >37.8°C (see Chapter 220). Fever
in newborn infants does not always signify infection; it may be caused

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1148 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
by increased ambient temperature, isolette or radiant warmer malfunction, dehydration, CNS disorders, hyperthyroidism, familial dysautonomia, or ectodermal dysplasia. A single temperature elevation is
infrequently associated with infection; sustained fever is more likely
to be caused by infection. Most febrile infected infants have additional
signs compatible with infection, although a focus of infection is not
always apparent. Acute febrile illnesses occurring later in the neonatal
period may be caused by urinary tract infection, meningitis, pneumonia, osteomyelitis, or gastroenteritis and viral infections (enteroviruses,
others) in addition to sepsis, thus underscoring the importance of a
diagnostic evaluation that includes blood culture, urine culture, lumbar puncture (LP), and other studies as indicated. Numerous pathogens may cause these late infections (see Table 148.2), including HSV,
enteroviruses, respiratory syncytial virus, and bacterial organisms. In
premature infants, hypothermia or temperature instability requiring
increasing ambient (isolette, warmer) temperatures is more likely to
accompany infection.

HSV infection is important to prevent corneal injury and dissemination to systemic sites.

Respiratory and Cardiovascular Symptoms

Omphalitis is a neonatal infection resulting from unhygienic care of
the umbilical cord, which continues to be a problem, particularly in
developing countries. The umbilical stump is colonized by bacteria
from the maternal genital tract and the environment (see Chapter 144).
The necrotic tissue of the umbilical cord is an excellent medium for
bacterial growth. Omphalitis may remain a localized infection or may
spread to the abdominal wall, the peritoneum, the umbilical or portal
vessels, and the liver. Abdominal wall cellulitis or necrotizing fasciitis, with associated sepsis and a high mortality rate, may develop in
infants with omphalitis. Prompt diagnosis and treatment are necessary
to avoid serious complications. S. aureus and gram-­negative organisms
are common involved pathogens.

Early signs and symptoms of pneumonia may be nonspecific, including poor feeding, lethargy, irritability, cyanosis, temperature instability, and the overall impression that the infant is not well. Respiratory
symptoms of increasing severity include grunting, tachypnea, retractions, nasal flaring, cyanosis, apnea, and progressive respiratory failure.
If the infant is premature, signs of progressive respiratory distress may
be superimposed on RDS or bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). For
mechanically ventilated infants, the need to increase ventilator support
may indicate infection. Although a common finding in neonatal sepsis,
tachycardia is nonspecific. Bradycardia may also occur. Poor perfusion and hypotension are more sensitive indicators of sepsis but tend
to be late findings. In a prospective national surveillance study, 40%
of neonates with sepsis required volume expansion, and 29% required
vasopressor support.
Signs of pneumonia on physical examination, such as dullness
to percussion, change in breath sounds, and the presence of rales or
rhonchi, are very difficult to appreciate in a neonate. Radiographs of
the chest may reveal new infiltrates or an effusion, but if the neonate
has underlying RDS or BPD, it is very difficult to determine whether
the radiographic changes represent a new process or worsening of the
underlying disease.
The progression of neonatal pneumonia can be variable. Fulminant
infection is most frequently associated with pyogenic organisms such
as GBS (see Chapter 230). Onset may occur during the first hours or
days of life, with the infant often manifesting rapidly progressive circulatory collapse and respiratory failure. With early-­onset pneumonia
in premature infants, the clinical course and chest radiographs may be
indistinguishable from those with severe RDS, particularly for GBS
pneumonia.
In contrast to the rapid progression of pneumonia caused by pyogenic organisms, an indolent course may be seen in nonbacterial
infection. The onset can be preceded by upper respiratory tract symptoms or conjunctivitis. The infant may demonstrate a nonproductive
cough, and the degree of respiratory compromise is variable. Fever is
usually absent or low grade, and radiographic examination of the chest
shows focal or diffuse interstitial pneumonitis or hyperinflation. Infection can be caused by C. trachomatis, CMV, Ureaplasma urealyticum,
and other respiratory viruses. Rhinovirus has been reported to cause
severe respiratory compromise in infants, particularly those who are
preterm.

Conjunctivitis

Conjunctival infection is relatively common and may be caused by a
variety of organisms. The presentation includes periorbital swelling,
conjunctival injection, and purulent conjunctival drainage. C. trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae are common causes; other gram-­
positive and gram-­
negative organisms are occasionally involved.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an important pathogen in hospitalized
preterm infants and may be a precursor to invasive disease. Viral infections (e.g., HSV, adenovirus) are occasionally seen. Recognition of

Skin and Soft Tissue Infection

Cutaneous manifestations of infection include omphalitis, cellulitis,
mastitis, and subcutaneous abscesses. Pustules likely indicate the
presence of staphylococcal infection but must be distinguished from
the vesicular rash of HSV infection. Staphylococcal pustulosis results
in larger, pus-­filled lesions often scattered around the umbilicus,
whereas HSV infection often appears as tiny vesicles in crops, often
on the scalp. The presence of small, salmon-­pink papules suggests L.
monocytogenes infection. Mucocutaneous lesions suggest Candida
spp. (see Chapter 280.1). Petechiae and purpura may be the result of
systemic viral or bacterial infection. Neonatal mastitis is caused by S.
aureus and in an otherwise well appearing afebrile neonate is a localized infection.

Omphalitis

Tetanus

Neonatal tetanus remains a serious infection in resource-­limited countries (see Chapter 257). It results from unclean delivery and unhygienic
management of the umbilical cord in an infant born to a mother who
has not been immunized against tetanus. The surveillance case definition of neonatal tetanus requires the ability of a newborn to suck at
birth and for the first few days of life, followed by an inability to suck.
Neonatal tetanus typically occurs in infants 5-­7 days after birth (range:
3-­24 days) and is complicated by difficulty swallowing, spasms, stiffness, seizures, and death. Bronchopneumonia, presumably resulting
from aspiration, is another complication and cause of death. Neonatal tetanus can be prevented by immunizing mothers before or during pregnancy and by ensuring a clean delivery, sterile cutting of the
umbilical cord, and proper cord care after birth.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Maternal history and infant signs should guide diagnostic evaluation
(Table 148.8). Additionally, signs of systemic infection in newborn
infants may be unrevealing, so laboratory investigation plays a particularly important role in diagnosis. Cultures and cell counts are obtained
from blood and urine. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) should be sent for Gram
stain, routine culture, cell count with differential, and protein/glucose
concentrations. Surface swabs, blood, and CSF are often obtained for
HSV testing. Except for culture and directed pathogen testing, no single
laboratory test is completely reliable for diagnosis of invasive infection in
the newborn. CBC may demonstrate elevated or decreased WBC count,
often with a shift toward more immature forms. Thrombocytopenia can
be seen in systemic bacterial, fungal, or viral infection. Hyponatremia,
acidosis, and other electrolyte abnormalities can be seen. Hyperbilirubinemia is nonspecific but may be an indication of systemic infection,
particularly of the urine tract. Elevated serum transaminases may be a
clue to systemic HSV, enterovirus, or other viral infection.
Various serum biomarkers have been investigated for their ability
to identify infants with serious bacterial infection (SBI). An immature-­
to-­total phagocyte count (I/T ratio) (≥0.2) has the best sensitivity of
the neutrophil indices for predicting neonatal sepsis. After the newborn period, serum C-­reactive protein (CRP), procalcitonin, and ferritin have demonstrated reasonable sensitivity and specificity for SBI.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 148 u Epidemiology of Infections
Table 148.8  Evaluation of a Newborn for Infection or
Sepsis
HISTORY (SPECIFIC RISK FACTORS)
Maternal infection during gestation or at parturition (type and duration
of antimicrobial therapy):
Urinary tract infection
Chorioamnionitis
Maternal colonization with group B Streptococci, Neisseria
gonorrhoeae, herpes simplex
Low gestational age/birthweight
Multiple birth
Duration of membrane rupture
Complicated delivery
Fetal tachycardia (distress)
Age at onset (in utero, birth, early postnatal, late)
Location at onset (hospital, community)
Medical intervention:
Vascular access
Endotracheal intubation
Parenteral nutrition
Surgery
EVIDENCE OF OTHER DISEASES*
Congenital malformations (heart disease, neural tube defect)
Respiratory tract disease (respiratory distress syndrome, aspiration)
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Metabolic disease (e.g., galactosemia)
EVIDENCE OF FOCAL OR SYSTEMIC DISEASE
General appearance, neurologic status
Abnormal vital signs
Organ system disease
Feeding, stools, urine output, extremity movement
LABORATORY STUDIES
Evidence of Infection
Culture from a normally sterile site (blood, CSF, other)
Demonstration of a microorganism in tissue or fluid
Molecular detection (blood, urine, CSF) by specific PCR and/or 16S
ribosomal DNA
Maternal or neonatal serology (syphilis, toxoplasmosis)
Evidence of Inflammation
Leukocytosis, increased immature/total neutrophil count ratio
Acute-­phase reactants: C-­reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation
rate, procalcitonin, ferritin
Cytokines: interleukin-­6, interleukin-­B, tumor necrosis factor
Pleocytosis in CSF or synovial or pleural fluid
Disseminated intravascular coagulation: fibrin degradation products,
D-­dimer
Evidence of Multiorgan System Disease
Metabolic acidosis: pH, Pco2
Pulmonary function: Po2, Pco2
Renal function: blood urea nitrogen, creatinine
Hepatic injury/function: bilirubin, alanine transaminase, aspartate
transaminase, ammonia, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin
time
Bone marrow function: neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia
*Diseases that increase the risk of infection or may overlap with signs of sepsis.
CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.

CRP may be monitored serially in newborn infants to assess response
to therapy. Their value in the initial diagnosis of sepsis in the newborn
period has yet to be clarified. The American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP) Committee on the Fetus and Newborn reiterated in a 2018
early-­onset sepsis guideline update that lab tests alone should not be
used to diagnose sepsis. Cytokines (both proinflammatory cytokines
such as interleukin [IL]-­6 and tumor necrosis factor-­α and antiinflammatory cytokines such as IL-­4 and IL-­10), chemokines, and other biomarkers are increased in infected infants.
Tables 148.8 and 148.9 list clinical features and laboratory parameters that are useful in the diagnosis of neonatal infection or sepsis.

1149

GENERAL APPROACH TO MANAGEMENT

In the absence of specific signs of focal infection, therapy for presumed
infection in the neonate is often empirical and initiated on the basis of
fever or hypothermia, listlessness, irritability, or apneic episodes. Antibiotics are chosen to cover the organisms typically causing neonatal
sepsis, including GBS, gram-­negative organisms, Listeria, and Enterococcus. Because the latter two organisms are intrinsically resistant to
cephalosporins, ampicillin is generally included in the empirical treatment of infants with presumed neonatal infection (Table 148.10). Initiation of antibiotics within 1 hour of onset is recommended and has a
survival advantage.
An empirical regimen for suspected early-­onset infection in a
term or late preterm infant includes ampicillin and gentamicin. This
has long been a standard regimen for early-­onset sepsis and provides
coverage for the most prevalent organisms, predominantly GBS and
E. coli. Resistance of E. coli to ampicillin or gentamicin has been
reported; approximately 1 in 10 isolates are resistant to both ampicillin and gentamicin. Ampicillin plus cefotaxime (if available) or
cefepime may be substituted if the patient presents with infection after
discharge from the nursery, or when infection with resistant E. coli
is suspected. Ceftriaxone is typically not used in the neonatal period
due to precipitation with intravenous calcium and displacement of
bound bilirubin causing hyperbilirubinemia. There is concern that
cephalosporins may be associated with higher rates of mortality in
neonates compared to ampicillin and gentamicin. Alterations to the
standard regimen may be appropriate in some circumstances, such
as for critically ill newborns, with illness out of proportion to degree
of prematurity, at highest risk of infection given maternal risk factors
and delivery characteristics.
HSV infection may present without cutaneous signs, in the absence
of maternal history of infection, and in mothers receiving suppressive
antiviral therapy. Therefore management of the ill newborn requires a
high index of suspicion for HSV infection. Surface swabs, blood, and
CSF are obtained for HSV culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
and empirical acyclovir is often recommended while the results of
these studies are pending (see Chapters 220 and 299).
Systemic infection caused by Candida spp. is a concern in hospitalized infants, particularly extremely preterm infants with central venous
access catheters and prior antibiotic and steroid exposure. Empirical
therapy for fungal infection may be indicated for those at highest risk,
as well as those with specific clinical signs such as erythematous rash,
thrombocytopenia, hyperglycemia, and invasive devices.
Definitive therapy is based on identification and susceptibility of the
offending organism. In almost all circumstances, the narrowest antibiotic with activity against the organism is chosen. Duration of therapy
depends on the organism and the site of infection. In neonates with
culture-­proven sepsis, the usual course of therapy is typically 7-­10 days.
Longer treatment courses may be warranted if a specific focus of infection is identified (e.g., meningitis, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis). Antimicrobial therapy should be altered based on the susceptibility profile
of the pathogen isolated. In infants with a negative blood culture but
a clinical status that remains concerning for a systemic inflammation,
other etiologies and potential focal sources of infection should be
investigated. Sepsis is unlikely in these infants if appropriately obtained
blood cultures are sterile by 48 hours.

PREVENTION

Intrapartum antibiotics are used to reduce vertical transmission of
GBS (Table 148.11), as well as to lessen neonatal morbidity associated
with preterm labor and preterm premature rupture of membranes
(see Chapter 230). With introduction of selective intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent perinatal transmission of GBS, rates of
early-­onset neonatal GBS infection in the United States declined from
1.7/1,000 live births to 0.25/1,000. Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis does
not reduce the rates of late-­onset GBS disease and has no effect on the
rates of infection with non-­GBS pathogens. Of concern is a possible
increase in gram-­negative infections (especially E. coli) despite a reduction in early GBS sepsis by intrapartum antibiotics.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1150 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 148.9  Culture-­Based and Non–Culture-­Based Diagnostics for Neonatal Sepsis
CATEGORY

PARAMETER

OPTIMAL TIMING, VOLUME OF SPECIMEN,
ROUTINE/INVESTIGATIONAL*

CULTURE BASED
Blood
CSF
Urine

Culture
Culture
Culture

>1 mL of whole blood, from two sites
When clinically feasible
>72 hr of life

Tracheal aspirate

Culture

Neonates with endotracheal tube in place and
signs of progressive respiratory distress

NON–CULTURE BASED
Neutrophil indices
Neutropenia
Absolute neutrophil
count
Absolute immature
neutrophil count
Neutrophil markers
CD64

Platelet count

Thrombocytopenia and
thrombocytosis
CSF WBC

Gold standard for bacteremia
Gold standard for bacterial meningitis
Not useful for EOS; indicated for LOS
evaluation
Usually reflects colonization

After 12 hr of life
Consider GA, delivery mode, altitude, arterial
versus venous sampling, time since birth

Neutropenia better predictor for sepsis
than leukocytosis

Elevated for 24 hr after infection
Requires 50 μL blood
Results within hours
Investigational
Late findings; slow to respond

Cut points between 2.38 and 3.62
optimal sensitivity, specificity, and
NPV for EOS

CSF chemistries

CSF protein
CSF glucose

Uninfected neonates: mean 10 cells/mm3; range
up to 20 cells/mm3
Term <100 mg/dL
Preterm higher; 70–80% of serum glucose

Acute phase reactants

CRP
Procalcitonin

8-­24 hr after infection
2-­12 hr after infection

CSF cell count

APPLICABILITY FOR NEONATAL
SEPSIS

Thrombocytopenia associated with
fungal infection
Does not predict culture-­proven
meningitis
Elevated in fungal meningitis
Low glucose specific for bacterial
meningitis
Good NPV
Better sensitivity but less specificity
than CRP

*Investigational refers to an assay or parameter that is undergoing evaluation for clinical use and applicability.
CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; EOS, early-­onset sepsis; GA, gestational age; LOS, late-­onset sepsis; MHC II, major histocompatibility complex class II; NPV, negative predictive value; TNF,
tumor necrosis factor; WBC, white blood cell count.
From Shane AL, Stoll BJ. Recent developments and current issues in the epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of bacterial and fungal neonatal sepsis. Am J Perinatol.
2013;30(2):131–141.

Aggressive management of suspected maternal chorioamnionitis
with antibiotic therapy during labor, along with rapid delivery of the
infant, reduces the risk of early-­onset neonatal sepsis. Vertical transmission of GBS and early-­onset GBS disease is significantly reduced
by selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis (see Fig. 230.4) but does
still occur. Neonatal infection with Chlamydia can be prevented by
identification and treatment of infected pregnant women (see Chapter
272). Mother-­to-­child transmission of HIV is significantly reduced by
maternal antiretroviral therapy during pregnancy, labor, and delivery,
by cesarean delivery before rupture of membranes, and by antiretroviral treatment of the infant after birth (see Chapter 322).
Prevention of congenital and perinatal infections predominantly
focuses on maternal health. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends the following screening tests and treatment when indicated:
1.	All pregnant women should be offered voluntary and confidential HIV testing at the first prenatal visit, as early in pregnancy
as possible. HIV screening should be part of routine prenatal
testing, unless the mother declines testing (opt-­out screening).
For women at high risk of infection during pregnancy (multiple
sexual partners or STIs during pregnancy, intravenous drug use,
HIV-­infected partners), repeat testing in the third trimester is
recommended. Rapid HIV screening is indicated for any women
who presents in labor with an undocumented HIV status, unless
she declines testing.
2.	A serologic test for syphilis should be performed on all pregnant
women at the first prenatal visit. Repeat screenings early in the
third trimester and again at delivery are recommended for women in whom syphilis test results in the first trimester were positive
and for those at high risk for infection during pregnancy. Infants
should not be discharged from the hospital unless the syphilis

status of the mother has been determined at least once during
pregnancy and preferably again at delivery.
3.	Serologic testing for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) should
be performed at the first prenatal visit, even if the woman has been
previously vaccinated or tested. Women who were not screened
prenatally, those who are at high risk for infection (multiple sexual partners, intravenous drug use, HBsAg-­positive sex partner),
and those with clinical hepatitis should be retested at the time of
delivery.
4.	A maternal genital culture for C. trachomatis should be performed
at the first prenatal visit. Young women (<25 years) and those at
increased risk for infection (new or multiple partners during pregnancy) should be retested during the third trimester.
5.	A maternal culture for N. gonorrhoeae should be performed at the
first prenatal visit. Those at high risk for infection should be retested
in the third trimester.
6.	All pregnant women at high risk for hepatitis C infection (intravenous drug use, blood transfusion or organ transplantation before
1992) should be screened for hepatitis C antibodies at the first prenatal visit.
7.	Evidence does not support routine testing for bacterial vaginosis in
pregnancy. For asymptomatic women at high risk for preterm delivery, testing may be considered. Symptomatic women should be
tested and treated.
8.	The CDC recommends universal screening for vaginorectal GBS
colonization of all pregnant women at 36 0/7 and 37 6/7 weeks of
gestation and a screening-­based approach to selective intrapartum
antibiotic prophylaxis against GBS (see Table 148.11) (see Figs. 230.2
and 230.3).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 148 u Epidemiology of Infections

1151

Table 148.10  Management and Prevention of Neonatal Sepsis
CONDITION
EMPIRICAL MANAGEMENT
Early-­onset sepsis

Late-­onset sepsis

THERAPY

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

Ampicillin + aminoglycoside
10 days for bacteremia; 14 days for GBS and
uncomplicated meningitis; extend to 21-­28 days
for complicated infections

• Consider a third-­generation cephalosporin or carbapenem
for meningitis or severe illness with high suspicion for
gram-­negative infection
• Tailor therapy to pathogen
• Should discontinue empiric therapy if pathogen not
isolated
• G ram-­p ositive coverage should be based on local
epidemiology, MRSA colonization, CONS risk factors,
and clinical presentation
• Aminoglycoside-­based regimen preferred to cephalosporin
given reduced risk of resistance
• Consider cephalosporin if meningitis suspected
• Consider a carbapenem if third-­generation cephalosporin
recently received
• Consider amphotericin for fungal etiologies
• Tailor therapy to pathogen
• Consider discontinuation of therapy if pathogen not
isolated

Vancomycin or antistaphylococcal penicillin
(i.e., nafcillin, oxacillin) + aminoglycoside
Duration dependent on pathogen and site

NONANTIMICROBIAL TREATMENT STRATEGIES
Recombinant G-­CSF
Enhance neutrophil number and function, but
Recombinant GM-­CSF
no reduction in infection when administered as
prophylaxis or improvement in survival when
administered as therapy
IVIG
Augments antibody-­dependent cytotoxicity and
improves neutrophilic function, but no evidence
that IVIG in suspected or proven sepsis reduces
death
PREVENTION STRATEGIES
IAP
Fluconazole prophylaxis
BLF supplementation with
a probiotic, Lactobacillus
rhamnosus (GG)

Insufficient evidence to support the clinical use of G-­CSF
or GM-­CSF either as treatment or prophylaxis to prevent
systemic infections
Insufficient evidence from 10 RCTs or quasi-­RCTs to support
use in neonates with confirmed or suspected sepsis

Administration of penicillin or ampicillin 4 hr before
parturition
Administration of weight-­b ased dosing to
neonates <1,500 g
BLF is a human milk glycoprotein with a role in
innate immune response
LGG enhances the activity of lactoferrin

Successfully reduces rates of EOS caused by GBS
No effect on LOS GBS
Most beneficial in NICUs with high baseline rates of invasive
candidiasis
BLF supplementation with and without LGG reduced the
incidence of 1st LOS in 472 VLBW neonates in large
randomized, double-­blind RCT
Additional confirmatory studies warranted

BLF, Bovine lactoferrin supplementation; CONS, coagulase-­negative staphylococci; EOS, early-­onset sepsis; GBS, group B Streptococcus; G-­CSF, granulocyte colony-­stimulating
factor; GM-­CSF, granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor; IAP, intrapartum antimicrobial prophylaxis; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin, LGG, Lactobacillus rhamnosus
GG; LOS, late-­onset sepsis; MRSA, methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus; NICU, neonatal intensive care unit; RCTs, randomized controlled trials; VLBW, very low birthweight.
Data from Carr R, Modi N, Doré C. G-­CSF and GM-­CSF for treating or preventing neonatal infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(3):CD003066. Brocklehurst P, Farrell B, King
A, et al. INIS Collaborative Group: Treatment of neonatal sepsis with intravenous immune globulin. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1201–1211. Manzoni P, Decembrino L, Stolfi I, et al. Italian
Task Force for the Study and Prevention of Neonatal Fungal Infections; Italian Society of Neonatology: Lactoferrin and prevention of late-­onset sepsis in the pre-­term neonates. Early
Hum Dev. 2010;86(Suppl 1):59–61.
From Shane AL, Stoll BJ. Recent developments and current issues in the epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of bacterial and fungal neonatal sepsis. Am J Perinatol. 2013;30(2):131–141.

Table 148.11  Indications for Intrapartum Antibiotic Prophylaxis to Prevent Early-­Onset Group B Streptococcus Disease
INTRAPARTUM GBS PROPHYLAXIS INDICATED

INTRAPARTUM GBS PROPHYLAXIS NOT INDICATED

Previous infant with invasive GBS disease

Colonization with GBS during a previous pregnancy (unless an
indication for GBS prophylaxis is present for current pregnancy)

GBS bacteriuria during any trimester of the current pregnancy

GBS bacteriuria during previous pregnancy (unless another indication
for GBS prophylaxis is present for current pregnancy)

Positive GBS screening culture during current pregnancy (unless a
cesarean delivery is performed before onset of labor or amniotic
membrane rupture)

Cesarean delivery before onset of labor or amniotic membrane rupture,
regardless of GBS colonization status or gestational age

Unknown GBS status at the onset of labor (culture not done,
incomplete, or results unknown) and any of the following:
Delivery at <37 weeks’ gestation*
Amniotic membrane rupture ≥18 hr
Intrapartum temperature ≥38.0°C (100.4°F)†
Intrapartum NAAT‡ positive for GBS

Negative vaginal and rectal GBS screening culture in late gestation
during the current pregnancy, regardless of intrapartum risk factors

*Recommendations for the use of intrapartum antibiotics for prevention of early-­onset GBS disease in the setting of threatened preterm delivery are presented in Chapter 230.
†If amnionitis is suspected, broad-­spectrum antibiotic therapy that includes an agent known to be active against GBS should replace GBS prophylaxis.

‡If intrapartum NAAT is negative for GBS but any other intrapartum risk factor (delivery at <37 wk gestation, amniotic membrane rupture ≥18 hr, or temperature ≥38.0°C/100.4°F) is

present, intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated.
GBS, Group B streptococcus; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test.
From Verani J, McGee L, Schrag S. Prevention of perinatal group B streptococcal disease—revised guidelines from CDC, 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010;59(RR-­10):1–36.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1152 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Maternal infection

Chapter 149

Congenital and Perinatal
Infections
Sallie R. Permar and Emma L. Mohr
Infections are a frequent and important cause of neonatal morbidity
and mortality. Congenital or intrauterine infections (i.e., those transmitted across the placenta) and perinatal infections (i.e., those transmitted from the mother to the fetus or newborn infant during the birth
process) represent two major routes of neonatal infection.

149.1 Congenital Infections
Sallie R. Permar and Emma L. Mohr
In utero infections are caused by a variety of etiologic agents, including
bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa. Clinical manifestations of congenital infectious diseases in neonates can range from asymptomatic
or subclinical to life-­threatening disease. History and physical examination findings, in addition to laboratory testing and/or radiologic
imaging, provide insight into the best approach for prevention and
treatment of congenital infectious diseases in this immunologically
immature population (see Fig. 148.2 and Table 148.2).

GENERAL APPROACH

Prenatal counseling on methods to prevent congenital infections is the
best approach for improving infant outcomes. Once a fetus or infant is
suspected of having a congenital or perinatal infection, infectious as
well as noninfectious processes, such as underlying congenital heart
disease, genetic disorders, and inborn errors of metabolism, should be
considered in the differential diagnosis. Because maternal infection is a
prerequisite for infection in the fetus, a thorough history is essential to
assess the mother for her symptoms, travel, diet, medication use, occupational exposures, and any sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
during pregnancy. Clinical manifestations are varied and overlap for
many of the pathogens causing intrauterine infection. Laboratory testing and/or radiologic imaging is often required to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment depends on the specific pathogen and can range from
symptomatic management with close follow-­up for long-­term sequelae
to targeted antimicrobial therapy.

PATHOGENESIS

The route and timing of infection can provide helpful clues as to
the potential infectious etiology (Fig. 149.1 and Table 149.1). First-­
trimester infection may alter embryogenesis and result in malformations of the heart and eyes, as seen in congenital rubella syndrome.
Third-­trimester infection (e.g., congenital toxoplasmosis) can result in
active infection with signs of hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and generalized lymphadenopathy at birth. Infections that occur late in gestation
(e.g., congenital syphilis) may lead to a delay in clinical manifestations
until weeks to years after birth.
Intrauterine infection from cytomegalovirus (CMV), Treponema
pallidum, Toxoplasma gondii, rubella virus, varicella-­
zoster virus
(VZV), and human parvovirus B19 may cause minimal or no symptoms in the mother but still may be transmitted across the placenta
to the fetus. The presence of maternal antibodies to rubella prevents
maternal infection and congenital transmission, but transmission
across the placenta of CMV can occur despite preexisting immunity,
albeit at a lower rate compared to primary maternal CMV infection.
Regardless of the mother’s immune status, the placenta may act as a

Bloodstream invasion
No fetal or placental
infection

Placental infection

Fetal infection
No effect on growth
or viability

No fetal infection

Effects on growth and viability

Embryonic
death
and resorption
Intrauterine
growth
restriction

Abortion
and
stillbirth
Developmental
anomalies

Premature
infant

Term
infant

Congenital
disease

Normal
infant

Eradication of infection

Persistent postnatal infection
Progressive
tissue damage
leading to
sequelae or death

No apparent
disease

Sequelae of
infection

Fig. 149.1 Pathogenesis of hematogenous transplacental infections.
(Adapted from Klein JO, Remington JS. Current concepts of infections
of the fetus and newborn infant. In: Remington JS, Klein JO, eds. Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn Infant, 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2002.)
barrier, and the fetus may or may not be infected. If infection occurs,
signs may or may not be noted in the fetus during pregnancy. Infection
can result in spontaneous abortion, congenital malformation, intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), premature birth, stillbirth, acute or
delayed disease in the neonate, or asymptomatic persistent infection
with sequelae later in life.

PREVENTION

Prevention of congenital infections includes behavioral and therapeutic interventions. Counseling-­based interventions are effective in
reducing CMV infection, but few healthcare providers report counseling their patients on CMV prevention. Counseling on hygienic practices, such as washing hands after diaper changes and avoiding contact
with saliva, decreases CMV transmission risk. Safer sex practices, safe
food preparation practices, and preventing mosquito bites are some of
the recommendations that prevent congenital and perinatal infections.
Prenatal and maternal vaccination and control of existing maternal
infections are other strategies of preventing congenital infection. Prevention recommendations are presented in Table 149.2.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of intrauterine infections can range from
asymptomatic to severe multiorgan system complications. For some
agents (e.g., CMV, T. pallidum), ongoing injury after birth can lead to
late sequelae as well. The specific clinical signs in the newborn period
are usually not sufficient to make a definitive diagnosis but are useful to
guide more specific laboratory testing. Symptomatic congenital infections often affect the central nervous system (CNS; brain and eyes) and
the reticuloendothelial system (RES; bone marrow, liver, and spleen).
Table 149.3 presents the clinical manifestations of some specific congenital infections. Congenital Zika virus infection has features that are
rarely seen with other congenital infections (Table 149.4). For example,
no hematologic or hepatic laboratory abnormalities have been documented in infants with congenital Zika virus infection. Table 149.5 provides late sequelae of some congenital infections.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 149 u Congenital and Perinatal Infections

1153

Table 149.1  Specific Agents in Effects of Transplacental Fetal Infection on the Fetus and Newborn Infant
DISEASE

ORGANISM

PREMATURITY

Viruses

CMV
HSV
Rubeola
Smallpox
HBV
HIV*
SARS-­CoV-­2
Zika

Bacteria

Treponema pallidum
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
Listeria monocytogenes
Campylobacter fetus
Salmonella typhi

Protozoa

Toxoplasma gondii
Plasmodium*
Trypanosoma cruzi

INTRAUTERINE GROWTH
RESTRICTION/LOW
BIRTHWEIGHT
CMV
Rubella
VZV*
HIV
Zika

T. gondii
Plasmodium
T. cruzi

DEVELOPMENTAL
ANOMALIES
CMV
Rubella
VZV
Coxsackievirus B*
HIV
Zika

CONGENITAL
DISEASE

PERSISTENT
POSTNATAL
INFECTION

CMV
Rubella
VZV
HSV
Mumps*
Rubeola
Vaccinia
Smallpox
Coxsackievirus B
Poliovirus
HBV
HIV
LCV
Parvovirus
Zika

CMV
Rubella
VZV
HSV
HBV
HIV
Zika

T. pallidum
M. tuberculosis
L. monocytogenes
C. fetus
S. typhi
Borrelia burgdorferi

T. pallidum
M. tuberculosis

T. gondii
Plasmodium
T. cruzi

T. gondii
Plasmodium

*Association of effect with infection has been suggested and is under consideration.
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; LCV, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus; SARS-­CoV-­2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; VZV,
varicella-­zoster virus.
From Maldonado YA, Nizet V, Klein JO, et al. Current concepts of infections of the fetus and newborn infant. In: Wilson CB, Nizet V, Maldonado Y, et al., eds. Remington and Klein’s
Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016. Tables 1–5; and from Woodworth KR, Olsen EO, Neelam V, et al. Birth and Infant Outcomes
Following Laboratory-­Confirmed SARS-­CoV-­2 Infection in Pregnancy -­SET-­NET, 16 Jurisdictions, March 29-­October 14, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;69:1635–40.

DIAGNOSIS
During Pregnancy

The presence of IUGR or a physical abnormality on a prenatal fetal
ultrasound raises concern for a congenital infection. The well-­known
acronym TORCH—T. gondii, Other (T. pallidum, human parvovirus
B19, HIV, Zika virus, others), Rubella, Cytomegalovirus, and Herpes
simplex virus (HSV)—is a historical mnemonic but is less useful given
the number of other infections that need to be considered. The routine
ordering of TORCH serology panels is not recommended because the
presence of a pathogen-­specific IgG response in the mother indicates
past infection but does not establish if the infection occurred during
pregnancy. Maternal IgM titers to specific pathogens are only moderately sensitive, and a negative result cannot be used to exclude infection. Testing the mother for the pathogen of concern itself, such as
testing for CMV, HIV, or Zika viremia, can shed some light onto the
potential congenital pathogens of concern.
In certain cases, a fetal blood sample with cordocentesis can be obtained
and tested for total and pathogen-­specific IgM assays, polymerase chain
reaction assays (PCRs), or cultures. A positive pathogen-­specific IgM test
is strongly suggestive of infection, but a negative test does not rule out
the organism as the cause of the fetopathy. Amniotic fluid can also be
obtained and sent for PCR or culture. The presence of CMV, T. gondii,
or human parvovirus B19 in amniotic fluid indicates the fetus likely is
infected but cannot establish the severity of disease. Although HSV is
included in the TORCH acronym, it is rarely isolated from amniotic fluid
and is rarely transmitted across the placenta from mother to fetus. Fetal
blood can be collected to test for human parvovirus B19 IgM and PCR.

Newborn Infant

When a congenital infection is suspected because clinical signs are
present at birth, a complete blood count with differential and platelet

count along with measurements of transaminases and total/direct bilirubin are routinely performed. Additional evaluations may include a
dilated funduscopic examination for retinopathy, auditory brainstem
response (ABR) for those failing the newborn hearing screen, and CNS
imaging. If available, pathologic examination of the placenta and/or
cord may be informative. Infectious diseases consultation is valuable in
guiding the evaluation.
Neonatal antibody titers for specific pathogens are often difficult to
interpret because IgG is acquired from the mother by transplacental
passage, and a positive result may reflect the mother’s past infection
and not infection of the newborn. Neonatal IgM antibody titers to specific pathogens have high specificity and only moderate sensitivity; a
negative result cannot be used to exclude infection. Paired maternal
and fetal-­neonatal IgG antibody titers showing higher or rising infant
IgG antibodies can diagnose some congenital infections (e.g., syphilis).
Total cord blood IgM and IgA are not actively transported across the
placenta to the fetus yet are not specific or sensitive enough for intrauterine infection.
PCR testing of infant saliva, urine, and/or blood for CMV and
other viral infections is sensitive, specific, and widely accepted over
virus cultures, yet should be performed within the first 2 weeks of
life to distinguish congenital infection from perinatal or postnatal
infection. The Palo Alto Medical Foundation Toxoplasma Serology
Laboratory (PAMF-­TSL; Palo Alto, CA: www.pamf.org/serology/;
telephone: (650) 853-­4828; e-­mail: remingtonlab@sutterhealth.org)
offers specialized tests and physician experts to aid in the diagnosis of congenital toxoplasmosis. Testing for Zika virus with real-­
time reverse-­transcription PCR (rRT-­PCR) from neonatal urine and
serum and IgM enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) from
neonatal serum is recommended. However, the most reliable method
of testing has not been established. In endemic areas, this workup

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1154 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 149.2  Prevention Strategies for Congenital and
Perinatal Infections
PATHOGEN

PREVENTION STRATEGY

CMV

Hygienic education to avoid direct contact with toddler
urine/saliva, avoid new sexual partners

HSV

Prevention of maternal STI near delivery and exposure
of newborn to active maternal lesions

VZV

Vaccination of nonpregnant women of childbearing
age with a negative varicella history or vaccine
immunity

Rubella virus

Vaccination of nonpregnant women of childbearing
age with no immunization history

HIV

Safe sex practices; maternal treatment with HAART
on infection

SARS-­CoV-­2

Prenatal and maternal vaccination, masking, and
social distancing

Zika virus

Prevention of mosquito bites and safe sex practices
with persons who have recently traveled to
endemic areas

Toxoplasma
gondii

Avoiding undercooked meat, avoiding unpasteurized
goat milk, avoiding raw mollusks, avoid contact
with litter or soil potentially contaminated with cat
feces

Treponema
pallidum

Safe sex practices; screening in nonpregnant
populations

HSV, Herpes simplex virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus; SARS-­
CoV-­2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; STI, sexually transmitted
infection; HAART, highly active antiretroviral therapy.
From Auriti C, De Rose DU, Santisi A, et al. Pregnancy and viral infections: Mechanisms
of fetal damage, diagnosis and prevention of neonatal adverse outcomes from
cytomegalovirus to SARS-­CoV-­2 and Zika virus. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis
Dis. 2021;1867:1–17; Maldonado YA, Read JS. American Academy of pediatrics
committee on infectious diseases: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of congenital
toxoplasmosis in the United States. Pediatrics. 2017;139(2):e20163860; US Preventive
Services Task Force: Screening for syphilis infection in pregnant women, February 2018.

should be done soon after delivery because it is difficult to distinguish congenital from perinatal and postnatal infection if testing is
done later.

SPECIFIC INFECTIOUS AGENTS

Important congenital infections include more than the TORCH agents.
The following is a list of pathogens that may be transmitted across the
placenta and the respective chapters where they are discussed in more
detail, including treatment.

Bacteria

Listeria monocytogenes (Chapter 234)
Syphilis (Treponema pallidum) (Chapter 264)

Viruses
Cytomegalovirus (Chapter 302)
Hepatitis B (Chapter 406)
Hepatitis C (Chapter 406)
Herpes simplex virus (Chapter 299)
Human immunodeficiency virus (Chapter 322)
Human parvovirus B19 (Chapter 298)
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (Chapter 318)
Rubella (Chapter 294)
Varicella-­zoster virus (Chapter 300)
Zika virus (Chapter 314.12)
Parasite
Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii) (Chapter 336)

149.2 Perinatal Infections
Sallie R. Permar and Emma L. Mohr
Perinatal infections are defined as those that are transmitted from the
mother to the fetus or newborn infant during the birth process. Despite
recommended universal screening of pregnant women for Chlamydia
trachomatis, gonorrhea, and group B streptococcus (GBS), transmission to the newborn still occurs. In addition to these STIs, other bacteria, viruses, and Candida spp. may cause perinatal infections. Similar to
congenital infections, their presentation can range from asymptomatic
to a sepsis-­like syndrome.

GENERAL APPROACH

The general approach is like that for congenital infections and includes
a detailed maternal history and a careful examination of the newborn
(see Chapter 148). Many clinical syndromes overlap; therefore laboratory testing is usually required to establish a specific microbiologic
etiology and guide management decisions.

PATHOGENESIS

The human birth canal is colonized with aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. Ascending amniotic infection may occur with either apparently intact membranes or relatively brief duration of membrane
rupture. Infectious agents can also be acquired as the newborn
infant passes through the vaginal canal. This acquisition may result
in either colonization or disease. Factors influencing which colonized infants will experience disease are not well understood but
include prematurity, underlying illness, invasive procedures, inoculum size, virulence of the infecting organism, genetic predisposition, the innate immune system, host response, and transplacental
maternal antibodies.
Chorioamnionitis has been historically used to refer to microbial
invasion of the amniotic fluid, often as a result of prolonged rupture of
the chorioamniotic membrane for >18 hours. The term chorioamnionitis is confusing because it does not convey the spectrum of inflammatory or infectious diseases, it leaves out other intrauterine components
that can be involved (e.g., decidua), and it results in significant variability in clinical practice, with the potential for a significant number of
well newborns being exposed to antimicrobial agents. The term intrauterine inflammation or infection at birth, abbreviated as Triple I, is
preferred because of the heterogeneous nature of conditions that can
affect the mother and neonate (Table 149.6). Regardless of the definition used, prematurity (<37 weeks) is associated with a greater risk of
early-­onset sepsis, especially with GBS.
Aspiration or ingestion of bacteria in amniotic fluid may lead to congenital pneumonia or systemic infection, with manifestations becoming apparent before delivery (fetal distress, tachycardia), at delivery
(failure to breathe, respiratory distress, shock), or after a latent period
of a few hours (respiratory distress, shock). Aspiration or ingestion of
bacteria during the birth process may lead to infection after an interval
of 1-­2 days.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most perinatal infections present clinically during the first month of
life. Initial signs and symptoms may be either nonspecific or focal (see
Chapter 148). Additional information on specific infectious agents and
their management are reviewed in the chapters indicated below.

SPECIFIC INFECTIOUS AGENTS
Bacteria

Chlamydia trachomatis (Chapter 272)
Escherichia coli (Chapter 246)
Genital mycoplasmas (Chapter 270)
Group B streptococci (Chapter 230)
Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Chapter 238)
Syphilis (Treponema pallidum) (Chapter 264)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 149 u Congenital and Perinatal Infections

1155

Table 149.3  Clinical Manifestations of Specific Neonatal Infections Acquired in Utero or at Delivery
RUBELLA VIRUS

CYTOMEGALOVIRUS

TOXOPLASMA
GONDII

HERPES
SIMPLEX VIRUS

TREPONEMA
PALLIDUM

ENTEROVIRUSES

ZIKA VIRUS

Hepatosplenomegaly Hepatosplenomegaly Hepatosplenomegaly Hepatosplenomegaly Hepatosplenomegaly Hepatosplenomegaly Fetal brain
Jaundice
Jaundice
Jaundice
Jaundice
Jaundice
Jaundice
disruption
Pneumonitis
Pneumonitis
Pneumonitis
Pneumonitis
Pneumonitis
Pneumonitis
sequence*
Petechiae
Petechiae
Petechiae
Petechiae
Petechiae
Petechiae
Cortical thinning
or purpura
or purpura
or purpura
or purpura
or purpura
or purpura
Ventriculomegaly
Meningoencephalitis Meningoencephalitis Meningoencephalitis Meningoencephalitis Meningoencephalitis Meningoencephalitis Microcephaly
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus*
Hydrocephalus
Adenopathy
Adenopathy
Microphthalmia
Adenopathy
Microcephaly*
Microcephaly
Microcephaly
Maculopapular
Maculopapular
or coloboma
Hearing deficits
Intracranial
Maculopapular
Maculopapular
exanthems*
exanthems
Cataracts
Myocarditis
calcifications*
exanthems
exanthems
Bone lesions*
Paralysis*
Contractures
Congenital
Hearing deficits
Intracranial
Vesicles*
Glaucoma
Myocarditis*
Hearing deficits
defects*
Chorioretinitis
calcifications*
Myocarditis
Chorioretinitis
Conjunctivitis
Epilepsy
Bone lesions*
or retinopathy
Myocarditis
Chorioretinitis
or retinopathy
Keratoconjunctivitis Hyper/hypotonia
Glaucoma*
Optic atrophy
Bone lesions
or retinopathy
Uveitis
Chorioretinitis
Chorioretinitis
Cataracts
or retinopathy*
or retinopathy*
Conjunctivitis
Cataracts*
Cataracts
or
Microphthalmia
Optic atrophy
keratoconjunctivitis*
Microphthalmia
Uveitis
Sensorineural
hearing loss*
*Has diagnostic significance for this infection.
Adapted from Maldonado YA, Nizet V, Klein JO, et al. Current concepts of infections of the fetus and newborn infant. In: Wilson CB, Nizet V, Maldonado Y, et al., eds. Remington and
Klein’s Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Tables 1–6; with data from Moore CA, Staples JE, Dobyns WB, et al. Characterizing the
pattern of anomalies in congenital zika syndrome for pediatric clinicians. JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(3):288–295.

Table 149.4  Syndromes in the Neonate Caused by Congenital Infections
ORGANISM

SIGNS

Toxoplasma gondii

Hydrocephalus, diffuse intracranial calcification, chorioretinitis

Rubella virus

Cardiac defects, sensorineural hearing loss, cataracts, microcephaly, “blueberry muffin” skin lesions, hepatomegaly,
interstitial pneumonitis, myocarditis, disturbances in bone growth, intrauterine growth restriction

CMV

Microcephaly, periventricular calcifications, jaundice, petechiae or purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, intrauterine
growth restriction, sensorineural hearing loss

HSV

Skin vesicles or scarring, eye scarring, microcephaly or hydranencephaly, vesicular skin rash, keratoconjunctivitis,
meningoencephalitis, sepsis with hepatic failure

Treponema pallidum

Bullous, macular, or eczematous skin lesions involving palms and soles; rhinorrhea; dactylitis and other signs of
osteochondritis and periostitis; hepatosplenomegaly; lymphadenopathy

VZV

Limb hypoplasia, cicatricial skin lesions, ocular abnormalities, cortical atrophy

Parvovirus B19

Nonimmune hydrops fetalis

HIV

Severe thrush, failure to thrive, recurrent bacterial infections, calcification of basal ganglia

Zika virus

Microcephaly, lissencephaly, cerebellar hypoplasia, akinesia syndrome, macular scarring, retinal mottling,
subcortical calcifications, hypertonia

HSV, Herpes simplex virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus.
From Maldonado YA, Nizet V, Klein JO, et al. Current concepts of infections of the fetus and newborn infant. In Wilson CB, Nizet V, Maldonado Y, et al., eds. Remington and Klein’s
Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Tables 1–7.

Table 149.5  Late Sequelae of Intrauterine Infections
INFECTION
CLINICAL SIGN

CMV

RUBELLA VIRUS

TOXOPLASMA GONDII

TREPONEMA PALLIDUM

ZIKA VIRUS

Hearing loss

+

+

+

+

+

Dental/skeletal problems

(−)

+

(−)

+

+

Developmental delays

+

+

+

+

+

Seizures

+

+

+

+

+

+, Present; (−), rare or absent; CMV, cytomegalovirus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1156 Part X u The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant
Table 149.6  Classification of Triple I and Isolated Maternal Fever
TERMINOLOGY

FEATURES

Isolated maternal fever

Maternal oral temperature ≥39°C is considered a “documented fever”
If the oral temperature is ≥38°C but ≤39°C, repeat the measurement in 30 min
If the repeat value is ≥38°C, it is considered a “documented fever”

Suspected Triple I

Fever without a clear source with any of the following:
1.	Baseline fetal tachycardia (>160 beats/min for 10 min)
2.	Maternal WBC >15,000/mm3 in the absence of corticosteroids
3.	Purulent fluid from the cervical os

Confirmed Triple I

All the above (from suspected Triple I) with any of the following:
1.	Amniocentesis-­proven infection through positive Gram stain
2.	Low glucose of amniotic fluid or positive amniotic fluid culture
3.	Placental pathology consistent with infection

Triple I, Intrauterine inflammation or infection at birth; WBC, white blood cell count.
Adapted from Higgins RD, Saade G; Chorioamnionitis Workshop participants: Evaluation and management of women and newborns with a maternal diagnosis of chorioamnionitis:
summary of a workshop. Obstet Gynecol 2016;127(3):426–436.

Table 149.7  Laboratory Tests in the Diagnosis of Specific Perinatal Infections
INFECTIOUS AGENT

ACCEPTABLE SPECIMEN(S) FROM INFANT
UNLESS OTHERWISE INDICATED

LABORATORY TEST

Chlamydia trachomatis

Conjunctiva, nasopharyngeal swab, tracheal
aspirate

DFA or culture using special transport media
NAATs are not FDA-­approved for specimens from
neonates*

Genital mycoplasmas (Mycoplasma
hominis, M. genitalium, Ureaplasma
urealyticum)

Tracheal aspirate, blood, CSF

Culture using special transport media
NAATs

Neisseria gonorrhoeae

Conjunctiva, blood, CSF, synovial fluid

Finding gram-­negative intracellular diplococci on Gram
stain is suggestive
Culture on special media establishes the diagnosis

Syphilis (Treponema pallidum)

Serum (mother)

Serum
CSF

A nontreponemal test (RPR or VDRL) and if reactive, a
specific treponemal test†
or reverse-­sequence screening: specific treponemal test
and if reactive, a quantitative nontreponemal test
RPR/VDRL
VDRL

Cytomegalovirus

Urine, saliva (with confirmational urine), blood,
or CSF (if CNS involvement)

CMV DNA PCR
Obtained within 3 wk of birth

Enteroviruses

Blood, nasopharyngeal swab, throat swab,
conjunctival swab, tracheal aspirate, urine,
stool, rectal swab, vesicle fluid, CSF

PCR
Cell culture (sensitivity depends on serotype and cell
lines used)

Hepatitis B

Serum (mother)
Serum

HBsAg
If mother’s HBsAg is positive, at age 9 mo, test the infant
for HBsAg and hepatitis B surface antibody

Herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2

Conjunctiva, skin vesicle scraping, whole
blood, mouth vesicles
CSF
“Surface cultures” (mouth, nasopharynx,
conjunctiva, and anus)

PCR or cell culture

HIV

Serum (mother)
Whole blood (infant)

Fourth-­generation HIV antigen/antibody test
HIV DNA PCR (performed on peripheral blood
mononuclear cells) or RNA PCR (performed on plasma)

Candida species

Blood, skin biopsy, or CSF

Culture

Zika virus

Blood, urine

RNA PCR
Also assay CSF for RNA if obtained for other reasons
IgM antibodies
Also assay CSF for IgM if obtained for other reasons

Blood
SARS-­CoV-­2

Nasopharynx, oropharynx, nose, saliva, trachea

PCR
PCR or cell culture

RT-­PCR or direct antigen testing

*Published evaluations of NAATs for these indications are limited, but sensitivity and specificity is expected to be at least as high as those for culture.
†Treponemal tests include the T. pallidum particle agglutination (TP-­PA) test, T. pallidum enzyme immunoassay (TP-­EIA), T. pallidum chemiluminescent assay (TP-­CIA), and fluorescent
treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-­ABS) test.
DFA, Direct immunofluorescence assay; NAAT, Nucleic acid amplification test; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research
Laboratories; RPR, rapid plasma reagin; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SARS-­CoV-­2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; RT-­PCR,
reverse-­transcription polymerase chain reaction.
Created with data from pathogen-­specific chapters within Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Redbook: 2021-­2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious
Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2018; p. 729–744.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 149 u Congenital and Perinatal Infections
Viruses
Cytomegalovirus (Chapter 302)
Enteroviruses (Chapter 297)
Hepatitis B (Chapter 406)
Herpes simplex virus (Chapter 299)
Human immunodeficiency virus (Chapter 322)
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (Chapter 311)

Fungi

Candida spp. (Chapter 280)

DIAGNOSIS

1157

(natural and acquired), and obstetric risk factors (prematurity, prolonged ruptured membranes, chorioamnionitis). STIs acquired by a
pregnant woman, including syphilis, N. gonorrhoeae, and C. trachomatis, have the potential for perinatal transmission.
Neonates with perinatal infections often present with nonspecific
symptoms and signs; therefore the general diagnostic evaluation for
the ill neonate as discussed in Chapter 202 should be followed. Table
149.7 provides a summary of laboratory tests that are useful to diagnose specific perinatal infections.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

The maternal history provides important information about maternal exposures to infectious diseases, bacterial colonization, immunity

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Adolescent Medicine

PART

XI

Hormonally driven physiologic changes and ongoing neurologic development occur in the setting of social structures that foster the transition
from childhood to adulthood. This period of development comprises
adolescence, which is divided into three phases—early, middle, and
late adolescence—each marked by a characteristic set of biologic, cognitive, and psychosocial milestones (Table 150.1). Although individual
variations in the timing and pace of development undoubtedly exist,
these changes follow a predictable pattern of occurrence. Gender and
culture profoundly affect the developmental course, as do physical,
social, and environmental influences (Fig. 150.1). Given the interaction of these domains, a biopsychosocial perspective is best suited to
approach the healthcare of the adolescent.

Chapter 150

Adolescent Physical and
Social Development
Cynthia M. Holland-­Hall and
Maria D. Brown
See also Part XXIV and Chapters 599 and 600.
During the preteen, teenage, and young adult years, young people
undergo not only dramatic changes in physical appearance but also
rapid changes in physiologic, psychologic, and social functioning.

PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT

Puberty is the biologic transition from childhood to adulthood. Pubertal changes include the appearance of the secondary sexual characteristics, increase in height, change in body composition, and development

Table 150.1  Milestones in Early, Middle, and Late Adolescent Development
VARIABLE

EARLY ADOLESCENCE

MIDDLE ADOLESCENCE

LATE ADOLESCENCE

Approximate age range

10-­13 yr

14-­17 yr

18-­21 yr

Sexual maturity rating*

1-­2

3-­5

5

Physical

• Females: secondary sex
characteristics (breast, pubic,
axillary hair), start of growth spurt
• Males: testicular enlargement,
start of genital growth

• Females: peak growth velocity,
menarche (if not already attained)
• Males: growth spurt, secondary
sex characteristics, nocturnal
emissions, facial and body hair,
voice changes
• Change in body composition
• Acne

• Physical maturation slows
• Increased lean muscle mass in males

Cognitive and moral

• Concrete operations
• Egocentricity
• Unable to perceive long-­term
outcome of current decisions
• Follow rules to avoid punishment

• Emergence of abstract thought
(formal operations)
• May perceive future implications,
but may not apply in decision-­
making
• Strong emotions may drive
decision-­making
• Sense of invulnerability
• Growing ability to see others’
perspectives

• Future-­oriented with sense of
perspective
• Idealism
• Able to think things through
independently
• Improved impulse control
• Improved assessment of risk vs
reward
• Able to distinguish law from morality

Self-­concept/identity
formation

• Preoccupied with changing body
• Self-­consciousness about
appearance and attractiveness

• Concern with attractiveness
• Increasing introspection

• More stable body image
• Attractiveness may still be of
concern
• Consolidation of identity

Family

• Increased need for privacy
• Exploration of boundaries of
dependence vs independence

• Conflicts over control and
independence
• Struggle for greater autonomy
• Increased separation from parents

• Emotional and physical separation
from family
• Increased autonomy
• Reestablishment of “adult”
relationship with parents

Peers

• Same-­gender peer affiliations

• Intense peer group involvement
• Preoccupation with peer culture
• Conformity

• Peer group and values recede in
importance

Sexual

• Increased interest in sexual
anatomy
• Anxieties and questions about
pubertal changes
• Limited capacity for intimacy

• Testing ability to attract partner
• Initiation of relationships and
sexual activity
• Exploration of sexual identity

• Consolidation of sexual identity
• Focus on intimacy and formation of
stable relationships
• Planning for future and commitment

*See text and Figures 150.2 and 150.3.

1158
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 150 u Adolescent Physical and Social Development
2

3

4

5

1159

Media

Peers

Employment

Education

Family of origin
Family of one’s own
Childhood Adolescence
(10–24 years)

Adulthood

Old age

Fig. 150.1 Changing proximal social determinants of health across

A
2

3

4

5

the life course. During adolescence, social determinants from outside
the family become greater, with major influences of peers, media, education, and the beginning of workplace influences. Community and
structural determinants remain consistently influential, as shown by the
background shading. (From Patton GC, Sawyer SM, Santelli JS, et al.
Our future: a Lancet commission on adolescent health and wellbeing.
Lancet. 2016;387:2423–2478, Fig. 2.)

of reproductive capacity. Two principal physiologic events occur
during puberty: adrenarche and gonadarche. Adrenal androgen production, chiefly dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS), rises in
response to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Increases in serum
concentrations of DHEAS result in the development of adult-­like body
odor and faint genital hair (adrenarche), occurring as early as 6-­8 years
of age. Gonadal sex steroid production occurs with activation of the
hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal (HPG) axis (gonadarche). Maturation of the gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH) pulse generator
is among the earliest neuroendocrine changes associated with the onset
of puberty. Under the influence of GnRH, the pituitary gland secretes
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH);
initially this occurs in a pulsatile fashion primarily during sleep, but
this diurnal variation diminishes throughout puberty. LH and FSH
stimulate corresponding increases in gonadal androgens and estrogens. The triggers for these changes are incompletely understood. The
activation of the HPG axis may be mediated by increasing adiposity
and associated insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, elevated androgens, and leptin. Both genetic and environmental (epigenetic) factors
contribute to the regulation of pubertal timing.

Sexual Development

The progression of the development of the secondary sex characteristics may be described using the sexual maturity rating (SMR) scale
(ranging from 1, prepubertal, to 5, fully mature adolescent) or Tanner
stages. Figures 150.2 and 150.3 depict the physical findings of breast
and pubic hair maturation at each SMR (Tables 150.2 and 150.3).
Although the ages at which individual pubertal changes occur may
vary, the timing and sequence of these changes relative to one another
is predictable (Figs. 150.4 and 150.5). The wide range of normal progress through sexual maturation is affected by genetics, the psychosocial environment, nutrition, and overall health status. Environmental
exposures may also play a role.
In males the first visible sign of puberty and the hallmark of SMR 2
is testicular enlargement, beginning as early as 9.5 years, followed by
the development of pubic hair. This is followed by penile growth during
SMR 3. Peak growth occurs when testis volumes reach approximately
9-­10 cm3 during SMR 4. Under the influence of LH and testosterone,
the seminiferous tubules, epididymis, seminal vesicles, and prostate

B
Fig. 150.2 Sexual maturity ratings (2-­5) of pubic hair changes in ado-

lescent males (A) and females (B) (see Tables 150.2 and 150.3). (Courtesy J.M. Tanner, MD, Institute of Child Health, Department for Growth
and Development, University of London.)

enlarge. Sperm may be found in the urine by SMR 3; nocturnal emissions may be noted at this time as well. Some degree of breast tissue
growth, typically bilateral, occurs in 40–65% of males during SMR 2-­4
as a presumed consequence of a relative excess of estrogenic stimulation. This usually resolves with ongoing maturation.
In females, typically the first visible sign of puberty and the hallmark
of SMR 2 is the appearance of breast buds (thelarche), between 7 and
12 years of age. A significant minority of females develops pubic hair
(pubarche) prior to thelarche. Less visible changes include enlargement
of the ovaries, uterus, labia, and clitoris and thickening of the endometrium and vaginal mucosa. A clear vaginal discharge may be present
before menarche (physiologic leukorrhea). Menses typically begins
within 3 years of thelarche, during SMR 3-­4 (average age 12.5 years;
normal range 9-­15 years) (see Fig. 150.5). The timing of menarche
is determined largely by genetics; contributing factors likely include
adiposity, chronic illness, nutritional status, and the physical and psychosocial environment. Early menstrual cycles often are anovulatory
and thus somewhat irregular, but typically occur every 21-­45 days and
include 3-­7 days of bleeding, even during the first year after menarche.
The onset of puberty and menarche appear to be occurring at earlier
ages than previously reported in the United States (see Chapter 599).
Several studies from 1948 to 1981 identified the average age for the
onset of breast development as ranging from 10.6 to 11.2 years of age. A
subsequent prospective study suggests an earlier average age of onset of
8.8 years in Black females and 9.6 years in White females. Almost 25%
of Black females and 10% of White females initiate breast development

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1160 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
1

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

by 7 years of age. A 2020 systematic review and meta-­analysis demonstrated an almost 3 months per decade decrease in age of thelarche
between 1977 and 2013 worldwide. Early breast development may be
associated with a slower tempo of puberty (i.e., longer time to menarche). There also appears to be a trend toward decreasing ages for the
onset of pubic hair development and menarche. Data from the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), a nationally
representative, longitudinal survey in the United States, show a decline
in the average age of menarche of 4.9 months between the 1960s and
2002. This may be partially explained by changes in the ethnic makeup
of the sample. Changes in the timing of menarche within ethnic groups
were significantly smaller. The reasons for the larger decrease in age for
breast development have been postulated to include the epidemic of
childhood obesity and exposure to estrogen-­like environmental agents
(endocrine disruptors), but further research in this area is needed.
Although fewer data are available on changes in the timing of puberty
in males, they appear to be experiencing a similar trend. Although the
method of assessing the onset of puberty (i.e., inspection vs palpation
of the testes) varies between studies, it appears that the average age for
the onset of genital and pubic hair development may have decreased by
1-­2 years over the past several decades in many industrialized countries. Evidence for an association of obesity with the timing of puberty
in males has been inconsistent.

Somatic Growth

5

5

Fig. 150.3 Sexual maturity ratings (1-­5) of breast changes in adolescent females. (Courtesy J.M. Tanner, MD, Institute of Child Health, Department for Growth and Development, University of London.)

Linear growth acceleration begins in early adolescence for all genders,
with 15–20% of adult height accrued during puberty. Females attain
a peak height velocity (PHV) of 8-­9 cm/year at SMR 2-­3, approximately 6 months before menarche. Males typically begin their growth
acceleration at a later SMR stage and achieve a PHV of 9-­10 cm/
year later in the course of puberty (SMR 3-­4). Males continue their
linear growth for approximately 2-­3 years after females have stopped
growing, accounting for an average difference of 11-­13 cm in height
between adult males and females (Fig. 150.6). The growth spurt begins
distally, with enlargement of the hands and feet, followed by the arms
and legs, and finally the trunk and chest. This growth pattern imparts
a characteristic “awkward” appearance to some early adolescents. Body

Table 150.2  Sexual Maturity Rating (SMR) Stages in Females
SMR STAGE

PUBIC HAIR

BREASTS

1

Preadolescent

Preadolescent

2

Sparse, lightly pigmented, straight, medial border of labia

Breast and papilla elevated as small mound; diameter of areola
increased

3

Darker, beginning to curl, increased amount

Breast and areola enlarged, no contour separation

4

Coarse, curly, abundant, but less than in adult

Areola and papilla form secondary mound

5

Adult feminine triangle, spread to medial surface of thighs

Mature, nipple projects, areola part of general breast contour

From Tanner JM. Growth at Adolescence, 2nd ed. Oxford, England: Blackwell Scientific; 1962.

Table 150.3  Sexual Maturity Rating (SMR) Stages in Males
SMR STAGE

PUBIC HAIR

PENIS

TESTES

1

None

Preadolescent

Preadolescent

2

Scant, long, slightly pigmented

Minimal change/enlargement

Enlarged scrotum, pink, texture altered

3

Darker, starting to curl, small amount

Lengthens

Larger

4

Resembles adult type, but less quantity;
coarse, curly

Larger; glans and breadth increase
in size

Larger, scrotum dark

5

Adult distribution, spread to medial
surface of thighs

Adult size

Adult size

From Tanner JM. Growth at Adolescence, 2nd ed. Oxford, England: Blackwell Scientific; 1962.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 150 u Adolescent Physical and Social Development

cm/yr

Strength spurt

Height spurt

Genital SMR

2

3

4

12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

50

1161

50

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Age (yr)

5

Fig. 150.6 Height velocity curves for American males (solid line) and
Pubic hair SMR

8

9

10

11

2

12

3

13

4

females (dashed line) who have their peak height velocity at the average age (i.e., average growth tempo). (From Tanner JM, Davies PSW.
Clinical longitudinal standards for height and height velocity for North
American children. J Pediatr. 1985;107:317.)

5

14

15

16

17

Age (yr)

Fig. 150.4 Sequence of pubertal events in males. Although the age

of onset of puberty is variable, the sequence of events relative to one
another is predictable. SMR, Sexual maturity rating.

Height spurt

Menarche

Breast SMR 2

Pubic hair SMR

8

9

10

3

Because skeletal growth precedes muscle and tendon growth, sprains
and strains may be more common during this time as well.
Cardiovascular changes in middle adolescence include increased
heart size, higher blood pressure, and increases in blood volume and
hematocrit, particularly in males. Coupled with an increase in lung
vital capacity, these changes lead to greater aerobic capacity. Androgenic stimulation of sebaceous and apocrine glands may result in acne
and body odor. Rapid enlargement of the larynx, pharynx, and lungs
leads to changes in vocal quality in males, typically preceded by vocal
instability (voice cracking). Elongation of the optic globe may result in
the development of myopia (see Chapter 660). Dental changes include
jaw growth, loss of the final deciduous teeth, and eruption of the permanent cuspids, premolars, and finally, molars (see Chapter 353).
Orthodontic appliances may be needed, secondary to growth exacerbations of bite disturbances. Physiologic changes in sleep patterns and
increased sleep requirements occur, causing many adolescents to delay
sleep onset at night, with subsequent difficulty awakening for early
school start times in the morning (see Chapter 31). The mechanism of
delayed circadian rhythm has not been elucidated but likely involves
changes in both circadian and homeostatic sleep regulatory processes.

NEUROLOGIC, COGNITIVE, AND MORAL
DEVELOPMENT
4

2

3

4

11

12

13

5

5

14

15

16

17

Age (yr)

Fig. 150.5 Sequence of pubertal events in females. Although the age
of onset of puberty is variable, the sequence of events relative to one
another is predictable. SMR, Sexual maturity rating.

composition changes as well after attainment of PHV. Males undergo
an increase in lean body mass (“strength spurt”), whereas females
develop a higher proportion of body fat. Scoliosis, if present, may progress with rapid axial skeleton growth (see Chapter 720.1). From 50% to
65% of total body calcium is laid down during puberty. Bone growth
precedes increases in bone mineralization and bone density, which may
increase the adolescent’s risk of fracture during times of rapid growth.

As children progress through adolescence, they develop and refine
their ability to use formal operational thought processes. Abstract,
symbolic, and hypothetical thinking replaces the need to manipulate
concrete objects. Middle and late adolescents develop the ability to
consider multiple options and to assess the long-­term consequences of
their actions. The capacity for verbal expression is enhanced. Because
adolescents’ decision-­making and subsequent behaviors are the primary determinants of their mortality and morbidity, understanding
these cognitive processes is of critical importance.
Both structural and functional brain development continue throughout adolescence. Cortical gray matter volume peaks in preadolescence,
then decreases because of selective “pruning” of rarely used synaptic
connections, slowly declining as the third decade of life is approached.
Cerebral white matter volume increases until mid-­to-­late adolescence,
reflecting increasing myelination and subsequent facilitation of integrated brain activity and more efficient transmission of information
between different regions of the brain, enhancing the “signal-­to-­noise”
ratio. Although the frontal lobes and prefrontal cortex, regions of the
brain associated with executive function, have been considered to be
among the last regions to mature, other cortical regions show similarly
prolonged trajectories of maturation. Without question, adolescents
are capable of the complex cognitive processes attributed to frontal
lobe function. Cognitive control, however, continues to improve into
adulthood, with progressive maturation and integration of component

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1162 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
processes such as working memory, inhibition and impulse control,
performance monitoring, and motivational circuitry.
The behavioral correlates of adolescent neurodevelopment remain
speculative but are increasingly supported by a rapidly expanding body
of research. Adolescents appear to demonstrate a unique sensitivity
to the effects of dopamine on reward-­relevant subcortical structures
such as the ventral striatum and the ventral tegmental area, with some
studies demonstrating increased activation in this region when receiving rewards relative to children or adults. Other studies show reduced
responsiveness to aversive stimuli in adolescents. This altered responsiveness to risk vs reward, paired with incomplete frontal lobe myelination and thus immature impulse control, may underlie the increased
risk taking and novelty seeking seen in adolescents. Early maturation
and distinct patterns of neural reactivity in the amygdala and other
limbic structures may explain the strong role that social and emotional stimuli play in adolescents, sometimes overwhelming the frontal
executive function systems that facilitate the interpretation and regulation of those social and emotional experiences. This may explain why
adolescents are more likely to make poor decisions in highly emotionally charged situations relative to mature adults. These “hot cognition”
processes may result in the adolescent making a different decision in
the context of a strong affective experience than he or she would in
a less emotional state (“cool cognition”). These two types of cognitive
processes may not develop at the same rate; the adolescent may be able
to use higher brain structures and functions more effectively when in
states of lower emotional arousal.
Early adolescents often continue to employ the concrete operational
cognitive processes of childhood. Although formal operational cognition is developing, it may be applied inconsistently across different
domains. A young adolescent may be able to use abstract thought when
completing schoolwork, but not when working through a personal
dilemma. Early adolescence also is characterized by egocentricity—the
belief of some adolescents that they are the center of everyone’s attention. Despite being largely imagined, this perception of always being
“on stage” can be stressful for adolescents, who may feel that others
are constantly judging or evaluating them. Early adolescents express a
greater need for privacy than they did in childhood and begin to appreciate the privacy of their own thoughts. With ongoing cognitive development, middle adolescents are more able to consider the needs and
feelings of other people. Their creativity and intellectual abilities are
enhanced. Because of their increased capacity for abstract thought in
combination with a persistent perception of uniqueness, middle adolescents may feel a sense of immortality and immunity to the consequences of risky behaviors. Late adolescents are more future oriented
and able to delay gratification. They can think more independently,
consider others’ views, and compromise. They have a stronger sense of
self and more stable interests. Under times of stress, adolescents may
temporarily revert to the cognitive processes and coping strategies used
at younger ages.
Moral development generally accompanies cognitive development. Preadolescents, concrete and individualistic, follow rules to
please authority figures and avoid punishment. As they move into early
adolescence, they develop a stronger sense of right and wrong but are
likely to perceive these as absolute and unquestionable. Middle and late
adolescents may establish a sense of morality driven by their desire to
be seen as a good person, to behave in a manner according to their
perceived place in society, or by their sense of obligation to care for
others. Moral decision-­making, however, still may be highly subject to
emotional context. Late adolescents may develop a rational conscience
and an independent system of values, although these often are largely
consistent with parental values. While going through this complex
developmental process, religious or political organizations that promote simple answers to complex social or moral questions may hold
great appeal to the adolescent.

PSYCHOSOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

In contrast to cognitive development, psychosocial development
correlates more strongly with pubertal status and physical maturation than with chronological age. Whereas cognitive development

is more biologically determined, psychosocial development is
subject to greater environmental and cultural influences. Indeed,
cultural variation can be dramatic. Some late adolescents move
immediately from high school into marriage, childbearing, working, and financial independence; others remain dependent on the
parents while pursuing their own education for several more years,
in a period sometimes referred to as emerging adulthood. Psychosocial development also may be nonlinear, with different domains of
growth progressing along different timelines. An overriding theme
of psychosocial development is the concept of identity formation
and consolidation as the adolescent moves away from the nurturing protection of the family, develops an increased affiliation with
the peer group(s), and ultimately defines himself or herself as an
individual.
Separation from the parents is a hallmark of adolescent development. Early adolescents start to seek out more privacy at home,
spending less time with the parents. They begin to reject parental
advice and involvement in their decision-­making as they explore
the boundaries of their dependence on, and independence from,
their parents. With evolving cognitive skills, an adolescent can
conceive of an ideal parent and contrast this ideal with his or her
own parents. Adolescents may seek out alternative adult role models, such as teachers, coaches, or parents of friends. Parent–child
conflict often peaks during middle adolescence, with disagreements
over privileges, independence, and other limits set by the parents.
Adolescents may appear intermittently to seek and reject parental
acceptance. It is theorized that perhaps the adolescent needs to conceive of the parents as “wrong” in order to ameliorate the pain of
separating from them. Throughout this time, however, the parents
remain a critical source of nurturing and support for the adolescent
and continue to exert significant influence over the adolescent’s
decision-­making. Paradoxically, frequent arguments and conflict
may coexist with strong emotional bonds and closeness. The late
adolescent may reestablish a more “adult–adult” type of relationship
with the parents, once again seeking out and considering parental
advice and guidance as they enter adulthood.
Increasing importance of the peer group also may buffer the emotional trauma of separating from the parents (see Fig. 150.1). Early
adolescents tend to socialize largely with same-­gender peers, both in
their individual friendships and larger groups. Females’ peer groups
tend to be more relationship oriented, whereas males’ peer groups are
more likely to be centered around a particular interest or activity. In
both cases, group cohesion and a sense of belonging become important. Peers become increasingly important in middle adolescence,
during which time the adolescent may experiment with being a part
of different groups and “try on” different identities. These groups may
include all genders. Peer groups may arise from organized activities,
such as sports or clubs, or may simply be friendship based. Gang
membership is another form of peer acceptance. Conformity with
the peers in manners of dress, speech, and behavior is a normal part
of this process and should not necessarily be viewed negatively. Similarly, peer pressure may exist, but its influence over the adolescent’s
decision-­making may be positive, negative, or negligible. Acceptance
and successful navigation of peer groups during adolescence may
give the individual more confidence to move into and out of various
social, academic, and professional groups in the future. Late adolescents are less vulnerable to peer group influence, having moved closer
to establishing their own stable identity. Their cognitive skills allow
them to choose selectively among different peer groups, endorsing
and adopting individual values and behaviors that best reflect who
they are becoming.
Early adolescents have increased sexual awareness and interest,
which may manifest as sexual talk and gossip, and often is focused
on sexual anatomy. Masturbation and other sexual exploration,
sometimes with same-­sex peers, are common. The prevalence of
other forms of sexual behavior varies by culture; in general, these
behaviors are less common in early adolescents. Romantic relationships, if they exist at all, lack emotional depth. Sexual curiosity, experimentation, and activity become more common among

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 150 u Adolescent Physical and Social Development
middle adolescents. Same-­sex attraction is common; sexual orientation may become clear to some adolescents, but still may be evolving in others during this time. Dating behaviors may be seen, but
this is culture dependent and may not be a popular construct for all
adolescents. Individual relationships often continue to emphasize
sexual attraction over emotional intimacy. Relationships that occur
during middle adolescence may be short and intense. Emotional
intimacy and more permanent relationships may not be seen until
late adolescence. At that time, relationships increasingly involve
love and commitment and demonstrate greater stability.
Body image may affect (and be affected by) adolescents’ psychosocial development as well. Early and middle adolescence are usually the ages during which poor or distorted body image and eating
disorders develop. Early adolescents undergo rapid physical changes
and may experience uncertainty about whether all these anatomic
and physiologic changes are progressing normally. Reassurance
from adults, including their healthcare providers, may be comforting. As puberty comes to an end and these changes slow, the middle
adolescent’s preoccupation may shift to whether they are attractive
to others. A strong emphasis on physical appearance during this
time is common. Although this focus on physical appearance may
continue into adulthood, late adolescence generally is characterized by a shifting balance toward introspection, with somewhat less
emphasis placed on external characteristics.
The timing of pubertal changes also can affect psychosocial development and well-­being. The progression of pubertal changes in males
is generally associated with a positive self-­
image. Early-­
maturing
males tend to have greater self-­confidence, social, and academic success, whereas later-­maturing males are at risk for more internalizing
behaviors and diminished self-­esteem. Females may initially perceive
changes in their physical appearance more negatively. This appears to
be especially true for early-­maturing females, some of whom experience greater decreases in self-­esteem, engage in more disruptive
behaviors, and have more conflict with their parents than do on-­time
or late-­maturing females. Early-­maturing females may be more comfortable associating with older peers and may subsequently be exposed
to peer pressure around things like sexual activity and substance use
at younger ages. Still lacking the cognitive skills to effectively navigate
these situations, they may be vulnerable to making poor decisions that
place their health and safety at risk. Many other factors influence how
adolescents experience puberty, and supportive peers and adults can
have a positive impact on psychosocial development at any maturational stage. With successful navigation of these domains, emerging
adults move into the world with a strong sense of personal identity
and their place in society. They are able to work toward a vocation
and financial independence and to manage the responsibilities of
adulthood.

IMPLICATIONS FOR PROVIDERS, PARENTS, AND
POLICYMAKERS

Providers can help parents approach their child’s adolescent years by
reframing some of the “challenges” of adolescence as normal developmental milestones that should be anticipated and accepted. Puberty
and emerging sexuality should be approached as positive and health-­
affirming life changes, rather than focusing discussions only on the negative reproductive risks and outcomes. Even good-­natured teasing about
bodily changes can be detrimental to the adolescent’s self-­image. Early-­
maturing females and late-­maturing males should be supported, recognizing their potential increased exposure to psychosocial challenges.
Identification of strengths and emerging positive coping strategies
should be promoted in all youth, particularly those with chronic illness
or other challenges. Providers need to determine the young adolescent’s
cognitive development and capacity for abstract thought and tailor their
communication and counseling style accordingly. Physical examinations
should be performed in private with the parent outside the exam room
(provided the adolescent is comfortable with this), which also affords the
adolescent and provider an opportunity to discuss confidential issues.
Reassurance of normal development should be provided.

1163

As adolescents develop more independence and parent–child
conflict peaks, providers should remind parents that this is typical and that arguing does not mean the adolescent does not value
the parents’ input and perspectives. Although some may rebel initially, most adolescents ultimately adopt a value system very similar
to that of their parents. Even if discussions feel ineffective to parents, they should continue to demonstrate and model these values
to their child. Similarly, rather than categorically dismissing their
child’s “negative” interests, such as playing a violent video game,
parents should be encouraged to use these opportunities to model
critical thinking about the impact of such an activity. Potentially
negative peer groups may be approached the same way, while fostering the development of positive peer networks. Authoritative
parenting, in which clear and appropriate negotiated limits are
set in the context of a caring and mutually respectful parent–child
relationship, is most strongly associated with positive psychosocial development. Parental connectedness and close supervision or
monitoring of the youth’s activities and peer group can be protective
against early onset of sexual activity and involvement in behaviors
that may threaten their safety and can foster positive youth development. Parents should also assume an active role in their adolescent’s
transition to adulthood to ensure that their child receives appropriate preventive health services.
Parents and providers may each work with adolescents to foster
good decision-­making. In addition to providing adolescents with
accurate and complete health information, the adolescent’s cognitive ability to use this information in various contexts must be
considered. Visits with providers can be used to promote independence among adolescents by spending time separately with both
caregivers and the adolescent, allowing the adolescent space to
voice concerns and receive appropriate information about making
healthy decisions and recognizing behaviors that may be placing
their health at risk.
Adolescents may find themselves needing to make important decisions in highly charged situations where they may be unable to manage their emotions and use their higher cognitive functions to examine
the consequences of their decision. For example, a couple in a sexual
situation with high emotional arousal may make the decision to proceed with unprotected intercourse. By anticipating this situation ahead
of time, under conditions of lower emotional arousal, and making a
plan to deal with this, they may make a different decision (e.g., stick
with their prior decision never to have sex without protection) when
the time comes. Parents and healthcare providers are in a position to
encourage and foster this anticipation and planning under conditions
of “cool cognition.”
Providers may need to help parents distinguish normal adolescent development and risk-­taking behaviors from possible signs of
a more serious mental health or conduct problem. Bids for autonomy, such as avoiding family activities, demanding privacy, and
increasing argumentativeness, are normal; extreme withdrawal
or antagonism may be dysfunctional, signaling a mental health or
substance use concern. Bewilderment and dysphoria at the start of
middle school are normal; continued failure to adapt several months
later suggests a more serious problem. Although some degree of risk
taking is normal, progressive escalation of risk-­taking behaviors
is problematic. In general, when the adolescent’s behaviors cause
significant dysfunction in the domains of home life, academics,
or peer relationships, they should be addressed by the parents and
healthcare provider, and referral to a mental health provider may be
considered. In most cases, parents can be reassured that although
adolescence can pose unique challenges, their adolescent, like most
adolescents, will come through it to become a successful and happy
adult.
At national and international levels, adolescents are at risk for environmental, health, behavioral, and societal challenges. Table 150.4 provides suggestions to address these issues.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1164 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 150.4  Recommended Action Bundles* for Adolescent and Young Adult Health Problems and Risks

PROBLEM/
RISK AREA

STRUCTURAL

Sexual and
reproductive
health,
including HIV

Legislation
18 yr as the minimum
age of marriage
Allow provision of
contraception to
legal minors
Legalize abortion

Undernutrition

Fortification of foods
(e.g., iron, folate)

SOCIAL
MARKETING

COMMUNITY
INTERVENTIONS,
INCLUDING
FAMILY

ELECTRONIC
HEALTH,
MOBILE
HEALTH

Promote
community
support for
sexual and
reproductive
health and HIV
health access
for adolescents

Cash transfer
programs, with
payments linked
to staying in
school
Positive youth
development
Peer education

Target
knowledge,
attitudes,
and risk
behaviors

Infectious
diseases

SCHOOLS

HEALTH
SERVICE
SECTOR

Quality secondary
education
Comprehensive
sexuality
education
Safe schools with
clean toilets
and facilities for
menstrual care
School-­based
health services
with condoms
and modern
contraceptives

Condoms and
affordable modern
contraception,
including long-­
acting reversible
contraception
Early HIV and STI
diagnosis and
treatment
Male circumcision
Antenatal, delivery,
and postnatal care
Transition to adult
care for HIV

Micronutrient
supplements
(particularly in
pregnancy)
Protein-­energy
supplementation
Deworming
Cash transfer
program
Nutrition education

Micronutrient
supplements
Healthy school
meals

Screening and
micronutrient
supplementation

Deworming
Bed net distribution

HPV vaccination
Deworming

Early identification
and treatment
Adolescent
vaccinations (HPV,
childhood catch-­up)
Deworming
Bed net distribution
Seasonal malaria
chemoprevention

Multicomponent
interventions that
target violent
behavior and
substance use

Trauma care

Violence

Gun control
Legalize
homosexuality and
protect women from
violence and sexual
coercion
Youth justice reforms
to promote second
chances and
diversion from
custody
16 yr as the minimum
age for criminal
responsibility

Promote
knowledge
of the effects
of violence
and available
services

Promote parent
skills and
parent–child
communication
Positive youth
development
Promote gender
equality
Economic
empowerment
Group training
for awareness,
knowledge, and
skills

Unintentional
injury

Graduated licensing
Mandatory helmet
wearing
Multicomponent
traffic injury control

Promote
knowledge of
risks

Police enforcement
of traffic injury
control

Alcohol and
illicit drugs

Limit alcohol sales
to underage
adolescents
Taxation on alcohol
Drunk-­driving
legislation
Restrict illicit alcohol
Interventions in
licensed premises
Diversion from youth
justice and custody
Graduated drinking

Advertising
restrictions
Campaigns
to build
community
awareness

Promote
parent–child
communication
and parenting
skills
Needle-­syringe
exchange access
Mentoring

Trauma care,
including first
responders (e.g.,
ambulances)
Target
knowledge,
attitudes,
and risk
behaviors

Alcohol-­free
policies

Risk screening
and motivational
interviewing

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 151 u Delivery of Healthcare to Adolescents

1165

Table 150.4  Recommended Action Bundles* for Adolescent and Young Adult Health Problems and Risks—cont’d

PROBLEM/
RISK AREA

STRUCTURAL

SOCIAL
MARKETING

COMMUNITY
INTERVENTIONS,
INCLUDING
FAMILY

ELECTRONIC
HEALTH,
MOBILE
HEALTH

HEALTH
SERVICE
SECTOR

SCHOOLS

Tobacco

Tobacco control,
including taxation,
pricing, and
advertising control
Youth access
restrictions
Legislation for
smoke-­free air

Anti-­tobacco
campaigns

Interventions
to promote
parent skills and
parent–child
communication

Text
messaging
adjunct to
quitting

Smoke-­free policies
Multicomponent

Routine screening
and motivation
interviewing to
promote cessation

Mental
disorders
and suicide

Restriction of access
to means

Promote
adolescent
mental health
literacy

Gatekeeper training

Electronic
mental
health
interventions

Educational
interventions
Gatekeeper
training
School-­based
mental health
services

Practitioner training
in depression
recognition and
treatment
Routine assessment
of mental health,
including self-­harm
and suicide risk

School-­based
health services

Promote self-­
management
Promote transition to
adult healthcare

Multicomponent
interventions
involving
education about
healthy diet
and increasing
opportunities
for physical
education

Manage
comorbidities of
obesity

Chronic
physical
disorders
Overweight
and obesity

Peer support
initiatives

Taxation of high-­
sugar, high-­salt, and
high-­fat foods
Front-­of-­pack
nutrition labels
Restriction of fast-­
food advertising

Promote
physical
activity

Create
opportunities for
maintenance of
physical activity in
daily life

Interactive or
personalized
feedback
interventions

*Actions in bold have an evidence base in adolescents and young adults; actions in italics are promising but without yet a strong evidence base in adolescents and young adults.
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; HPV, human papillomavirus; STI, sexually transmitted infection.
From Patton GC, Sawyer SM, Santelli JS, et al. Our future: a Lancet commission on adolescent health and wellbeing. Lancet. 2016;387:2423–2478, p. 2458.

Chapter 151

Delivery of Healthcare
to Adolescents
Samantha V. Hill and
Tamera Coyne-­Beasley
Healthcare providers play an important role in nurturing healthy
behaviors among adolescents, because the leading causes of death and
disability among adolescents are preventable. Adolescence provides
a unique opportunity to prevent or modify health conditions arising
from behaviors that develop in the second decade of life and that can
lead to substantial morbidity and mortality, such as trauma, suicide,
cardiovascular and pulmonary disease, type 2 diabetes, reproductive
health issues, and cancer (see Chapter 150, Table 150.4).
Health systems in each community should be in place to ensure comprehensive and high-­quality care to adolescents. Health insurance coverage that is affordable, continuous, confidential, and not subject to
exclusion for preexisting conditions should be available for all adolescents
and young adults. Comprehensive, coordinated benefits should meet the
developmental needs of adolescents, particularly for reproductive, mental health, dental, and substance use services. Safety net providers and
programs that provide confidential services, such as school-­based health
centers, federally qualified health centers, family planning services, and
clinics that treat sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in adolescents and

young adults, need to have assured funding for viability and sustainability.
Quality-­of-­care data should be collected and analyzed by age so that the
performance measures for age-­appropriate healthcare needs of adolescents are monitored. Affordability is important for access to preventive
services. Family involvement should be encouraged, but confidentiality
and adolescent consent are critically important and should be addressed
with intentionality at each visit.
Healthcare providers, trained and experienced in adolescent care, should
be available in all communities. Healthcare providers should be adequately
compensated to support the range and intensity of services required to
address the developmental and health service needs of adolescents. The
development and dissemination of provider education about adolescent
preventive health guidelines have been demonstrated to improve the
content of recommended care (Table 151.1). The ease of recognition or
expectation that an adolescent’s needs can be addressed in a setting relates
to the visibility and flexibility of sites and services. Staff at sites should be
approachable, linguistically capable, culturally humble, and able to balance
trauma-­
informed care with healing-­
centered engagement approaches
with attention to equity and social determinants of health. Health services
should be coordinated to respond to goals for adolescent health at the
local, state, and national levels. The coordination should address service
financing and delivery in a manner that reduces disparities in care.
Although most adolescents in the United States have seen a
healthcare provider in the past year and report a usual source of
healthcare, adolescents are less likely to receive preventive care
services. According to the 2019 National Health Interview Survey,
an estimated 92% of 12-­to 17-­year-­old U.S. adolescents had a well
child visit within the past year. Uninsured adolescents are the least
likely to receive care. The National Health Interview Survey found
that 8% of 15-­to 18-­year-­olds were uninsured, whereas 61% and
31% had private and public insurance in 2016, respectively.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1166 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
70

Table 151.1  Bright Futures/American Academy of
Pediatrics Recommendations for Preventive
Healthcare for 11-­to 21-­Year-­Olds

HISTORY

Annual

MEASUREMENTS
Body mass index
Blood pressure

Annual
Annual

SENSORY SCREENING
Vision
Hearing

PROCEDURES
Immunization*
Hematocrit or hemoglobin
Tuberculin test
Dyslipidemia screening

Annual

Cervical dysplasia screening‡

Annual
If risk assessment positive
If risk assessment positive
Once at 9-­11 yr, and once at
17-­21 yr
If sexually active
Once between ages 15 and 18 yr
Discuss and offer at earlier age
and annually if risk assessment
positive.
Beginning at age 21 yr

ORAL HEALTH

Annual; refer to dental home

ANTICIPATORY GUIDANCE

Annual§

STI screening
HIV screening†

40

Uninsured

30
20
Public coverage

10

At 12 yr and 15 yr visits or if risk
assessment positive
Screen with audiometry,
including 6,000-­ and 8,000-­Hz
high frequencies once at 11-­
14 yr, once at 15-­17 yr, and once
at 18-­21 yr.

DEVELOPMENTAL/BEHAVIORAL ASSESSMENT
Developmental surveillance
Annual
Psychosocial/behavioral
Annual
assessment
Depression screening
Annual for 12 yr and older
Tobacco, alcohol, and drug use
If risk assessment positive
assessment
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

50
Percent

PERIODICITY AND
INDICATIONS

Private coverage

60

*Schedules per the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, published annually
at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/index.html and http://redbook.solutio
ns.aap.org/SS/Immunization_Schedules.aspx.
†The CDC recommends universal, voluntary HIV screening of all sexually active people
beginning at age 13 yr. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends offering
routine HIV screening to all adolescents at least once by 16-­18 yr of age and to those
younger if at risk. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends offering
routine HIV screening to all adolescents age 15 yr and older at least once and to
those younger if at risk. Patients who test positive for HIV should receive prevention
counseling and referral to care before leaving the testing site.
‡Screening for cervical cancer, April 2012, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. http://ww
w.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/uspscerv.htm.
§Refer to specific guidance by age as listed in Bright Futures guidelines.
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; STI, sexually transmitted infection.
Adapted from Hagan JF, Shaw JS, Duncan PM, eds. Bright Futures: Guidelines for
Health Supervision of Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 4th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL:
American Academy of Pediatrics; 2017.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) has
expanded access to both commercial health plans and Medicaid for
young adults age 19-­26 years (Fig. 151.1); the proportion of young
adults with insurance increased from 65.7% to 73.8%. ACA provisions
require that commercial health plans continue dependent coverage to
26 years, regardless of the young adult’s financial or dependent status,
marriage, or educational enrollment; mandate university and college student health plans enhance consumer protections for students;
provide financial assistance for young adults to enroll into health
insurance exchanges with incomes ranging from 133% to 399% of

0

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012
(Jan-Sept)

Fig. 151.1 Percentage of adults 19-­25 years of age with health insur-

ance by coverage type and percentage uninsured at the time of the
interview: United States, 1997 to September 2012. Note: Estimates for
2012 are based on data collected in January through September. Data
are based on household interviews of a sample of the civilian noninstitutionalized population. (Data from CDC/NCHS, National Health Interview Survey, 1997–2012, Family Core Component.)

the federal poverty level in Medicaid expansion states; and offer
preventive healthcare services (to include contraceptive care) free
of any cost sharing, deductibles, or copayments. In states that have
expanded Medicaid coverage, all adults with incomes <133% of the
federal poverty level are eligible to enroll. After passage of the ACA,
14% of 18-­to 24-­year-­olds still remained uninsured.
The complexity and interaction of physical, cognitive, and psychosocial developmental processes during adolescence require sensitivity and skill on the part of the health professional (see Chapter 150).
Health education and promotion, as well as disease prevention, should
be the focus of every visit (Table 151.2).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) currently recommends
routine adolescent vaccines for universal administration beginning at
the 11-­to 12-­year-­old visit or as soon as possible: (1) tetanus-­diphtheria-­
acellular pertussis vaccine (Tdap), (2) the meningococcal conjugate
vaccine (MCV4) with a booster at age 16 years, (3) the human papillomavirus vaccine (HPV) series, and (4) the COVID-­19 vaccine (see
Chapter 215). ACIP recommends annual influenza vaccination and hepatitis A virus (HAV) vaccination to adolescents and young adults who
have not previously received the HAV vaccine series if immunity against
HAV is desired or for those at increased risk for infection, such as men
who have sex with men (MSM), injection drug users (IDUs), and those
with chronic liver disease or clotting factor disorders, or those who live
in endemic areas. Although another meningococcal vaccine (MenB) is
not routinely recommended for all adolescents, the ACIP recommends
a MenB vaccine series for people ages 16-­23 based on shared clinical
decision-­making with the patient (or parent/guardian) to provide short-­
term protection against serogroup B meningococcal disease.
The time spent on various elements of the screening will vary with
the issues that surface during the assessment. However, time for
screening and assessment is important for all adolescents, and the
ideal model of adolescent care requires a minimum of 20 minutes per
visit. For lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, intersex, and asexual youth (see
Chapters 153 and 154), emotional and psychologic concerns related to
their experiences, from fear of disclosure to the trauma of discrimination or bullying or violence, may direct the clinician to spend more
time assessing emotional and psychologic supports in the young person’s environment. For youth with chronic illnesses or special needs,
the assessment of at-­risk behaviors should not be omitted or deemphasized by assuming they do not experience the “normal” adolescent
vulnerabilities.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 151 u Delivery of Healthcare to Adolescents

1167

Table 151.2  Adolescent Screening Recommendations
11-­ TO 14-­YR-­OLD VISIT

15-­ TO 17-­YR-­OLD VISIT

18-­ TO 21-­YR-­OLD VISIT

ACTION

ACTION

ACTION

UNIVERSAL SCREENING
Cervical dysplasia*

N/A

N/A

Pap smear all young women at 21 yr visit

Depression

Annual adolescent depression
screen beginning at 12 yr visit

Annual adolescent
depression screen

Annual adolescent depression screen

Dyslipidemia

Lipid screen once at 9-­11 yr

Lipid screen once at 17-­21 yr

Lipid screen once at 17-­21 yr

Hearing

Once at 11-­14 yr
Audiometry, including 6,000-­ 
and 8,000-­Hz high frequencies

Once at 15-­17 yr
Audiometry, including
6,000-­ and 8,000-­Hz high
frequencies

Once at 18-­21 yr
Audiometry, including 6,000-­ and 8,000-­Hz high
frequencies

HIV†

Selective screening (see later)

HIV test once at 15-­18 yr

HIV test once at 15-­18 yr

Tobacco, alcohol, or drug
use

Annual tobacco, alcohol, or
drug use screen

Annual tobacco, alcohol, or
drug use screen

Annual tobacco, alcohol, or drug use screen

Vision

At 12 yr visit
Objective measure with age-­
appropriate visual acuity
measurement using HOTV or
Lea symbols, Sloan letters, or
Snellen letters

At 15 yr visit
Objective measure with age-­
appropriate visual acuity
measurement using HOTV
or Lea symbols, Sloan
letters, or Snellen letters

N/A

11-­14 YR OLD VISIT
SELECTIVE SCREENING

RISK ASSESSMENT (RA)

ACTION IF RA+

15-­17 YR OLD VISIT

18-­21 YR OLD VISIT

ACTION IF RA+

ACTION IF RA+

Anemia

Positive on risk screening
questions

Hemoglobin or hematocrit

Hemoglobin or
hematocrit

Hemoglobin or
hematocrit

Dyslipidemia (if not
universally screened
at this visit)

Positive on risk screening
questions and not previously
screened with normal results

Lipid profile

Lipid profile

Lipid profile

HIV†

Positive on risk screening
questions

HIV test

HIV test (if not
universally screened
at this visit)

HIV test (if not
universally screened
at this visit)

Oral health (through 16 yr
visit)

Primary water source fluoride
deficient

Oral fluoridation
supplementation

Oral fluoridation
supplementation

N/A

STIs
Chlamydia

Sexually active females

Gonorrhea

Sexually active females

Chlamydia and gonorrhea
NAAT (test at all sites
where patient engages in
sex)

Chlamydia and
Chlamydia and
gonorrhea NAAT
gonorrhea NAAT
(test at all sites where
(test at all sites
patient engages in sex)
where patient
engages in sex)

Syphilis

Sexually active and positive on
risk screening questions

Syphilis test

Syphilis test

Syphilis test

Tuberculosis

Positive on risk screening
questions

Tuberculin skin test

Tuberculin skin test

Tuberculin skin test

Vision at other ages

Positive on risk screening
questions at 11, 13, and
14 yr visits

Objective measure with age-­
appropriate visual acuity
measurement using HOTV
or Lea symbols, Sloan
letters, or Snellen letters

Objective measure with
age-­appropriate visual
acuity measurement
using HOTV or Lea
symbols, Sloan letters,
or Snellen letters

Objective measure
with age-­appropriate
visual acuity
measurement using
HOTV or Lea
symbols, Sloan
letters, or Snellen
letters

*Screening for Cervical Cancer. April 2012. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
†The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends universal, voluntary HIV screening of all sexually active people beginning at age 13 yr. The American Academy of

Pediatrics recommends routine HIV screening offered to all adolescents at least once by 16-­18 yr of age and to those younger if at risk. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommends routine HIV screening offered to all adolescents age 15 yr and older at least once and to those younger if at risk. Patients who test positive for HIV should receive
prevention counseling and referral to care before leaving the testing site.
NA, Not applicable; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test; STIs, sexually transmitted infections.
Adapted from Hagan JF, Shaw JS, Duncan PM, eds. Bright Futures: Guidelines for Health Supervision of Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 4th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL:
American Academy of Pediatrics; 2017 and Bright Futures/American Academy of Pediatrics: Recommendations for Preventive Pediatric Health Care (Periodicity Schedule), 2017.
https://www.aap.org/en-­us/Documents/periodicity_schedule.pdf.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1168 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

151.1 Legal Issues
Samantha V. Hill and Tamera Coyne-­Beasley
The rights of an individual, including those of adolescents, vary widely
between nations. In the United States, the right of a minor to consent to
treatment without parental knowledge differs between states and is governed by state-­specific minor consent laws. Some consent laws are based
on a minor’s status, such as minors who are emancipated, parents, married, pregnant, in the armed services, or mature. In some states, minors
can be considered emancipated if they are or have served in the armed
services or are living apart from parents and are economically independent through gainful employment. A mature minor is a minor who is
emotionally and intellectually mature enough to give informed consent
and who lives under the supervision of a parent or guardian. Courts have
held that if a minor is mature, a physician is not liable for providing beneficial treatment. There is no formal process for recognition of a mature
minor. The determination is made by the healthcare provider.
Some minor consent laws are based on services a minor is seeking,
such as emergency care, sexual healthcare, substance abuse, or mental healthcare (Table 151.3). All 50 states and the District of Columbia explicitly allow minors to consent for their own health services for
STIs. Approximately 25% of states require that minors be a certain age
(generally 12-­14 years) before they can consent for their own care for
STIs. No state requires parental consent for STI care or requires that
providers notify parents that an adolescent minor child has received
STI services, except in limited or unusual circumstances.
Minors’ right to consent for contraceptive services varies from state
to state. Almost 50% of states and the District of Columbia explicitly
authorize all minors to consent for their own contraceptive services,
and 50% of states permit minors to consent for their own contraceptive
services under specific circumstances, such as being married, a parent,
currently or previously pregnant, over a certain age, or a high school
graduate, or per physician’s discretion. The FDA has approved a nonprescription daily oral contraceptive (norgestrel) intended to reduce
barriers to access to an effective birth control measure.
A minor’s right to consent for mental healthcare and substance use
treatment services varies by state and age of the minor, whether care is
medical vs nonmedical (e.g., counseling), and whether care is delivered

as an inpatient vs outpatient basis. Minor consent laws often contain
provisions regarding confidentiality and disclosure, even when general
state consent laws do not have such provisions.
The confidentiality of medical information and records of a minor
who has consented for his or her own reproductive healthcare is governed by numerous federal and state laws. Laws in some states explicitly
protect the confidentiality of STI or contraceptive services for which
minors have given their own consent and do not allow disclosure of
the information without the minor’s consent. In other states, laws grant
physicians discretion to disclose information to parents.
The confidentiality of medical information and records of a minor
who has consented for their own healthcare is also governed by numerous federal and state laws. Laws in some states explicitly protect the
confidentiality of STI, contraceptive, or mental health services for
which minors have given their own consent and do not allow disclosure
of the information without the minor’s consent. In other states, laws
grant physicians discretion to disclose information to parents. Title X
and Medicaid both provide confidentiality protection for family planning services provided to minors with funding from these programs.
Federal regulations issued under the Federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, known as the HIPAA Privacy Rule,
defer to state and “other applicable laws” with respect to the question of
whether parents have access to information about care for which a minor
has given consent. Thus both the state laws that either prohibit or permit
disclosure of confidential information and the federal Title X and Medicaid laws that protect the confidentiality of care for adolescents are important under the HIPAA Privacy Rule in determining when confidential
information about health services for minors can be disclosed to parents.
Billing for confidential services is complex. Commercial health plans
send home an explanation of benefit (EOB) to the primary insured or
the primary beneficiary, listing services rendered by the provider and
reimbursed by the health plan. An EOB documenting that confidential health services were rendered to their adolescent dependent that
is received by a parent may disclose those services. In addition, copayments automatically generated with certain billing codes for office
visits and medications can be a barrier for adolescents receiving care,
including treatment. One way to circumvent a breach of confidentiality
from EOBs is to have the adolescent call the insurance company; however, this can be a time-­consuming process.

Table 151.3  Types of Minor Consent Statutes or Rules of Common Law That Allow for Medical Treatment of a Minor Patient
Without Parental Consent
LEGAL EXCEPTIONS TO INFORMED
CONSENT REQUIREMENT

MEDICAL CARE SETTING

The “emergency” exception

• The child is suffering from an emergent condition that places his or her life or health in danger
• The child’s legal guardian is unavailable or unable to provide consent for treatment or transport
• Treatment or transport cannot be safely delayed until consent can be obtained
• The professional administers only treatment for emergent conditions that pose an immediate
threat to the child

The “emancipated minor” exception

• Married
• Economically self-­supporting and not living at home
• Active-­duty status in the military
• In some states, a minor who is a parent or pregnant
• Some states might require a court to declare the emancipation of a minor

The “mature minor” exception

Most states recognize a mature minor, in which a minor, usually ≥14 yr, displays sufficient maturity
and intelligence to understand and appreciate the benefits, risks, and alternatives of the proposed
treatment and to make a voluntary and reasonable choice on the basis of that information; states
vary or whether a judicial determination is required

Exceptions based on specific medical
condition (state laws vary)

Minor seeks:
• Mental health services
• Pregnancy and contraceptive services
• Testing or treatment for HIV infection or AIDS
• Sexually transmitted infection testing and treatment
• Drug and alcohol addiction treatment

Data from American Academy of Pediatrics: consent for emergency medical services for children and adolescents. Pediatrics 2011;128:427–433.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 151 u Delivery of Healthcare to Adolescents
In March 2020, in response to the COVID-­19 pandemic, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was
passed. Part of this act requires rapid release of all patient documentation (e.g., notes, laboratory results, problem and medication lists) and
poses a new challenge to the provision of confidential health services
to adolescents.
Providers may elect to establish a policy of discussing with their adolescent patients when medical records and other information will be
disclosed and developing a mechanism to alert office staff as to what
information in the chart is confidential. For legal and other reasons, a
chaperone should be present whenever an adolescent patient’s genitalia
is examined.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

151.2 Screening Procedures
Samantha V. Hill and Tamera Coyne-­Beasley

INTERVIEWING THE ADOLESCENT

The preparation for a successful interview with an adolescent patient
varies based on the history of the relationship with the patient.
Patients (and their parents) who are going from preadolescence
to adolescence while seeing the same provider should be guided
through the transition. Although the rules for confidentiality are
the same for new and continuing patients, the change in the physician–patient relationship, allowing more privacy during the visit
and more autonomy in the health process, may be threatening for
the parent and the adolescent. For new patients, the initial phases
of the interview are more challenging given the need to establish
rapport rapidly with the patient in order to meet the goals of the
encounter. Issues of confidentiality and privacy should be explicitly stated along with the conditions under which that confidentiality may need to be altered, that is, in life-­or safety-­threatening
situations. For new patients, the parents should be interviewed with
the adolescent or before the adolescent to ensure that the adolescent does not perceive a breach of confidentiality. The clinician
who takes time to listen, avoids judgmental statements and the use
of street jargon, and shows respect for the adolescent’s emerging
maturity will have an easier time communicating with the adolescent. The use of open-­ended questions, rather than closed-­ended
questions, will further facilitate history taking. (The closed-­ended
question, “Do you get along with your father?” leads to the answer
“yes” or “no,” in contrast to the question, “What might you like to
be different in your relationship with your mother?” which may
lead to an answer such as, “I would like her to stop always worrying
about me.”)
The goals of the interview or clinical encounter are to establish an
information base, identify problems and issues from the patient’s perspective, and identify problems and issues from the perspective of the
clinician, based on knowledge of the health and other issues relevant
to the adolescent age-­group. The adolescent should be given an opportunity to express concerns and the reasons for seeking medical attention. The adolescent and the parent should be allowed to express the
strengths and successes of the adolescent, in addition to communicating problems.
The effectiveness of an interview can be compromised when the
interviewer is distracted by other events or individuals in the office,
when extreme time limitations are obvious to either party, or when
there is expressible discomfort with either the patient or the interviewer. The need for an interpreter when a patient is hearing impaired
or a translator if the patient and interviewer are not language compatible provides a challenge, but not necessarily a barrier, under most
circumstances (see Chapter 12). Observations during the interview can

1169

be useful to the overall assessment of the patient’s maturity, presence or
absence of depression, and the parent–adolescent relationship. Given
the key role of a successful interview in the screening process, excellent training and experience should be sought by clinicians providing
comprehensive care to adolescent patients.

PSYCHOSOCIAL ASSESSMENT

A few questions should be asked to identify the adolescent who
is having difficulty with peer relationships (Do you have a best
friend with whom you can share even the most personal secret?),
self-­image (Is there anything you would like to change about yourself?), depression (In the past year have you felt depressed or sad
most days, even if you felt okay sometimes?), school (How are your
grades this year compared with last year?), personal decisions (Are
you feeling pressured to engage in any behavior for which you do
not feel you are ready?), substance use (Have you ever tried smoking, vaping, alcohol, weed, or prescription drugs that were not prescribed for you?), and an eating disorder (Do you ever feel that
food controls you, rather than vice versa?). Standardized screening for depression with validated tools such as the PH-­Q9 modified
for teens is also helpful. The HEADS/SF/FIRST mnemonic, basic
or expanded, can be useful in guiding the interview if encounter
forms are not available (Table 151.4). Based on the assessments,

Table 151.4  Adolescent Psychosocial Assessment:
HEADS/SF/FIRST Mnemonic
Home. Space, privacy, frequent geographic moves, neighborhood
Education/School. Frequent school changes, repetition of a grade/in
each subject, teachers’ reports, vocational goals, after-­school educational
clubs (e.g., language, speech, math), learning disabilities
Abuse. Physical, sexual, emotional, verbal abuse; parental discipline
Drugs. Tobacco, electronic cigarettes or vaping devices, alcohol,
marijuana, inhalants, “club drugs,” “rave” parties, others; drug of
choice, age at initiation, frequency, mode of intake, rituals, alone or
with peers, quit methods, number of attempts
Safety. Seat belts, helmets, sports safety measures, hazardous activities,
driving while intoxicated
Sexuality/Sexual Identity. Reproductive health (use of contraceptives,
presence of sexually transmitted infections, feelings, pregnancy)
Family and Friends
Family: Family constellation; genogram; single/married/separated/
divorced/blended family; family occupations and shifts; history of
addiction in first-­ and second-­degree relatives; parental attitude
toward alcohol and drugs; parental rules; chronically ill, physically
or mentally challenged parent
Friends: Peer cliques and configuration (“preppies,” “jocks,”
“nerds,” “computer geeks,” cheerleaders), gang or cult
affiliation
Image. Height and weight perceptions, body musculature and physique,
appearance (including dress, jewelry, tattoos, body piercing as
fashion trends or other statement)
Recreation. Sleep, exercise, organized or unstructured sports,
recreational activities (television, video games, computer games,
internet and chat rooms, church or community youth group
activities [e.g., Boy (BSA)/Girl Scouts; Big Brother/Sister groups,
campus groups]). How many hours per day, days per week involved?
Spirituality and Connectedness. Use HOPE* or FICA† acronym;
adherence, rituals, occult practices, community service or
involvement
Threats and Violence. Self-­harm or harm to others, running away,
cruelty to animals, guns, fights, arrests, stealing, fire setting, fights
in school
*HOPE, Hope or security for the future; organized religion; personal spirituality and
practices; effects on medical care and end-­of-­life issues.
†FICA, Faith beliefs; importance and influence of faith; community support.
From Dias PJ: Adolescent substance abuse: assessment in the office. Pediatr Clin North
Am 2002;49:269–300.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1170 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
appropriate counseling or referrals are recommended for more
thorough probing or for in-­depth interviewing.

The pubertal growth spurt may involve the optic globe, resulting in
its elongation and myopia in genetically predisposed individuals (see
Chapter 658). Vision testing should therefore be performed to detect
this problem before it affects school performance.

provide reassurance about development. The peak incidence of germ
cell tumors of the testes is in late adolescence and early adulthood.
Because varicoceles often appear during puberty, the examination
also provides an opportunity to explain and reassure the patient
about this entity (see Chapter 582). Self-­examination is no longer
recommended because of the low incidence and high recovery rates
of testicular cancer in this age-­group. Palpation of the scrotum along
with visual inspection should be performed to document bilaterally
descended testicles.

Audiometry

Pelvic Examination

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Vision Testing

Highly amplified music of the kind enjoyed by many adolescents may
result in hearing loss or tinnitus (see Chapter 676). A hearing screening
is recommended by the Bright Futures guidelines for adolescents who
are exposed to loud noises regularly, have had recurring ear infections,
or report problems.

Blood Pressure Determination

Criteria for a diagnosis of hypertension are based on age-­specific
norms that increase with pubertal maturation (see Chapter 471). Individuals younger than 13 years old whose blood pressure (BP) exceeds
the 95th percentile for their age are suspect for having hypertension,
regardless of the absolute reading, and a BP between the 90th and 95th
percentiles should receive appropriate counseling relative to weight
and have a follow-­up examination in 6 months. Individuals 13-­18 years
old with a BP of 130-­139/80-­89 are suspect for having hypertension,
and those with a BP of 120-­129/80 should receive appropriate counseling relative to weight and have a follow-­up examination in 6 months.
Those with elevated BPs should have their BP measured on three separate occasions to determine the stability of the elevation before moving forward with an intervention strategy. The technique is important;
false-­positive results may be obtained if the cuff covers less than two
thirds of the upper arm. The patient should be seated, and an average
should be taken of the second and third consecutive readings, using the
change rather than the disappearance as the diastolic pressure. Most
adolescents with BP elevation have labile hypertension. If BP is below
2 standard deviations (SD) for age, anorexia nervosa and Addison disease should be considered.

Scoliosis

See Chapter 720.
Approximately 5% of male and 10–14% of female adolescents have a
mild curvature of the spine. This is 2-­4 times the rate in younger children. Scoliosis is typically manifested during the peak of the height
velocity curve, at approximately 12 years in females and 14 years in
males. Females should be screened twice, once between 11 and 12 and
again between 13 and 14, and males should be screened between 12
and 13. Curves measuring >10 degrees should be monitored by an
orthopedist until growth is complete.

Breast Examination

See Chapters 158 and 588.
Visual inspection of the young and middle adolescent female’s
breasts is performed to evaluate progression of sexual maturation and
provide reassurance about development. The American Cancer Society
no longer recommends a clinical breast exam as a screening method
for women in the United States. Breast self-­exam is also no longer recommended as an option for women of any age.

Scrotum Examination

Visual inspection of the young and middle adolescent male testicles is performed to evaluate progression of sexual maturation and

See Chapter 585.

Laboratory Testing

The increased incidence of iron-­deficiency anemia after menarche
directs the performance of a hematocrit annually in females with moderate to heavy menses. The reference standard for this test changes
with progression of puberty, as estrogen suppresses erythropoietin (see
Chapter 496). Populations with nutritional risk should also have the
hematocrit monitored. Androgens have the opposite effect, causing the
hematocrit to rise during male puberty; sexual maturity rating (SMR)
1 males have an average hematocrit of 39%, whereas those who have
completed puberty (SMR 5) have an average value of 43%. Tuberculosis (TB) testing is important in adolescents with risk factors, such
as an adolescent with HIV, living in a household with someone with
HIV, incarcerated, homeless, from a country where TB is common,
or those with other risk factors, because puberty has been shown to
activate this disease in those not previously treated. Hepatitis C virus
(HCV) screening should be offered to all adolescents 18 years and
older regardless of their risks. It should also be offered to adolescents
who report risk factors, such as IDU, received blood products or organ
donation before 1992, or long-­term hemodialysis. The rate of acute
hepatitis C has remained the highest among persons age 20-­39 years,
similar to age-­groups at highest risk for fatal overdose in the United
States and age at initiation of IDU among certain U.S. populations.
Compared with 2018, the greatest increase in the rates of acute hepatitis C were observed among those age 40-­49 years (31% increase),
followed by those age 30-­39 years (23% increase). For the first time
in more than a decade, the rate of acute hepatitis C decreased slightly
among those age 20-­29 years. Rates have consistently been lowest
among those age <20 years or ≥60 years. Sexually active adolescents
should undergo screening for STIs per CDC guidelines, regardless of
symptoms (see Chapter 163). There are clear indications for chlamydia
and gonorrhea screening of females ≤24 years old, but less sufficient
evidence to support routine screening in young men. Based on feasibility, efficacy, and cost-­effectiveness, evidence is insufficient to recommend routine chlamydia screening in all sexually active young men.
However, screening of sexually active young males should be considered in clinical settings associated with a high prevalence of chlamydia
(e.g., adolescent clinics, correctional facilities, sexually transmitted
disease clinics) and should be offered to all young MSM. HIV screening should be discussed and offered at least once to all adolescents age
15-­18 years and to younger and older adolescents who are at increased
risk. Routine screening of adolescents who are asymptomatic for certain STIs (e.g., syphilis, trichomoniasis, herpes simplex virus, HPV)
is not recommended. However, young MSM and pregnant adolescent
females might require more thorough evaluation for all sexually transmitted diseases. Because cervical cancer incidence is low and complications from procedures may outweigh benefits of screening adolescent
females, cervical cancer screening should not begin until age 21 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1171

Chapter 152

Transitioning to Adult
Care
Joseph M. Truglio and Nikita Barai
The importance of thoughtfully and intentionally transitioning care
of adolescents from pediatric to adult services, particularly for adolescents with special healthcare needs (SHCN), has been recognized for more than 2 decades. The Society of Adolescent Health
and Medicine defines health care transitions as “the purposeful,
planned movement of adolescents and young adults (AYA) with
chronic physical and medical conditions from child-­centered to
the adult-­oriented health care system.” For adolescents with SHCN,
successful transition is associated with improved health outcomes
and quality of life, whereas poorly managed transitions may lead to
loss of a medical home and worsening of chronic disease control.
All adolescents, regardless of SHCN, are likely to benefit from the
autonomy, continuity of care, and self-­management skills that are
facilitated by a successful transition.
Guidelines emphasize that transition is a process, not an event,
and encompasses much more than simply the transfer of care from
one clinician to another. The guidelines make recommendations
and provide practice-­based resources for implementing elements of
transition support in pediatric, family medicine, internal medicine,
and combined internal medicine–pediatric practices. This includes
providing assistance for the patient in adapting to an adult model
of healthcare delivery as they transition from one practice/clinician
to another or as they transition between models of care within the
same practice. It also emphasizes the importance of the many members of the patient’s care team (primary and specialty care, physical
and occupational therapy, school and/or vocational support, mental
health clinicians, and so on) that support the patient before, during,
and after the transition process. Table 152.1 represents the key elements of healthcare transition. Tools to assist providers with these
steps are available online from the National Center for Health Care
Transition Improvement (www.gottransition.org).
The process begins with the development of a transition policy
and its dissemination to all families of young adolescents, ensuring
families understand that transition planning will be an element of
health maintenance and chronic care management visits throughout the adolescent years. By middle adolescence, a transition plan
should be developed with the youth and family caregivers and
updated at subsequent visits until the patient is ready for implementation of the adult care model in early adulthood. Periodic readiness assessments are key to planning and anticipating challenges.
Critical to the transition process is skills training for the adolescent
in communication, self-­advocacy, and self-­care. Some youth with
SHCN depend on caregivers for navigating the healthcare system
on their behalf, and it is not realistic to expect increased independence. For these youth, addressing guardianship, long-­term care
planning, and advance directives are important. Care coordination
facilitates navigation and engagement in an adult-­oriented health
system, especially for adolescents with SHCN. The goal is to help all
youth maximize their potential as they become young adults.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 152.1  Key Elements of the Transition of Healthcare
Process
• Written transition policy to be shared with youth, families,
providers, and staff, explaining the process and the
responsibilities of all team members
• Transitioning youth registry to track the progress of each patient
through the transition process
• Longitudinal readiness checklists assessing the youth’s ability for
independence, self-­management, and communicating with the
adult healthcare system, as well as the family’s readiness to assist
the patient in achieving these goals
• Written transition plan documenting the steps to be conducted
to meet the needs identified in the readiness assessment and
identifying appropriate adult care resources
• For youth with SHCN, expanded transition services, including
attention to insurance, entitlements, guardianship, and vocational
needs, in addition to adult subspecialty care
• Appropriate communication between the pediatric and adult
medical home and subspecialists, including a portable medical
summary and care plan delivered to the patient and caregivers
• Transfer of care, within the 18-­ to 21-­yr-­old range, to adult
providers, to whom pediatric providers continue to serve as a
resource until transition is complete

Chapter 153

Gender Identity and
Transgender Care
Abby Walch and Stephen M. Rosenthal
TERMINOLOGY

Sex refers to the physical or genetic characteristics that differentiate
between biologic maleness or femaleness (e.g., sex chromosomes,
gonads, internal and external genital structures). Sex designated
(assigned) at birth is typically based on the appearance of the external genitalia. In the absence of atypical genitalia, which may indicate a
difference of sexual development requiring further evaluation, sex is
designated at birth as either male or female.
Gender identity refers to one’s internal core sense of gender. Gender is not binary, and although most people identify their gender as
being male (boy or man) or female (girl or woman), others may identify as both, neither, or another gender completely. The gender identity
of an individual cannot be known until they reach a certain level of
psychosocial development and self-­awareness to identify it themself.
Development of gender identity likely results from a complex interplay
of biologic, environmental, and cultural factors. This concept is supported by compelling studies in several biomedical disciplines including genetics, endocrinology, and neurology. Gender expression refers
to one’s external manifestations of gender (e.g., choice of name, pronouns, clothing, hairstyle), whereas gender role describes the behaviors, attitudes, and personality traits considered to be masculine or
feminine by a society or culture during a particular period.
Many cultures recognize and accept as normal more than two genders. In the Philippines, Bakla is considered a third gender; many are
community leaders. In India, the third gender is Hijras, and Aboriginal
(Australian) terms such as brotherboy and sistergirl are used to refer to
transgender and gender-­diverse people.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1172 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Indigenous Nations (America) peoples may have three to five genders: male, female, Two Spirits female, Two Spirits male, and transgender. Navajo refer to Two Spirits as Nádleehí (transformed), and the
Cheyenne term for Two Spirits is Hemaneh (half man, half woman). In
all these societies, Two Spirits people are honored and often leaders in
their tribe.
Cisgender refers to people who have a gender identity that aligns
with their sex designated at birth. Gender incongruence is the term
used when gender identity does not align with the sex designated at
birth. Transgender and gender diverse (TGD) is an umbrella term
used to describe a diverse group of people with gender incongruence.
All TGD gender identities are normal, healthy variations within the spectrum of possible gender identities. Individuals with gender identities that
are not exclusively male or female may describe themselves as gender
nonbinary, genderqueer, or genderfluid. Some of these individuals
may also identify as transgender while others may not.
Gender dysphoria refers to the distress experienced by TGD individuals caused by gender incongruence. This term replaced “gender
identity disorder” in the most recent Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM)-­5 published in 2013, focusing the clinical
concern on the distress an individual may experience because of gender dysphoria and underscoring the nonpathologic nature of TGD gender identities. Not all TGD individuals experience gender dysphoria,
and use of this term, although sometimes necessary to obtain gender-­
affirming therapies, may be considered offensive and stigmatizing by
some.
It is important to distinguish gender identity as separate from
sexual orientation, which refers to an individual’s sexual attraction
to another person. Gender identity does not predict sexual orientation, and a person with any gender identity may have any sexual
orientation.

which TGD individuals encounter significant oppression and discrimination. What is evident is the importance of accepting and valuing the gender
identities as reported by TGD children at any point in time and the recognition that gender may not be binary and may change over time.
Gender incongruence that occurs in young children does not invariably
persist into adolescence and adulthood. Studies based on earlier versions
of the DSM demonstrate that gender dysphoria or gender incongruence
in prepubertal children persists in a minority of these individuals. Future
studies may reveal different persistence rates, as DSM-­5 criteria for the
diagnosis of gender dysphoria are narrower compared to previous versions. Although it is currently not possible to predict which children will
persist in their asserted TGD identity, certain factors are associated with
persistence of a TGD identity. Receipt of a gender dysphoria diagnosis in
childhood, increased intensity of gender dysphoria as measured on gender
dysphoria scales, social gender transition in childhood, sex designated as
female at birth, and older age at clinic intake have been associated with
higher persistence rates of TGD identities. Although not well studied, the
assigned male at birth verbal toddler who asserts “I am a girl” (rather than
“I want to be a girl”) has a high likelihood of persistence.
Recognition that social gender transition in prepubertal children is
associated with a higher likelihood of persistence should not prevent children from making this transition. Social transition, when completed early,
may result in more favorable outcomes for some TGD children and should
be done with input from a qualified mental health provider. Currently, persistence of gender incongruence and gender dysphoria can only reliably
be assessed after the onset of puberty. Gender dysphoria that emerges or
worsens with puberty onset is associated with a very high rate of persistence of that individual’s TGD identity into adulthood, an observation that
is fundamental to the rationale for the provision of medical interventions
in TGD youth who meet criteria for treatment.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Optimally, the diagnostic evaluations of TGD youth are performed by
a multidisciplinary team comprising medical and mental health professionals. Current clinical practice guidelines recommend that gender
incongruence and gender dysphoria be diagnosed by a qualified mental health gender specialist after a thorough psychodiagnostic evaluation. Specific criteria for the mental health gender specialist in their
role providing care for TGD youth are outlined elsewhere, whereas the
recommendations in this chapter are intended for medical providers.
Although the involvement of a mental health gender specialist in the
diagnostic evaluation of TGD youth is recommended by current clinical
practice guidelines prior to initiating any medical therapies, it is recognized that this may not always be possible. Mental health gender specialists may be inaccessible in certain areas, and the insistence that a TGD
child establish mental healthcare in this circumstance could delay care
indefinitely. Additionally, if an early pubertal TGD child presents with significant gender dysphoria, and if requiring input from a mental health gender specialist before initiating puberty blockers would create a significant
delay in care, resulting in the development of irreversible secondary sexual
characteristics, this could be harmful. Therefore in limited circumstances
it may be reasonable to initiate gender-­affirming medical therapies without input from a mental health gender specialist, though with the increasing use of telehealth, there may be greater access to mental health gender
specialists. Providers involved in the diagnostic evaluation of TGD youth
should be thoughtful about their strengths and limitations and refer for
further evaluation as needed to provide optimal care.
At the initial clinic visit, medical providers should obtain information from TGD youth and their families about the child’s gender journey. This information should include their current understanding of
their gender identity, challenges faced in addition to support received
in their families and surrounding communities, any distress associated
with their body and if so whether it changed with puberty, and a full
medical and mental health history. After obtaining this information,
in TGD youth seeking gender-­affirming medical therapies, the medical provider then must decide whether the individual fulfills criteria
for treatment (Table 153.1) for gender dysphoria/gender incongruence
according to the DSM-­5 (Table 153.2).

Early studies likely underestimated the size of the TGD population due
to reliance on reports of individuals who accessed gender-­related mental health or medical care and because of the lack of questions related to
gender identity on population-­based surveys. With newer study methods and increased societal recognition and acceptance of the diverse
spectrum of genders, it is now evident that the prevalence of TGD persons is higher than previously thought. With improved access to multidisciplinary gender clinics, TGD youth are seeking gender-­affirming
medical treatment at increasing rates.
In 2022, a report from the Williams Institute of the University
of California Los Angeles School of Law, informed by the Center
for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System and the Youth Risk Behavior Survey carried
out from 2017 to 2020 and 2017 to 2019, respectively, revealed that
0.5% of U.S. adults (18 years and older) and 1.4% of adolescents and
young adults (13-­17 years) identify as transgender. A population-­
based study of self-­reported gender identity in high school students
carried out in Minnesota in 2016 reported a 2.7% prevalence of
TGD individuals. An international review in 2016 estimated the
TGD population worldwide to be 25 million with 0.5–1.3% of birth-­
designated males and 0.4–1.2% of birth-­designated females having
TGD gender identities.
There has been a striking inversion in the sex ratio of TGD youth
seeking services for gender dysphoria. Reports from Europe and North
America prior to 2005–2006 revealed a predominance of birth-­designated
males. Since then, and for unclear reasons, there has been a predominance
of birth-­designated females. A 2017 survey of 25 gender centers in the
United States, Europe, and Chile demonstrated that 63% of youth being
treated were transitioning from female to male.

Clinical Presentation

TGD youth may recognize and reveal their gender identity to others at
any age. Some will communicate their identity in early childhood as soon
as they are able to talk. Others may not acknowledge or share their identity until adulthood, largely influenced by a cis-­heteronormative society in

Diagnostic Evaluation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1173
Table 153.1  Criteria for Gender-­Affirming Hormone
Therapy for Adolescents

Table 153.2  DSM-­5 Criteria for Gender Dysphoria in
Adolescents and Adults

Adolescents are eligible for GnRH agonist treatment if:

A. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed
gender and natal gender of at least 6 mo in duration, as manifested
by at least two of the following:
1. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed
gender and primary and/or secondary sex characteristics
(or in young adolescents, the anticipated secondary sex
characteristics)
2. A strong desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or secondary
sex characteristics because of a marked incongruence with
one’s experienced/expressed gender (or in young adolescents,
a desire to prevent the development of the anticipated
secondary sex characteristics)
3. A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex
characteristics of the other gender
4. A strong desire to be of the other gender (or some alternative
gender different from one’s designated gender)
5. A strong desire to be treated as the other gender (or some
alternative gender different from one’s designated gender)
6. A strong conviction that one has the typical feelings and
reactions of the other gender (or some alternative gender
different from one’s designated gender)

1. A QUALIFIED MHP HAS CONFIRMED THAT:

• The adolescent has demonstrated a long-­lasting and intense pattern
of gender nonconformity or gender dysphoria (whether suppressed or
expressed)
• Gender dysphoria worsened with the onset of puberty
• Any coexisting psychologic, medical, or social problems that could
interfere with treatment (e.g., that may compromise treatment adherence)
have been addressed, such that the adolescent’s situation and
functioning are stable enough to start treatment
• The adolescent has sufficient mental capacity to give informed consent/
assent to this (reversible) treatment

2. AND THE ADOLESCENT:

• Has been informed of the effects and side effects of treatment (including
potential loss of fertility if the individual subsequently continues with sex
hormone treatment) and options to preserve fertility
• Has given informed consent/assent and (particularly when the adolescent
has not reached the age of legal medical consent, depending on
applicable legislation) the parents or other caretakers or guardians have
consented to the treatment and are involved in supporting the adolescent
throughout the treatment process

3. AND A PEDIATRIC ENDOCRINOLOGIST OR OTHER CLINICIAN
EXPERIENCED IN PUBERTAL ASSESSMENT:
• Agrees with the indication for GnRH agonist treatment
• Has confirmed that puberty has started in the adolescent (Tanner stage
≥G2/B2)
• Has confirmed that there are no medical contraindications to GnRH
agonist treatment

Adolescents are eligible for subsequent sex hormone treatment if:
1. A QUALIFIED MHP HAS CONFIRMED:

• The persistence of gender dysphoria
• Any coexisting psychologic, medical, or social problems that could
interfere with treatment (e.g., that may compromise treatment adherence)
have been addressed, such that the adolescent’s situation and
functioning are stable enough to start sex hormone treatment
• The adolescent has sufficient mental capacity (which most adolescents
have by age 16 years) to estimate the consequences of this (partly)
irreversible treatment, weigh the benefits and risks, and give informed
consent/assent to this (partly) irreversible treatment

2. AND THE ADOLESCENT:

• Has been informed of the (irreversible) effects and side effects of
treatment (including potential loss of fertility and options to preserve
fertility)
• Has given informed consent/assent and (particularly when the adolescent
has not reached the age of legal medical consent, depending on
applicable legislation) the parents or other caretakers or guardians have
consented to the treatment and are involved in supporting the adolescent
throughout the treatment process

3. AND A PEDIATRIC ENDOCRINOLOGIST OR OTHER CLINICIAN
EXPERIENCED IN PUBERTAL INDUCTION:
• Agrees with the indication for sex hormone treatment
• Has confirmed that there are no medical contraindications to sex
hormone treatment

MHP, mental health professional.
Data from Coleman E, Radix AE, Bouman WP, et al. Standards of care for the health
of transgender and gender diverse people, Version 8. Int J Transgend Health.
2022;23(Suppl 1):S1-S259.

Gender-­Affirmative Care

TGD youth have historically faced high rates of discrimination and barriers in medical care settings. Pediatric primary care providers play a
vital role in assessing the gender identities of their patients during routine well child checks, and they should be relied upon as a trusted source
of validation, support, and reassurance to TGD youth and their families
(Table 153.3). If a provider feels unable to address gender-­related issues,
then referral to another provider who can is recommended. If additional
information on gender-­affirming medical therapies is desired, referral to

B. The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning
Specify if:
1. The condition exists with a disorder of sex development
2. The condition is posttransitional, in that the individual has
transitioned to full-­time living in the desired gender (with or
without legalization of gender change) and has undergone (or is
preparing to have) at least one sex-­related medical procedure or
treatment regimen—namely, regular sex hormone treatment or
gender reassignment surgery confirming the desired gender
(e.g., penectomy, vaginoplasty in natal males; mastectomy or
phalloplasty in natal females)
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. Copyright
2013. American Psychiatric Association.

a provider with expertise in the care of TGD youth is appropriate. Available resources for youth, family, and providers are noted in Table 153.4.
Pediatric providers should follow a gender-­affirmative care model
(GACM) in their practices. In a GACM, providers offer a supportive,
open-­minded environment while facilitating discussion and exploration of their patients’ gender identities. Within this care model, the
following messages are relayed: (1) TGD identities and diverse gender
expressions are normal, healthy variations, (2) gender identity develops through a complex interplay of biologic, environmental, and cultural factors, and (3) coexisting mental health issues are more often
caused by stigma and discrimination than by internal psychologic disturbances within the TGD child. Key components of gender-­affirming
clinics are highlighted in Figure 153.1.
Pediatric providers should help TGD youth explore the various
options available for gender affirmation. Some TGD youth will require
medical or surgical interventions for affirmation of their gender,
whereas others will not. Social transition is a nonmedical intervention
that may occur gradually or all at once. It may occur in only some environments and not in others, or it may occur in all spaces in which TGD
individuals find themselves. Social transition may include adaptions
to name and/or pronouns, changes to hairstyle and/or clothing, use
of devices to hide unwanted physical features (e.g., binders to create a
smoother contour of the chest) or to create the appearance of desired
physical features (e.g., packers to achieve the appearance of a genital
bulge), and steps to access appropriate restroom facilities at school,
work, or other public locations. Social transition may also include legal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1174 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 153.3  Strategies for Supporting TGD Youth
DOMAIN

STRATEGIES

Clinical settings

Use of affirmed name and pronouns in clinical spaces and inclusion of this information in the electronic medical
record (EMR)
Training for clinical staff
Use of affirming imagery, inclusive intake forms
Gender-­neutral bathroom spaces
Open-­ended, nonjudgmental discussion about gender identity
Sensitive, trauma-­informed care
History taking using nongendered language

Relationships with family/
caregivers

Assistance with disclosure of identity to family when desired by the youth
Psychoeducation on gender development and the benefits of supporting TGD youth
Promoting practices such as use of affirmed name and pronouns
Education about social transitioning
Providing space and support for parents to express concerns without youth present
Support for disclosure to extended family or other important people
Referrals to support groups or family counseling

Educational settings

Education for school staff on gender concepts and zero tolerance for transphobia
Advocating for the use of affirmed name and pronouns
Advocacy for inclusive sexual education curriculum
Advocacy for youth to use preferred bathrooms, locker rooms, and dorms and participate with desired sports
teams

Public identification

Assistance with documentation for changing legal name and/or gender marker
Documentation of the patient’s gender identity to ensure safe passage during travel

From Voss RV, Simons L. Supporting the health of transgender and gender-­diverse youth in primary care settings. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:259–270, Table 2; with data
from Guss CE, Woolverton GA, Borus J, et al. Transgender adolescents’ experiences in primary care: a qualitative study. J Adolesc Health. 2019;65:344–349.

Table 153.4  Resources for Youth, Parents, and Providers
ONLINE RESOURCE
Resources for youth

Gender Spectrum (genderspectrum.org)
The Trevor Project (thetrevorproject.org)
Transgender Law Center
(transgenderlawcenter.org)
TransAthlete (transathlete.com)
TransLifeline (translifeline.org)

Resources for families
and caregivers

Resources for
providers

PFLAG/PTI (pflag.org)
Family Acceptance Project (familyproject.
sfsu.edu)
Gender Spectrum (genderspectrum.org)
National Center for Transgender Equality
(transequality.org)
Trans Youth Family Allies (imatyfa.org)
World Professional Association for
Transgender Health Standards of Care
(wpath.org)
Endocrine Society Gender Dysphoria/
Gender Incongruence Practice Guidelines
(www.endocrine.org)
UCSF Transgender Center for Excellence
(transcare.ucsf.edu/guidelines)
National LGBTQIA + Health Education
Center (lgbtqiahealtheducation.org)

From Voss RV, Simons L. Supporting the health of transgender and gender-­diverse
youth in primary care settings. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:259–270, Table 3.

affirmation in which an individual updates their name and/or gender
marker on legal documents.

MENTAL HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS

Although the vast majority of TGD youth do not have any underlying
severe psychiatric illnesses, they are at increased risk of internalizing
disorders and life-­threatening behaviors. Studies have demonstrated
an increased prevalence of anxiety, depression, obsessive-­compulsive
disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, eating disorder, self-­
harm

PROVIDERS with
appropriate
knowledge and
resources
EMR tools that
appropriately
document sex and
gender identity, along
with name/pronouns
in use

POLICIES that
prevent discrimination
and ensure
confidential care

AFFIRMING
CLINICS
FOR TGD
YOUTH
ART, FORMS,
AND MEDIA
MATERIALS that reflect
and ACCOMMODATIONS
that are safe/accessible
for all patients
and families

STAFF that are
trained to address
patients appropriately
and provide
affirming treatment

CARE that is
strength-based,
trauma-informed,
and confidential

Fig. 153.1 Key components of an affirming clinic for TGD youth.
(Adapted from Allen BJ, Rosenthal SM. Care of transgender, nonbinary,
and gender diverse youth. In Allen DB, Nadeau K, Kappy MS, Geffner
ME, eds. Pediatric Endocrinology: Principles and Practice, 3rd ed. New
York: McGraw Hill; 2020: Fig. 7-­2.)

behavior, suicidal ideation, and suicide attempts in TGD youth compared to cisgender controls. These conditions and behaviors are not
inherent to an individual’s gender identity, but rather often occur secondary to a lack of societal acceptance, stigma, discrimination, and poor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1175
access to gender-­affirming mental health and medical care. A higher
co-­occurrence of autism spectrum disorder among individuals with
gender dysphoria and vice versa has also been demonstrated in addition
to higher rates of homelessness, physical violence, substance abuse, and
high-­risk sexual behaviors compared to the general population.
In addition to determining the presence or absence of gender dysphoria as part of the psychodiagnostic evaluation, there are many
important reasons to consider involving a mental health gender specialist in the evaluation and care of TGD youth before and during the
provision of gender-­affirming medical care. Mental health gender specialists may (1) evaluate for the presence of and provide treatment for
coexisting mental health concerns, (2) provide family counseling and
supportive psychotherapy to assist youth with the exploration of their
gender identity and alleviate any distress secondary to gender dysphoria, (3) provide education, assist in decision-­making, and refer as indicated for gender-­affirming medical therapies, (4) educate and advocate
for TGD youth and their families in their community, and (5) provide
TGD youth and their families with information for support groups. An
emphasis should be placed on the nonpathologic nature of TGD gender identities, and conversion or reparative therapies aimed at changing an individual’s gender identity are ineffective and unethical (and
illegal in certain places) practices that should not be pursued.
Despite the increased risk for mental health comorbidities in TGD
youth, studies have provided evidence of protective factors resulting
in positive mental health outcomes. Education regarding and access
to gender-­
affirming medical interventions at early pubertal stages
resulted in less gender dysphoria and better mental health and well-­
being in TGD youth. Additionally, TGD youth with supportive family
environments have better mental health outcomes and quality of life.
This knowledge underscores the importance of involving a qualified
mental health professional to facilitate supportive home environments
as needed and educating TGD youth and their families on options for
gender-­affirming medical therapies.
Another aspect of support is to provide access to other children/adolescents who are TGD. Many have identified like-­minded friends in their
own community, but others may develop a community through summer camps, group meetings associated with a treatment center, or the
internet.

Gender-­Affirming Medical Care

Affirming medical and surgical options in TGD individuals who
require them to bring their body into alignment with their gender
identity are essential, medically necessary interventions that have
clear mental health benefits, some of which might even be lifesaving. Mental health benefits of gender-­affirming medical therapies
include the alleviation of gender dysphoria and the avoidance of
worsening of any underlying psychologic distress. Options available
to TGD youth vary depending on their pubertal and developmental
stage, and care should be individualized based on the goals of the
child rather than applied as a blanket algorithm. At each decision
point, careful consideration should be given to the potential risks,
benefits, and likely outcomes of each treatment, and use of signed
consent forms, or informed assent forms in the case of individuals <18 years of age, attesting to an understanding of these considerations are advised before initiating any gender-­affirming medical
therapies. Medical care for TGD youth is based primarily on the
World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH)
Standards of Care (SOC) published in 2022 and the Endocrine Society’s clinical practice guidelines, last published in 2017. TGD seeking gender-­affirming hormone therapy must satisfy certain criteria
before proceeding (see Table 153.1).
Current standards of care and clinical practice guidelines for the
gender-­affirming medical care of TGD youth are based on compelling
research from short-­to medium-­term studies, a 22-­year follow-­up case
report, and expert opinion. Although large longitudinal observational
outcome studies are ongoing, there remains a paucity of long-­term outcome data currently available. Nevertheless, refusing to deliver timely
medical interventions for TGD youth is not a neutral option. A delay
or withholding of care may prolong or worsen gender dysphoria and

mental health and lead to the development of irreversible physical
changes that may require invasive surgical interventions in the future.

PUBERTY BLOCKERS
Treatment Criteria and Timing

Pubertal hormone suppression is recommended in TGD youth who
meet criteria for treatment (see Table 153.1). No medical interventions
are recommended before the onset of puberty. TGD youth are eligible
for treatment only after the onset of puberty. Medical providers should
monitor for physical exam findings consistent with Tanner stage 2,
including breast buds in youth designated female at birth and testicular volume ≥4 mL in youth designated male at birth. Laboratory assays,
including ultrasensitive gonadotropin and sex steroid levels obtained
in the early morning, can be used to confirm the onset of puberty.
However, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH) is released from
the hypothalamus in a pulsatile manner, and in early puberty, gonadotropin and sex steroid hormone levels may overlap with prepubertal
ranges if checked at random times.

Goals of Therapy

When initiated early in puberty, pubertal suppression allows for
expansion of the diagnostic phase with additional time for gender
identity exploration before deciding whether or not to proceed with
gender-­affirming sex hormone (GAH) therapy. Pubertal suppression
also prevents the development of undesirable, irreversible secondary
sex characteristics not aligned with the individual’s gender identity.
These irreversible characteristics include breast development, female
body habitus, and possibly short stature in individuals designated
female at birth and low voice, laryngeal prominence, male bone configuration, tall stature, and male hair pattern on the face and extremities in individuals designated male at birth. Some, but not all, of these
features can only be addressed later with surgery, but pubertal suppression is preferred. Pubertal suppression initiated in early puberty
is thought to be fully reversible; if suspended or discontinued, endogenous puberty will resume.
Pubertal suppression can also be considered in TGD youth in later
stages of puberty with the goal of achieving menstrual suppression in
individuals designated female at birth or the goal of blocking androgen
effects in individuals designated male at birth. However, studies do not
currently exist that inform whether pubertal blockers can be used as a
monotherapy (and for how long) in adolescents older than 14 without
posing a risk to skeletal health, given that prolonged deficiency of sex
steroids could result in impaired bone mineral density (BMD) during
later adolescence and adulthood.

Treatment Options

GnRH agonists are the preferred agents for pubertal suppression
in TGD youth. GnRH agonists are long-­acting medications that are
highly effective in suppressing gonadotropin release through GnRH
receptor desensitization. Once started, GnRH agonists may result in
some regression of previously developed secondary sex characteristics,
including atrophy of breast tissue and a reduction in testicular size.
GnRH agonists are available as injectables given every 1-­6 months or
as subcutaneous implants that last 1-­2 years.
Although GnRH agonists are the most effective and preferred option
for pubertal suppression, they are costly and may be inaccessible to
TGD individuals without insurance coverage. Antiandrogens and
progestins with antiandrogen properties, including spironolactone,
cyproterone, bicalutamide, and medroxyprogesterone, provide additional options for pubertal suppression. These medications are not as
efficacious in suppressing the HPG axis as compared to GnRH agonists, and concern regarding potential side effects have limited their
use. The various medications available for pubertal suppression can be
found in Table 153.5.

Potential Adverse Effects

Before initiating treatment for pubertal suppression, it is important to discuss potential adverse effects with TGD youth and their
guardians. The primary risks of treatment with GnRH agonists

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1176 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 153.5  Available Formulations of Medications Used for Pubertal Blockade
ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

MEDICATION
GnRH agonists

Progestins

Antiandrogens

DOSING FREQUENCY

DOSE

Leuprolide acetate

Intramuscular

Every 1-­3 mo

11.25-­30 mg

Triptorelin

Intramuscular

Every 24 wk

22.5 mg

Histrelin

Subcutaneous implant

Every 1-­2 yr

50 mg

Medroxyprogesterone

Oral

Daily

Up to 40 mg

Intramuscular

Every 3 mo

150 mg

Spironolactone

Oral

1-­2 times/day

25 mg initially, up to 100-­300 mg
divided twice daily

Cyproterone acetate

Oral

Daily

Up to 100 mg

Bicalutamide

Oral

Daily

50 mg

GnRH, Gonadotropin-­releasing hormone.
Adapted from Allen BJ, Rosenthal SM. Care of transgender, nonbinary, and gender diverse youth. In: Allen DB, Nadeau K, Kappy MS, Geffner ME, eds. Pediatric Endocrinology:
Principles and Practice, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw Hill; 2020.

Table 153.6  Baseline and Follow-­Up Protocol During
­Suppression of Puberty
EVERY 3-­6 MO
Anthropometry: height, weight, sitting height, blood pressure,
­Tanner stages
EVERY 6-­12 MO
Laboratory: LH, FSH, E2/T, 25-­OH vitamin D
EVERY 1-­2 YR
Bone density using DXA
Bone age on x-­ray of the left hand (if clinically indicated)
DXA, Dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry; E2, estradiol; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone;
LH, luteinizing hormone; T, testosterone.
Adapted from Hembree WC, Cohen-­Kettenis PT, Delemarre-van de Waal HA, Gooren LJ,
et al; Endocrine Society. Endocrine treatment of transsexual persons: an Endocrine
Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94(9):3132–3154.

include impaired bone mineralization, compromised fertility (if
followed by GAH therapy), and unknown effects on brain development and metabolism.

Bone Health

GnRH agonist treatment initiated early in puberty is associated with an
increased risk of compromised BMD. Assessment of BMD in TGD individuals is challenging in part because it is not clear whether scores should
be compared to norms for the individual’s sex designated at birth or to
norms for their gender identity. Previous studies have demonstrated an
expected stabilization or decline in BMD Z-scores during treatment with
GnRH agonists without recovery to baseline after treatment with GAH
therapy in all instances. In one study, BMD Z-scores normalized in transmales but remained below zero in transfemales 3 years after the addition
of GAH therapy. Potential explanations for differences include differences
in lifestyle, exercise, and vitamin D levels. In early pubertal TGD youth
treated with GnRH agonists, vitamin D status should be monitored and
supplemented, if necessary, and adequate dietary calcium intake and
weight-­bearing exercise should be encouraged to optimize bone health.
BMD should also be monitored every 1-­2 years during GnRH agonist
treatment and, if the individual undergoes phenotypic transition with
gender-­affirming sex hormones, should continue to be monitored as
described in the Endocrine Society’s clinical practice guideline (Tables
153.6 and 153.7).

Fertility

Before initiating treatment for pubertal suppression, counseling must
be provided regarding options for fertility preservation. TGD adolescents and their families should be given the opportunity to meet with a
specialist in reproductive endocrinology before initiating therapy or at
any point during gender-­affirming medical therapy as desired. When
initiated early in puberty, GnRH agonists inhibit gonadal tissue maturation. If discontinued, the effects of GnRH agonists on fertility are
reversible, and gamete maturation will resume. However, if followed
by GAH therapy, fertility is likely to be compromised. If TGD youth
desire fertility preservation, delaying or temporarily discontinuing
pubertal suppression to promote spermatogenesis and oocyte maturation to allow for gamete collection is an option. The attainment of
mature gametes occurs during the later stages of puberty when irreversible secondary sexual characteristics have developed, however,
features that are undesirable for many TGD youth. Individuals who
decide to continue pubertal suppression may elect to preserve immature gonadal tissue in the hopes that ongoing studies and future preservation techniques will allow for the maturation and preservation of
viable gametes. Although in vitro maturation of human germ cells has
not yet been accomplished, a report described in vivo maturation and
subsequent cryopreservation of oocytes in a transgender male adolescent treated with a GnRH agonist starting in early puberty. This was
achieved 2 years after the initiation of GnRH agonist therapy and without the discontinuation of pubertal suppression.
In contrast to TGD youth who initiate GnRH agonist therapy in
early puberty, cryopreservation of mature sperm or eggs is an option
before initiating gender-affirming medical therapy in late puberty or
postpuberty (Table 153.8). If GAH therapy is initiated without fertility
preservation in these individuals, it may be possible to discontinue hormone therapy in the future to allow for recovery of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­
gonadal (HPG) axis and subsequent gamete maturation.
Stopping estrogen in individuals designated male at birth may allow for
recovery of testicular function and collection of sperm. Discontinuation of testosterone in individuals designated female at birth may allow
for ovarian recovery and release of eggs, and some who have desired
this have had successful pregnancies. Unfortunately, even when counseling is provided, very few TGD youth pursue fertility preservation
because of the high associated costs and invasiveness of some procedures and concerns regarding potential delays to medical transition.

Brain Development

Very few studies thus far have assessed the impact of GnRH agonist
therapy on brain development. Attainment of executive functioning is
a milestone that is typically achieved during puberty. A single cross-­
sectional study comparing TGD adolescents treated with GnRH agonists

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1177
Table 153.7  Baseline and Follow-­Up Protocol During Induction of Puberty
Anthropometry

Height,* sitting height,* weight, blood pressure, Tanner stages*

Every 3-­6 mo

Laboratory studies

Testosterone: testosterone, hemoglobin/hematocrit, lipids, 25-­OH vitamin D*
Estrogen: estradiol, prolactin, 25-­OH vitamin D*

Every 3-­12 mo

Imaging*

DXA to evaluate bone mineral density†

Every 1-­2 yr

Left hand radiograph to evaluate bone age (as clinically indicated)
*Only indicated in individuals previously treated with pubertal blockers.
†BMD should be monitored into adulthood (until the age of 25-30 yr or until peak bone mass has been reached).

DXA, Dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry.
Adapted from Hembree WC, Cohen-­Kettenis PT, Delemarre-van de Waal HA , Gooren LJ , et al; Endocrine Society. Endocrine treatment of transsexual persons: an Endocrine Society
clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94(9):3132–3154.

Table 153.8  Fertility Preservation Options for Transgender Patients
FERTILITY PRESERVATION METHOD

PROCEDURE

TIMING OF INTERVENTION

ASSIGNED MALE AT BIRTH
Sperm cryopreservation

Sperm is collected from ejaculated
semen ± electrical or vibratory
stimulation

1. Before initiation of gender-­affirming hormone therapy
or surgery
2. If gender-­affirming hormone therapy already initiated,
consider 3-­mo cessation of estrogen

Surgical sperm extraction

Sperm is obtained surgically from the
testis (TESE) or epididymis (PESA)

1. Before initiation of gender-­affirming hormone therapy
or surgery
2. If gender-­affirming hormone therapy already initiated,
consider 3-­mo cessation of estrogen

Ovarian stimulation followed by surgical
egg retrieval and egg freezing

1. Before initiation of gender-­affirming hormone therapy
or surgery
2. If gender-­affirming hormone therapy already initiated,
consider 3-­mo cessation of testosterone

Embryo cryopreservation

Ovarian stimulation followed by surgical
egg retrieval, IVF, and embryo freezing

1. Before initiation of gender-­affirming hormone therapy
or surgery
2. If gender-­affirming hormone therapy already initiated,
consider 3-­mo cessation of testosterone

Ovarian tissue cryopreservation

Surgical removal and freezing of ovarian
tissue

Before gender-­affirming surgery involving removal of
ovaries

ASSIGNED FEMALE AT BIRTH
Oocyte cryopreservation

PESA, Percutaneous epididymal sperm aspiration; TESE, testicular sperm extraction; IVF, in vitro fertilization.
From Montoya MN, Peipert BJ, Whicker D, Gray B. Reproductive considerations for the LGBTQ+ community. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:283–297, Table 2.

to untreated TGD adolescents found no significant differences in executive functioning. However, animal studies have suggested that GnRH
agonists may affect cognitive function, and one transgender adolescent
was reported to demonstrate a lack of expected variation in white matter
fractional anisotropy (a measure of brain maturation thought to typically
occur during puberty) and a 9-­point drop in operational memory testing
after approximately 2 years of treatment with a GnRH agonist. A subsequent systematic review and meta-analysis found no adverse impacts
of hormone therapy on cognitive function in transgender young adults.
Additional long-­term studies are necessary to assess the impact of GnRH
agonist therapy more fully on brain development in TGD youth.

Metabolism and Other Effects

A few studies have evaluated the effects of GnRH agonists on various
metabolic and physiologic parameters and future surgical outcomes.
A decrease in lean body mass, an increase in fat percentage, and
weight gain have been reported in studies of TGD adolescents treated
with GnRH agonists. TGD youth designated female at birth who start
GnRH agonist therapy may also experience hot flashes, especially if
this treatment is initiated in the later stages of puberty. TGD youth
designated male at birth who initiate pubertal suppression in early
puberty will have limited growth of their genitalia, which may require
alternative techniques for penile inversion-vaginoplasty if gender-­
affirming genital surgery is desired in the future, and counseling
should be provided in this regard before initiating treatment with a
pubertal blocker.

Alternative Therapy Side Effects

GnRH agonist therapy for pubertal suppression may not be an option
for all TGD youth, and alternative therapies are also associated with
potential adverse effects. Spironolactone may cause electrolyte abnormalities, polyuria, and orthostasis. Concern for potential hepatotoxicity associated with cyproterone acetate and bicalutamide treatment
has limited their use. Progestin treatment may cause hot flashes, headaches, acne, depression, weight gain, lipid changes, and irregular menstrual bleeding in individuals designated female at birth.

Monitoring Protocol

Efficacy and potential adverse effects of treatment should be monitored
closely in TGD youth treated with pubertal suppression according to
the protocol outlined in Table 153.6. For individuals treated with spironolactone, serum electrolytes should be monitored every 3 months
for the first year of therapy and then annually.
A clear endpoint for pubertal suppression can be difficult to determine. It is generally recommended that GnRH agonists not be continued as monotherapy past age 14 years (nor initiated as a monotherapy
past age 14 years) because of the potential adverse effects on bone
health. The decision must ultimately be made to discontinue pubertal
suppression all together or to initiate concurrent treatment with GAH
therapy. It is recognized that this decision point can be difficult for
TGD adolescents, particularly for some with nonbinary gender identities who may not desire certain physical changes that may occur with
sex hormone therapy. Although current guidelines suggest that GnRH

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1178 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

Table 153.9  Protocol Induction of Puberty
MEDICATION
Estrogen

17β−estradiol

ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

DOSING
FREQUENCY

Oral/sublingual

Daily

Transdermal

Testosterone

Testosterone
enanthate/
cypionate

Every 3-­5 days

Subcutaneous

Weekly

Intramuscular

Every 2 wk

INITIAL DOSE

DOSE
ESCALATION

PB: 5 μg/kg/day

5 μg/kg every 6 mo

PP: 1 mg

1 mg every 6 mo

PB: 6.25-­12.5 μg/24 hr

12.5 μg/24 hr every
6 mo

PP: 25-­50 μg/24 hr

25 μg/24 hr every
6 mo

PB: 12.5 mg/m2

12.5 mg/m2 every
6 mo

PP: 37.5 mg

37.5 mg every 6 mo

PB: 25 mg/m2

25 mg/m2 every
6 mo

PP: 75 mg

75 mg every 6 mo

ADULT DOSE
2-­6 mg/day
50-­200 μg/24 hr

30-­100 mg/wk

60-­200 mg every
2 wk

PB, Pubertal blocker initiated in early puberty; PP, postpuberty.
Adapted from Hembree WC, Cohen-­Kettenis PT, Gooren L, et al. Endocrine treatment of gender-­dysphoric/gender-­incongruent persons: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017;102:3869–3903, Table 8; and from Allen BJ, Rosenthal SM. Care of transgender, nonbinary, and gender diverse youth. In: Allen DB, Nadeau
K, Kappy MS, Geffner ME, eds. Pediatric Endocrinology: Principles and Practice, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw Hill; 2020, Fig. 7-­2.

agonist therapy may be continued in conjunction with sex hormone
therapy until gonadectomy (if pursued), it is often possible to discontinue this therapy in individuals designated female at birth who initiate
treatment with testosterone once adult levels of testosterone have been
reached.

GENDER-­AFFIRMING SEX HORMONE THERAPY
Treatment Criteria and Timing

GAH therapy is a medically necessary intervention for many TGD
adolescents. GAH therapy is partially reversible, and it is the responsibility of the medical provider to ensure the adolescent meets criteria
for treatment before initiating therapy (see Table 153.1). GAH treatment may be initiated in TGD adolescents who request this therapy
after a multidisciplinary team of medical and mental health providers
has confirmed the persistence of gender dysphoria/gender incongruence
and if the adolescent has sufficient mental capacity to give informed
consent/assent. Most adolescents are felt to have sufficient mental
capacity to provide informed consent by age 16 years; however, there
may be compelling reasons to initiate therapy earlier. TGD youth
treated with pubertal suppression at Tanner stage 2, which may occur
as early as 8-­9 years of age, may incur certain risks if this treatment is
continued as monotherapy until 16 years of age. Prolonged pubertal
suppression may be detrimental to bone health, and it may have detrimental effects on mental health if puberty is delayed well beyond
the majority of an individual’s peers. Treatment with GAH therapy
therefore should be individualized with consideration given to earlier initiation as clinically indicated. Initiation of GAH should follow
an evaluation by a qualified mental health gender specialist (separate
from any evaluation focused on prior use of pubertal suppression),
the signing of consent/assent forms, the obtainment of baseline labs,
and consideration of fertility preservation.

Goals of Therapy

The goals of GAH therapy are (1) to reduce endogenous sex hormone
levels to prevent the development of secondary sex characteristics
in individuals previously treated with pubertal blockers or to reduce
secondary sex characteristics in those who have already progressed
through any degree of puberty and (2) to provide exogenous sex hormones to allow for phenotypic changes aligned with an individual’s
gender identity. GAH therapy must be individualized based on the
adolescent’s goals rather than applying a one-­size-­fits-­all approach,
though it is important to achieve a level of either testosterone or estrogen that is in the normal range for a person’s developmental stage.

Treatment Options

In TGD adolescents whose puberty was blocked in early Tanner stages,
puberty induction with GAH treatment should be initiated using a
gradually increasing dose schedule (Table 153.9). Initial exogenous sex
hormone levels are insufficient to suppress endogenous sex hormone
secretion, and pubertal blockade should be continued. As sex hormone
doses increase, GnRH agonist treatment may often be discontinued in
individuals designated female at birth who are treated with testosterone therapy. Adult doses of exogenous testosterone therapy are often
sufficient to suppress the HPG axis. In contrast, pubertal suppression
must often be continued in individuals designated male at birth who
are treated with estrogen therapy. Adult doses of estrogen therapy
are insufficient in suppressing the HPG axis and testosterone release.
Ongoing adjunctive therapy with a GnRH agonist or antiandrogen
therapy (e.g., spironolactone) to block testosterone secretion and/or
action is required indefinitely or until gonadectomy, if pursued. Not all
TGD adolescents will pursue gonadectomy, and long-­term studies are
needed to determine the potential risks of prolonged treatment with
GnRH agonists.
In TGD adolescents who present for gender-­affirming medical therapy in late puberty or after completion of puberty, pubertal induction
with sex hormones can start at higher doses and can occur more rapidly (see Table 153.9).
At this time, no evidence has demonstrated that any of the following medically approved types or methods of administering
hormones is superior to others in yielding the desired phenotypic
changes. Protocols for some formulations of estrogen and testosterone are not available. Protocols that do exist are outlined in Table
153.9. It is important to emphasize to patients that individual variations in outcomes will occur based on several factors including
genetics, body type, and compliance.

Estrogen

Estrogen can be given via transdermal, oral, or injectable routes. The
naturally occurring form, 17β−estradiol, is preferred to synthetic (e.g.,
ethinyl estradiol) and conjugated estrogens (e.g., Premarin), which
cannot easily be monitored in the serum. Compared to synthetic
estrogens, 17β−estradiol is also associated with a lower risk of venous
thromboembolism (VTE). Serum estradiol levels can be monitored,
with the eventual goal of achieving values in the normal range for premenopausal females (100-­200 pg/mL).
TGD individuals who pursue estrogen therapy should be educated on the expected timeline of physical changes (Table 153.10).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1179
Table 153.10  Timeline of Effects from Gender-­Affirming Sex Hormone Therapy
EFFECT
Estrogen

Testosterone

ONSET

MAXIMUM

REVERSIBILITY

Redistribution of body fat

3-­6 mo

2-­3 yr

Likely

Decreased muscle mass/strength

3-­6 mo

1-­2 yr

Likely

Softening of skin/decreased oiliness

3-­6 mo

Unknown

Likely

Decreased sexual desire

1-­3 mo

3-­6 mo

Likely

Decreased spontaneous erections

1-­3 mo

3-­6 mo

Likely

Breast growth

3-­6 mo

2-­3 yr

Not possible without surgery

Decreased testicular volume

3-­6 mo

2-­3 yr

Unknown

Decreased sperm production

Unknown

>3 yr

Unknown

Decreased terminal hair growth

6-­12 mo

>3 yr

Possible

Scalp hair

Variable

Skin oiliness/acne

1-­6 mo

1-­2 yr

Likely

Facial/body hair growth

6-­12 mo

4-­5 yr

Unlikely without electrolysis

Scalp hair loss

6-­12 mo

Increased muscle mass/strength

6-­12 mo

2-­5 yr

Likely

Fat redistribution

1-­6 mo

2-­5 yr

Likely

Cessation of menses

1-­6 mo

Clitoral enlargement

1-­6 mo

1-­2 yr

Unknown

Vaginal atrophy

1-­6 mo

1-­2 yr

Unknown

Deepening of voice

6-­12 mo

1-­2 yr

Not possible without surgery

Unlikely

Likely

Adapted from Hembree WC, Cohen-­Kettenis PT, Gooren L, et al. Endocrine treatment of gender-­dysphoric/gender-­incongruent persons: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017;102:3869–3903, Table 12; and from Allen BJ, Rosenthal SM. Care of transgender, nonbinary, and gender diverse youth. In Allen DB, Nadeau
K, Kappy MS, Geffner ME, eds. Pediatric Endocrinology: Principles and Practice, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw Hill; 2020, Tables 7-­11 and 7-­12.

Treatment will lead to some changes that are likely reversible and
others, such as breast development, that are irreversible without
surgery.

Testosterone

Naturally occurring testosterone may be given transdermally via gels
or patches, through subcutaneous or intramuscular injections, or via
implantation of subcutaneous pellets. Oral testosterone undecanoate is Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved for use in
the United States but is not currently in wide use. It is important to
counsel patients on the potential transfer to others via direct contact
when transdermal formulations are used. Testosterone levels can be
monitored in the serum, with the eventual goal of achieving values in
the normal male range (typically 320-­1,000 ng/dL, depending on the
specific assay).
TGD individuals treated with testosterone should be educated on
the expected timeline of physical changes (see Table 153.10). Treatment will lead to some changes that are likely reversible and others
that are not, such as facial hair growth, which is irreversible without
electrolysis. Adult levels of testosterone are typically sufficient to
suppress the HPG axis and induce amenorrhea in TGD individuals
designated female at birth. However, unplanned pregnancies have
been reported, emphasizing the need for ongoing contraceptive counseling in these individuals. If undesired uterine bleeding persists, or
if menstruation is causing significant dysphoria before the initiation of testosterone therapy, a progestin or other agent may be used
for menstrual suppression. If estrogen is tolerable, combined continuous oral contraceptives (with limited intervals for breakthrough
menses) are more effective in achieving menstrual suppression and
are better for maintaining bone health than progestin-­only options.
For TGD adolescents who prefer nonestrogen-­containing medications, progesterone-­only pills, medroxyprogesterone acetate shots,

and progesterone-­containing intrauterine or implantable devices
are available.

Potential Adverse Effects

Clinicians should inform TGD adolescents of the potential for adverse
effects of GAH treatment. Risk for adverse effects is higher when supraphysiologic or inadequate doses of sex hormones are used, which
should be avoided. Before initiating therapy, risk factors for adverse
effects should be assessed and minimized when possible. GAH treatment has implications for fertility, which must be discussed before initiating therapy as noted previously.

Risks with Estrogen

The most serious risks associated with estrogen therapy include VTE,
cardiovascular disease, and cerebrovascular accident. The risk increases
with higher estrogen doses and supraphysiologic estradiol levels. Risk
factors for these conditions should be assessed and addressed before
initiating estrogen therapy. Tobacco cessation counseling should be
provided as indicated. Oral ethinyl estradiol in particular appears to
increase the risk of VTE, and it should not be used for GAH therapy
in individuals at high risk. Estrogen may also cause growth of pituitary
lactotroph cells and hyperprolactinemia, which resolves with a reduction or discontinuation of therapy in most individuals. Other potential
adverse effects include weight gain, cholelithiasis, and hypertriglyceridemia. TGD adults treated with estrogen therapy have been shown to
have an increased risk for developing breast cancer compared with a
general population of men in a retrospective Dutch study, although the
risk was still lower than in the general population of women. Another
retrospective Dutch study spanning five decades demonstrated an
increased mortality risk in TGD individuals treated with estrogen
therapy compared with a general population of men and general population of women with high risks of death because of cardiovascular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1180 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
disease, lung cancer, HIV-­related disease, and suicide; however, the
study was not designed to attribute the cause of the increased mortality
risk to a specific effect of estrogen therapy. Absolute contraindications
to estrogen therapy include previous VTE related to an underlying
hypercoagulable condition, history of estrogen-­sensitive neoplasm,
and end-­stage chronic liver disease.

Risks with Testosterone

Testosterone therapy is primarily associated with potential risks of
developing acne, weight gain, hypertension, polycythemia, and a
more atherogenic lipid profile (i.e., elevated low-­density lipoprotein,
elevated triglyceride, and decreased high-­density lipoprotein cholesterol levels). Risk increases with sustained, supraphysiologic testosterone levels. Risk factors for these conditions should be assessed
and addressed before initiating testosterone therapy. Despite being
associated with a more atherogenic lipid profile, numerous studies
have shown no increased risk of cardiovascular disease in individuals
treated with testosterone. Additional studies are needed to determine
if therapy is associated with an increased risk for cerebrovascular
disease. Historically, oral testosterone formulations have been associated with increased risk for transaminitis and severe liver dysfunction, whereas injectable formulations are not. Because of the concern
that aromatization of testosterone to estradiol may increase risk in
patients with a history of estrogen-­sensitive malignancies, consultation with an oncologist should be considered before initiating
therapy in such patients. Absolute contraindications to testosterone
therapy include current pregnancy, unstable coronary artery disease,
and untreated polycythemia (hematocrit ≥55%).

Monitoring Protocol

Efficacy and potential adverse effects of treatment should be monitored
closely in TGD youth treated with GAH therapy at baseline and follow-­up

according to the protocol outlined in Table 153.7. Clinical evaluation
and laboratory monitoring are recommended every 3 months during
the first year of GAH therapy and then 1-­2 times annually thereafter.
All evaluations should include a physical exam, including measurement
of weight and blood pressure. Chest and genitourinary exams may be
sensitive issues for TGD youth and should only be conducted as needed
to guide management. Evaluations should include questions regarding
occurrence of potential adverse events and satisfaction with phenotypic
changes on medical therapies. Medication dosing adjustments should
occur as needed with the goal of avoiding supraphysiologic and subphysiologic hormone levels that may increase the risk for adverse effects.

Surgical Therapy

Gender-­affirming surgeries may be pursued by some TGD individuals
to better align their bodies with their gender identities. In these individuals, surgery is medically necessary and an essential step to alleviate their gender dysphoria. Surgeries are irreversible interventions, and
most, including those that directly affect fertility such as gonadectomy
and/or hysterectomy, are not recommended until an individual reaches
age 18 years or the age of legal majority in their country. The Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline and WPATH SOC acknowledge
that mastectomy may be considered in TGD adolescents before age 18
years, taking into consideration the physical and mental health status
of the individual. Hormone therapy should not be considered a prerequisite to accessing gender-­affirming surgical procedures in individuals
who do not desire hormone therapy nor in those in whom it is medically contraindicated. Surgeries may occur after the appropriate assessments by qualified medical and mental health professionals responsible
for the care of the TGD individual have been performed and confirm
that criteria for surgery are met. Individuals who undergo gonadectomy will require ongoing hormone replacement therapy to prevent
adverse effects, including osteoporosis.

Table 153.11  Recommendations for Breast and Reproductive Tract Cancer Screening
ORGAN

TRANSGENDER WOMEN

TRANSGENDER MEN

Breast/chest

Discuss mammography in transwomen age >50 yr with additional risk
factors for breast cancer (body mass index >35 kg/m2, estrogen and/or
progestin use >5 yr, family history)
• Family history of BRCA mutations: prophylactic mastectomy could be
recommended, with consecutive primary reconstruction

Patients who have not undergone bilateral mastectomy
should follow cisgender women recommendations
for breast cancer screening
Patients who have undergone chest reconstructive
surgery should be offered physical examination
and/or chest ultrasound

Cervix

Not recommended (transwomen do not have a cervix)
• Patients should be routinely examined to detect HPV-­related lesions

Patients with an intact cervix should follow the
recommendations for cisgender women
• Consider self-­collected vaginal swabs to test for
high-­risk HPV DNA
• Pathologists should be aware if patient is taking
testosterone
• Patients who have undergone total hysterectomy
and have no history of high-­grade cervical
precancerous lesion or cervical cancer can
discontinue cervical cancer screening

Ovarian

N/A

Do not routinely screen
• Transmen at increased risk (identified BRCA
gene mutation and family history) should be
referred for genetic counseling
• Consider risk-­reduction salpingo-­oophorectomy

Endometrial

N/A

Do not routinely screen
• Unexplained bleeding (in patients under
testosterone who had reached amenorrhea)
should be evaluated

Prostate

Monitor the following framework for cisgender men
• PSA cutoffs may be lower in transgender men receiving antiandrogens
• Consider transvaginal digital examination and ultrasound

N/A

N/A, Not applicable; PSA, prostate-­specific antigen.
From Labanca T, Manero I, Pannunzio M. Transgender patients: considerations for routine gynecologic care and cancer screening. J Gynecol Cancer. 2020;30:1990–1996, Table 4.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1181
Primary Care: Screening

Not all TGD adults have had gender-­affirming chest or reproductive
organ surgery. Because of this, they may be at risk for cancers not typically screened for based on their affirmed or biologic gender. Suggested
breast and reproductive cancer screening recommendations are noted
in Table 153.11.

THERAPY FOR NONBINARY YOUTH

Youth with nonbinary gender identities are increasingly presenting
for gender-­affirming medical care. Although current clinical care
guidelines recognize that gender exists on a spectrum and may not
always be binary, research and guidelines to date have been largely
grounded in the binary gender narrative. Some individuals with
nonbinary gender identities will seek treatment as outlined in current clinical practice guidelines, but not all will. The Endocrine
Society clinical practice guidelines state that tailoring of current
protocols to the individual may be acceptable if done within the context of accepted safety guidelines using a multidisciplinary approach
including mental health support. Additionally, the WPATH SOC
state they are intended to be flexible to meet the diverse healthcare needs of the individual, and health professionals may modify
them in consultation with their TGD patients. However, evidence-­
based protocols are not yet available for nonbinary individuals, and
neither the Endocrine Society nor the WPATH provide guidelines
specific to the care of nonbinary youth. Nonbinary individuals have
been shown to have higher rates of depression, anxiety, and self-­
harm compared to their binary transgender peers. In addition, they
often encounter more barriers in their attempts to access gender-­
affirming medical care, even when care is accessed at specialized
gender clinics. As a result, some feel forced to identify within the
gender binary to obtain desired medical therapies or choose to not
seek care.
Until future studies inform clinical practice guidelines outlining therapeutic approaches specific to nonbinary youth, gender-­
affirming care for nonbinary youth should be individualized.
Providers should frame care using the concept of embodiment
rather than transition, the latter implying a linear path within the
gender binary. Ongoing dialogue and support are essential in helping nonbinary youth navigate a potentially nonlinear path. Providers should explore the individual’s internal awareness of self,
specific areas of gender dysphoria, and their embodiment goals
to offer specific therapies toward affirming the individual’s gender. Specific expected outcomes of the possible interventions (e.g.,
increased facial hair with testosterone or chest growth with estrogen) should be discussed rather than describing therapies as masculinizing or feminizing in nature. Difficult decisions may need to
be made, particularly for nonbinary youth treated with pubertal
suppression who do not desire any secondary sex characteristics.
There is the potential for negative impacts on bone health from prolonged monotherapy with pubertal blocking agents, and this should
be avoided. Providers should expect to have conversations about
balancing the individual’s priorities in their specific embodiment
goals and to discuss the known potential risks and benefits of various treatment options in order to provide optimal care to their nonbinary patients. Patients should be counseled about the importance
of maintaining a minimum threshold level of sex steroids—typically
a normal adult range of either estrogen or testosterone—to preserve
general health.
Like TGD youth with binary gender identities, available medical
interventions for nonbinary youth may include pubertal suppression, sex hormones, and surgeries. Desired and unwanted effects
should be discussed and balanced in decision-­making regarding

therapies. Existing treatment protocols may be modified to achieve
patient embodiment goals if deemed safe with a plan for close follow-­up monitoring. Potential modifications may include gradual
titration or tapering of doses, low-­dose or limited testosterone therapy, lower doses of estrogen therapy, intermittent hormone dosing,
use of both estrogen and testosterone, and use of adjunctive medications. After initiating a new treatment, follow-­up visits should
include a discussion of physical changes noted and whether they
are in alignment with the patient’s embodiment goals, with adjustments made as needed.

Mental Health Outcomes of Treatment

Multiple studies have demonstrated the positive impact of gender-­
affirming medical and surgical interventions on mental health
outcomes in TGD adolescents. A prospective study of 55 TGD
adolescents and young adults in the Netherlands published in
2014 demonstrated resolution of gender dysphoria and improvement in general psychologic functioning after sequential treatment with GnRH agonist therapy, GAH treatment, and gender
reassignment surgery. These individuals were also shown to have
a sense of well-­being equivalent or superior to that seen in age-­
matched controls from the general population, and none regretted treatment. A cross-­
sectional survey administered by the
National Center for Transgender Equality to more than 20,000
U.S. TGD adults age 18-­36 years demonstrated that those treated
with GnRH agonists for pubertal suppression during adolescence
had a significantly lower odds of lifetime suicidal ideation compared to those who wanted, but did not receive, such treatment.
The largest observational study assessing the impact of genderaffirming medical care on the mental health of TGD adolescents
and young adults in the United States (n = 315, age 12-­20 years)
demonstrated significant improvements in psychosocial functioning, decreases in depression and anxiety, and increases in appearance congruence, positive affect, and life satisfaction. Other studies
have also reported on improvement of mental health measures,
quality of life, global psychosocial functioning, and body image in
response to treatment with gender-­affirming medical care.

Challenges to Care

TGD youth not only face high levels of discrimination in their lived
environments, but those who succeed in accessing medical care
often encounter stigma and discrimination within healthcare settings. Research on the experiences of TGD persons of color, a group
that faces startingly high rates of violence and homicide, is an area
in need of much attention. In the United States, gender-­affirming
medical therapies are currently not FDA-­approved for use in TGD
youth, and insurance companies often deny coverage of these medically necessary, essential, and even lifesaving interventions. Some
families can pay out-­of-­pocket for treatments when coverage is
denied, whereas others cannot, furthering the socioeconomic divide
between wealthy and impoverished. Efforts in multiple U.S. states to
criminalize the medical care of TGD youth are ongoing and in need
of significant advocacy and education. In addition, participation
in same-­gender sporting activities has created significant barriers
among TGD athletes. Some athletic bodies have placed barriers to
same-­gender participation, requiring transfemales to start suppressive therapy early in puberty or to monitor testosterone levels, with
a cutoff level prohibiting participation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1182 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

Chapter 154

Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual
Adolescents
Stewart L. Adelson and Mark A. Schuster
Understanding a child’s or adolescent’s sexual and emotional development is an essential part of any comprehensive pediatric evaluation. For youth who are or might be gay, lesbian, or bisexual (GLB
also noted as LGB in the LGBT abbreviation), such understanding is particularly important. GLB youth as a group have the same
health and developmental needs typical of youth in general, and their
sexual orientation is part of the normal spectrum of human sexuality. However, they encounter distinct developmental challenges and
can have additional physical and mental health needs related to their
orientation and others’ reaction to it. Their sexual orientation may
be different from that expected by some families, peers, and society;
they are at risk of peer rejection, bullying, violence, or family nonacceptance more frequently than most youth. Although the majority of
GLB adolescents grow up physically and mentally healthy, they are at
increased risk for certain health problems as a result of these stresses
and the epidemiology of health threats such as HIV and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs). In addition, healthcare providers
may also have biases and assumptions about the GLB community
(Table 154.1).
Sexual orientation refers to an individual’s attraction to others
based on sex or gender. It encompasses emotional and erotic desires,
physiologic arousal, sexual behavior, sexual identity, and social
role. As sexuality develops, youth can be oriented entirely toward

a particular sex or gender, or more than one, to various degrees on
a continuum. Homosexuality involves orientation toward people
of one’s same sex or gender, and bisexuality involves orientation
toward males and females. Gay is a common term for both males
and females who have same-­sex attractions; lesbian refers to gay
females. Increasing numbers of youth describe themselves as having a nonbinary gender identity (see Chapter 153). Accordingly,
some do not fit binary categories of sexual orientation and use other
terms to describe themselves, such as pansexual (attracted to all
genders). Those unsure of their orientation are curious or questioning. The term young men who have sex with men (YMSM) is
sometimes used in the research literature to denote male youth who
engage in sexual activity with other males, regardless of how they
identify themselves.

PREVALENCE OF HOMOSEXUALITY
AND BISEXUALITY IN YOUTH

Some junior high and high school students self-­identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual (Fig. 154.1). Some who do not identify as GLB report
same-­sex attraction, fantasies, or behavior. Some are unsure of their
sexual orientation. Certainty about sexual orientation tends to increase
through adolescence with sexual experience, although one can be
aware of one’s orientation without having had sexual partners. Those
who fear nonacceptance may try to suppress or deny their orientation.
Consequently, various aspects of an individual’s orientation—attraction, behavior, and identity—may not always be consistent with each
other throughout development. Not all youth with homosexual attraction or experience identify as gay, consistent in part with reluctance
about having or revealing a gay identity and underscoring the differences among attraction, behavior, and identity. A report providing
national estimates of the number of high school students with GLB
identity in 2019 found that 2.5% said they were gay or lesbian, 8.7%
said they were bisexual, and 4.5% reported being unsure of their sexual
orientation (see Fig. 154.1).

Table 154.1  Common Assumptions to Avoid When Caring for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Queer Patients
ASSUMPTION TYPE

DO NOT ASSUME THAT…

Identity

• Lesbian, gay, or bisexual people are cisgender
• A person has to identify as either male or female
• A person’s gender or sexual orientation is a major aspect of a person’s identity
• Being lesbian, gay, bisexual, or queer is always hard
• LGBQ people cannot adjust to stressors

Sexual orientation

• All patients are heterosexual
• People exploring their sexuality have a need to categorize into established sexual orientations
• Bisexuality is a phase or that bisexual people are confused
• Sexual orientation aligns with sexual behavior

Sexual behavior

• All LGBQ people are sexually active (some are celibate or asexual)
• Gay men do not have sex with women or lesbian women do not have sex with men
• All gay men have multiple partners and engage in high-­risk behavior
• Sexual behavior will remain stable over time
• Lesbians are not at risk of HPV or other STIs
• Bisexual people are promiscuous or are always unfaithful

Relationships and family

• Lesbian women do not want to be pregnant or are not at risk of pregnancy
• Interpersonal violence does not occur in LGBQ couples
• LGBQ patients do not have children or do not wish to have children
• All adults of reproductive age have an interest in parenting
• LGBQ people do not have strong family ties
• LGBQ patients have ties to their families of origin

Anatomy

• Queer people all want to change their bodies with surgeries or hormones
• Anything about the body of an LGBQ patient

HPV, Human papillomavirus; STI, sexually transmitted illness.
Adapted from Makadon HJ, Mayer KH, Potter J, Goldhammer H. The Fenway Guide to Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Health, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: American College of
Physicians, 2015; and Suarez Lupez E, Siegel J, Streed Jr C. The annual examination for lesbian, gay, and bisexual patients. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:191–212, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 154 u Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Adolescents

Heterosexual/straight
Gay/lesbian
Bisexual
Not sure

YRBS 2019 - students were restricted to these choices

Fig. 154.1 Sexual identities among high school students. YRBS; Youth

Risk Behavior Study. (From HHS Youth Risk Behavior Survey from 2019:
US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. (2020, Aug 21). Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance -- United States, 2019. MMWR Supplement, 69(1) https://www.
cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/yrbs/pdf/2019/su6901-H.pdf.)

DEVELOPMENT OF SEXUAL ORIENTATION IN
CHILDHOOD AND ADOLESCENCE

Sexual orientation development appears to begin prenatally and
continue through childhood and adolescence and into adulthood.
Both gender role behavior in childhood and sexual orientation in
puberty and adolescence are partly influenced by prenatal genetic
and neuroendocrine factors. Sociocultural and psychologic factors
also influence sexual development. A gay or lesbian sexual orientation is sometimes preceded developmentally in childhood by
nonconforming gender expression or variation from population
averages in expression of gender-­related behavior such as activities, interests, styles, and other attributes recognized as masculine
or feminine, like toy preferences and preference for playmates of
a particular gender. Childhood gender nonconformity is significantly associated with nonheterosexual orientation, especially in
males. However, it is not experienced by all gay or lesbian people,
and not all children with nonconforming gender role behavior
are gay or lesbian. When present, however, nonconformity causes
many gay people to feel different from peers during childhood, even
before sexual desire or identity emerges. Depending on the setting,
gender-­nonconforming children may experience ostracism, bullying, or family nonacceptance. These reactions to gender nonconformity can lead to later difficulty with gender-­related self-­esteem and
long-­term mental health problems.
Less frequently, gay or lesbian sexual orientation in adolescence
is preceded by childhood gender variant identity, a phenomenon
in which the gender identity of an individual at any age differs from
phenotypic sex and assigned sex at birth (see Chapter 153).

STIGMA, RISK, AND RESILIENCE

People experiencing same-­sex attraction and behavior exist in all societies. The meaning, acceptance, and legality of non-­heterosexual attraction vary greatly with cultural, historical, and social contexts. Although
gay people are more visible and accepted in some societies, youth are
often exposed to antigay attitudes. For many GLB youth, revealing their
sexual orientation (coming out) to family, peers, healthcare providers,
and others is a significant step. Specific racial, ethnic, religious, and other
demographic groups may experience distinct developmental stressors.
A comprehensive understanding of a youth’s sexual development and
health must consider intersecting sociodemographic factors influencing
a youth’s experience of a nonheterosexual orientation. For example, race,
ethnicity, and religious affiliation—and the reactions of others to one’s
demographic characteristics—can influence comfort disclosing an GLB
identity, involvement in GLB socialization, access to religious affirmation, and processes of coming out.

1183

Some GLB youth experience difficulty coping with stigma. A
longitudinal study that investigated bullying and victimization
among youth from 5th through 10th grade found that the females
and males who identified as GLB in 10th grade were more likely
than their peers to report that they had been bullied and victimized across grades. GLB youth may be perceived by others as different before they themselves have any GLB attraction or experience
or identify as GLB. Even when not overtly threatened, GLB youth
frequently encounter negative attitudes that force them to hide
at a time when family and peer acceptance holds great developmental significance. Family nonacceptance, feeling unsafe due to
school harassment, and peer bullying related to sexual orientation
elevate risk in GLB adolescents for depression, anxiety, substance
abuse, suicidal thoughts and attempts, and social problems such
as truancy, dropping out, running away, and homelessness. Mental
health problems, sexual risk-­taking, or substance use may increase
exposure to HIV and other STIs. Stigma may also impede access to
healthcare in some communities.
Nevertheless, most GLB youth are resilient, with good physical
and mental health despite possible pervasive stresses. Family connectedness and school support and safety are important protective
factors against depression, suicidal thoughts and attempts, and
substance abuse. GLB antiharassment policies and organizations
such as genders and sexualities alliances (also sometimes called
gay-­straight alliances) and antibullying programs are associated
with increased school safety for GLB youth. It is therefore important to reduce stigma, support acceptance, and promote resilient
coping.

HEALTH
Depression and Suicidality

Compared to their heterosexual peers, GLB youth and those who
are not sure of their sexual orientation have a higher prevalence of
suicidality. Family rejection, bullying, and other victimization motivated by homophobia account statistically for increased depression
and suicidal thoughts and attempts in GLB adolescents. Suicidal
thoughts or attempts are highest during the interval after recognition
of same-­sex attraction or a same-­sex sexual experience but before
self-­acceptance as gay.

Sexually Transmitted Infections

The epidemiology of STIs, related to specific sexual practices and prevalence of certain STIs in GLB communities, informs recommended counseling, screening, and treatment strategies (Table 154.2). Anal intercourse
has been shown to be the most efficient route of infection by hepatitis B (see
Chapter 406), cytomegalovirus (see Chapter 302), and HIV (see Chapter
322). Oral-­anal and digital-­anal contact can transmit enteric pathogens,
such as hepatitis A. Unprotected oral sex also can lead to oropharyngeal
disease in the receptive partner and gonococcal and nongonococcal urethritis in the insertive partner. Certain STIs, particularly ulcerative diseases, such as syphilis and herpes simplex virus infection, facilitate spread
of HIV. YMSM are also at risk for infections with Shigella spp. and Mpox
(see Chapter 163).
Among U.S. adolescents and young adults, YMSM, and especially Black
YMSM, continue to face the greatest prevalence of HIV/AIDS. Although
possible, female-­to-­female sexual transmission of HIV is inefficient, and
females who only engage in sex with females are less likely than other youth
to acquire an STI. However, males and females who identify as gay or lesbian may engage in sexual activity with partners who are not of the same
gender; counseling and screening for all types of STIs are still relevant.

Substance Abuse

Compared with their heterosexual peers, GLB youth appear to use
alcohol and other substances at higher rates, including more binge
drinking and earlier onset and more rapid trajectory of substance use.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1184 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
More substantial substance use may be greatest in youth who, although
they do not identify as GLB, have attraction to or engage in sexual
behavior with others of their gender.

Obesity and Disordered Eating

Compared with heterosexual females, lesbian and bisexual females are
generally more likely to be obese or overweight. In contrast, young
gay and bisexual males are more likely to have body image concerns
and to restrict eating or engage in compensatory weight loss strategies

compared to heterosexual boys. Binge eating may also be more common
in GLB youth.

Psychosocial Problems

Academic underachievement, truancy, and dropping out of school are
frequently associated in GLB adolescents with homophobic victimization, harassment, violence, and feeling unsafe at school. Studies suggest
that youth who eventually identify as GLB have higher rates than other
youth of experiencing child abuse and of running away or being kicked

Table 154.2  The 6 Ps of a Complete Sexual History
P

OBJECTIVES

QUESTIONS

Partners

• Determine the number and gender/sex of partners
• Determine partner risk factors (other partners, drug
use)

“Are you currently sexually active?”
“Have you ever been sexually active?”
“When you have sex, what is the gender of your partners? What
anatomy is used for sex?”
“How do you describe your sexual orientation?”
“How many partners have you had in the past 6 (or 12) months?”
“Has anyone ever forced themselves on you sexually or touched
you sexually in an unwanted way?”*
Remember to ask about opposite-­sex partners

Practices

• If a patient has had more than one partner in the
past 12 mo (or has a partner who has other sex
partners)
• Explore their sexual practices and behaviors,
because they will guide assessment of risk and
determination of testing

“What types of sex are you having?”
“When having sex, do you have vaginal, anal, and/or oral sex?”
“If you have anal sex, do you have insertive sex, receptive sex, or
both?” In colloquial words, “Are you a top, a bottom, or vers?”
“Do you have any alternative sexual practices?” (i.e., kinks,
BDSM, fisting)
“Do you use alcohol or drugs during sex?”
“Have you ever exchanged sex for money, drugs, food, or
shelter?”
“Do you use lubricants during sex? What kind?”
“Do you use sex toys? How often? Do you share them? Do you
clean them?”
Put bluntly, questions should aim to answer who is putting what,
where, when, and how

Protection from STI

• If a patient has had more than one partner in the
past 12 mo (or has a partner who has other sex
partners)†
• Based on patient risk profile, ask these questions
accordingly
• Explore the patient’s use of barrier methods
• Explore the patient’s use of PrEP

“How do you keep yourself safe during sex”
“Do you use condoms/dental dams when having vaginal, anal,
and/or oral sex? How often? All the time? Most of the time?
About half of the time? Rarely?”
If no, “Why not?”
“Do you and your partners use any other protection against
STI?”
“Do you or your partner use PrEP? “Are you interested in
starting PrEP?”

Past history of STI

• Explore patient STI history as a risk factor for future
STI

“Have you ever been tested for HIV or other STIs?”
“Have you ever been diagnosed with an STI?”
If yes, “When were you diagnosed? How were you treated?”
“Would you like to be tested? And which parts of your body
should we check?”
“Has your current or any former partners ever been diagnosed
with an STI?” If yes, “Have you been tested for the same STI?”

Pleasure/pain

• Recognize the importance of pleasure in sexual
intimacy and well-­being

“Are you satisfied with your sexual life?”
“Do you have any pain with sex?”
“Do you have any problems with erection, lubrication,
ejaculation, or orgasm?”

Prevention/planning
of pregnancy

• Evaluate desire for/risk of pregnancy

“Are you concerned about getting pregnant or getting your
partner pregnant?”
“Are you using contraception or practicing any form of birth
control?”
“Do you need any information on birth control?”

*For more information, please see, “Sexual Health and the LGBTQ+ Community,” by Taylor NM, King CK.. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:271-­282.
†For patients who report one or fewer partners in the last 12 mo, ask whether they have any concerns about STI.
BDSM, Bondage and discipline, dominance and submission, sadism and masochism; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; PrEP, preexposure prophylaxis.
From Suarez S, Lupez E, Siegel J, Streed Jr C. The annual examination for lesbian, gay, and bisexual patients. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:191–212, Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 154 u Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Adolescents
out of their homes. GLB young people are overrepresented among
homeless and runaway populations across the United States, which can
expose them to drugs, sexual abuse, and other health risks.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CARE
Evaluation

The goal of GLB pediatric care is physical health, social and emotional well-­being, and healthy development. Physicians should provide nonjudgmental care to all adolescents, including those who are
GLB or questioning (see Chapter 153, Table 153.1, and Table 154.1).
They should receive the age-­appropriate history, examination, and
anticipatory guidance recommended for adolescents in general.
The physical examination and laboratory evaluation of GLB and
questioning adolescents are the same as for any teenager. However,
providers should appropriately screen for special potential medical
and psychosocial threats to GLB teenagers’ health.
A nonjudgmental healthcare environment is important, with
open communication and a positive relationship with youth and
families. In the waiting room, written material about sexual orientation, support groups, and community resources will signal openness to discussing sexuality. Registration forms recognizing the
possibility of same-­gender parents signal a safe setting (e.g., forms
can list parent/guardian #1, parent/guardian #2). Sexual history
questions should avoid heterosexual assumptions (e.g., ask “Are you
dating someone?” vs “Do you have a boyfriend/girlfriend?”). This
is important at all ages. For example, asking a 6-­year-­old male if he
has a girlfriend may convey an unsupportive message if he discovers
later that he would like a boyfriend. Explaining confidentiality and
incorporating into each adolescent visit private time with no parent
in the room (see Chapter 137) may facilitate discussing sexual orientation, as may use of appropriate health history forms such as the
American Medical Association’s Guidelines for Adolescent Prevention Services Questionnaire.
Clinicians should remember that any youth might be GLB whether
or not they are identified or perceived as such, so clinicians should not
presuppose a particular orientation (see Table 154.1). Competency in
conveying sensitivity, acceptance, and respectfulness; effective communication skills; and appropriate attention to privacy and confidentiality (including practices related to billing and record requests) are
fundamental to providing high-­quality care. While remaining attuned
to youth’s preferences, explicit or implied, for discussing sexual orientation, providers can tactfully take the lead, if necessary, regarding any
pressing areas of clinical concern.

Medical and Sexual Health

STIs are covered in Chapter 163, but issues specific to GLB youth
are included here. Use of latex condoms for fellatio, and dental dams
and cut-­open latex condoms for anilingus and cunnilingus, should
be discussed with adolescents. Recommendations also include use
of latex condoms for sexual appliances. In addition, it is important to
emphasize that people who have been using alcohol or other drugs
are at increased likelihood for engaging in riskier sexual activity. It
is important not to assume that a gay male or female who does not
identify as bisexual has not had sex with someone of a different sex
or gender; lesbians can still have an unplanned pregnancy. Therefore prevention counseling about unintended pregnancy is relevant

1185

to all adolescents. Similarly, youth who identify as heterosexual
and whose attractions are not to those of the same sex or gender
may still have sexual activity with a partner of the same sex or
gender.
Although vaccination against hepatitis A and B is recommended
for all children, it is particularly recommended that nonvaccinated
adolescent males who are having (or are likely to have) sex with
males receive catch-­up vaccines. The same recommendation applies
to the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine for males. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that males
who are engaging in sexual activity with males have annual testing for HIV, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, syphilis, urethral gonorrhea,
and chlamydia (if engaging in insertive oral or anal intercourse),
oral gonorrhea (if engaging in receptive oral intercourse), and rectal gonorrhea and chlamydia (if engaging in receptive anal intercourse). The CDC also recommends HIV pre-­exposure prophylaxis
(PrEP) for adolescents who are engaging in or plan to engage in
sexual behavior placing them at “substantial ongoing risk of HIV
exposure and acquisition.”

Mental Health

Awareness of mental health and social problems is important when caring for GLB youth, as for all youth. Clinicians should monitor for depression, suicidality, anxiety, and substance abuse and know their community’s
mental health resources. Minor psychosocial problems might be handled
by referral to a support group for patients (e.g., a school gay-­straight or
genders-­sexualities alliance, other community support group) or for parents and others (e.g., Parents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays).
In some communities, agencies and organizations serving the GLB community can help with social, educational, vocational, housing, and other
needs.
Individuals or families who harbor negative attitudes may inquire
about mental health treatment to avert or change a gay or bisexual
orientation (conversion therapy). However, a GLB orientation is not
an illness, and all leading health organizations have concluded that
such change is neither possible nor warranted. Conversion therapy
is illegal in 18 states; 22 states have no law or policy.
It is important to distinguish between a GLB orientation, which is not
a mental illness, and mental health problems (e.g., depression) for which
GLB youth are at elevated risk. While understanding different families’ values, clinicians must recognize the morbidity and mortality associated with
stigma and attempt to foster physical and emotional health. Individual or
family therapy might be indicated.
Clinicians should also monitor for specific stressors, such as bullying
and other homophobic victimization, family nonacceptance, and abuse.
Failure to confront harassment constitutes tacit assent. Anticipatory guidance, referral, and substance abuse treatment should be considered for the
subset of GLB youth who use alcohol, drugs, or tobacco, some of whom
may be using these to manage painful feelings related to conflicts over their
sexuality.
Adolescents with serious psychiatric symptoms, such as suicidality,
depression, and substance abuse, should be referred to mental health specialists with competency in treating GLB adolescents (see Chapter 40).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1186 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

Chapter 155

The Epidemiology of
Adolescent Health
Problems
Samantha V. Hill and Tamera Coyne-­Beasley
Adolescence is the first period of life where the major determinants of
morbidity and mortality are behavioral rather than congenital or infectious. As adolescents make the transition from childhood to adulthood, they establish behaviors that affect both their current and future
health. Adolescence is a time of immense biologic, psychologic, and
social change (see Chapter 150). Many of the psychologic changes have
a biologic substrate in the development and eventual maturation of the
central nervous system, particularly the frontal lobe areas responsible
for executive functioning (Fig. 155.1). In addition to cognitive development, there are both risk and protective factors for adverse adolescent
health behaviors that are dependent on the social environment and the
mental health of an adolescent (Table 155.1).
Many adolescents continually confront the task of making healthy
choices while struggling with impulsivity that can lead to unintentional consequences, such as injuries, sexually transmitted infections
(STIs), or drug overdoses. Adolescents are also challenged with adopting behaviors that will affect their future adult health, such as eating
nutritiously; engaging in physical activity; and choosing not to use
tobacco (including vapes and e-­cigarettes), alcohol, cannabis, or illicit
substances. Environmental factors and social determinants of health in
and among an individual’s family, peers, school, and community also
contribute to adolescents’ health and risk behaviors. The U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance Survey, a school-­based survey of a nationally representative
sample of U.S. high school students, demonstrates that youth begin
engaging in behaviors that place their health at risk during adolescence
(Fig. 155.2).
Although according to the 2018 CDC National Health Interview
Survey (https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/shs/tables.htm), a probability sample survey conducted annually, an estimated 83% of 12-­to
17-­year-­olds report excellent or very good health, 11% reported limitation in usual activities because of one or more chronic conditions, 10%
missed 6-­10 school days in the past year, 6% are uninsured, 5% have
no usual place of healthcare, 10% have asthma, 12% have respiratory

allergies, 10% have a learning disability, 13% have attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder, and 18% take prescription medications routinely. In 2018 the mortality rate among adolescents 15-­19 years of age
was 49 deaths per 100,000 population. Although varying by gender,
the leading causes of death overall among adolescents 15-­19 years of
age are (1) unintentional injuries, (2) suicide, and (3) homicide (Table
155.2).
Within the adolescent population, disparities in health occur. Adolescent health outcomes and behaviors vary among populations that
can be defined by being Black, ethnicity, gender, education, income,
disability, geographic location (e.g., rural or urban), or sexual orientation. Health disparities result from multiple factors affecting social
determinates of health, including poverty, environmental threats,
inadequate access to healthcare, individual and behavioral factors, racism and other systemic biases, and educational and other inequalities
(Table 155.3).

ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE

Adolescents in the United States make fewer visits to physicians for
ambulatory office visits than any other age-­group; school-­age children and adolescents are more likely than younger children to have
unmet health needs and delayed medical care. Adolescents who actually receive preventive care may still not have access to time alone
with their provider to discuss confidential health issues such as
STIs, HIV, or pregnancy prevention. Less than half (22% of 13-­to
14-­year-­­olds and 43% of 15-­to 18-­year-­olds) of adolescents have time
alone with their healthcare provider during a preventive healthcare
visit; sexually experienced teens report sexual health discussions
more often than nonsexually experienced teens, but the frequency is
still low at 81% and 65% for sexually experienced young women and
men, respectively.
The 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) has
improved access to care for young adults 18 to 24 years old. The ACA
permits children to receive benefits from their parents’ health plans
through age 26 years. Although accomplishments have been made in
improving adolescent health, Healthy People provides science-­based,
10-­year national objectives for measuring and improving the health
of all Americans by establishing benchmarks and monitoring progress
over time. The Healthy People 2030 agenda includes 24 adolescent-­
specific objectives with a goal of improving the healthy development,
health, safety, and well-­being of adolescents and young adults over the
next 10 years (Table 155.4). This science-­based initiative is centered
around a framework for public health prevention priorities and actions
to improve the health status of U.S. youth.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 155.1 It has been speculated that the
Early Adolescence
Puberty heightens
emotional arousability,
sensation-seeking,
reward orientation

Middle Adolescence
Period of heightened
vulnerability to risk-taking
and problems in regulation
of affect and behavior

Late Adolescence
Maturation of frontal
lobes facilitates
regulatory
competence

impact of puberty on arousal and motivation
occurs before the maturation of the frontal
lobes is complete. This gap may create a period of heightened vulnerability to problems
in the regulation of affect and behavior, which
might help to explain the increased potential
in adolescence for risk-­
taking, recklessness,
and the onset of emotional and behavioral
problems. (From Steinberg L. Cognitive and
affective development in adolescence. Trends
Cogn Sci. 2005;9:69–74.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 155 u The Epidemiology of Adolescent Health Problems

1187

Table 155.1  Identified Risk and Protective Factors for Adolescent Health Behaviors
BEHAVIOR

RISK FACTORS

PROTECTIVE FACTORS

Smoking

Depression and other mental health problems, alcohol use,
disconnectedness from school or family, difficulty talking
with parents, minority ethnicity, low school achievement,
peer smoking

Family connectedness, perceived healthiness,
higher parental expectations, low prevalence
of smoking in school

Alcohol and drug misuse

Depression and other mental health problems, low self-­
esteem, easy family access to alcohol, working outside
school, difficulty talking with parents, risk factors for transition
from occasional to regular substance misuse (smoking,
availability of substances, peer use, other risk behaviors)

Connectedness with school and family,
religious affiliation

Teenage pregnancy

Deprivation, city residence, low educational expectations,
sexual intercourse, lack of access to sexual health services,
drug and alcohol use

Connectedness with school and family,
religious affiliation

Sexually transmitted infections

Mental health problems, substance misuse, exploration of
sexuality and sexual identity (sexual activity)

Connectedness with school and family,
religious affiliation

Adapted from McIntiosh N, Helms P, Smyth R, eds. Fofar and Arneil’s Textbook of Pediatrics, 6th ed. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2003:1757–1768; and Viner R, Macfarlane A.
Health promotion. BMJ. 2005;330:527–529.

90
9th grade
12th grade

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

t

O

ve

rw

ac
in

ei

tiv

gh

e

e
tiv

Ph

ys

ic

al

ly

al
xu
Se

iju
ar
m

ly

an

a

ac

us

ki
in
nt

C

ur

re

C

e

ng

e
us
e
ng
Bi

nt
ur

re

dr

D
EN

ed
pt
m

te
At

s

ic
su

ea
w
ry

ar
C

id

n
po

e
iv
dr
d
an
k
rin
D

e

0

Fig. 155.2 Selected health behaviors among 9th-and 12th-grade high school students. ENDs, Electronic nicotine delivery systems. (Data from
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: 1991-2021 High school youth risk behavior survey data. http://nccd.cdc.gov/youthonline.)

Table 155.2  Leading Causes of Death Among 15-­to 19-­Year-­Olds by Gender, United States, 2018-2021*
LEADING
CAUSES OF
DEATH

MALE
CAUSE OF DEATH

FEMALE
MORTALITY RATE PER
100,000 POPULATION

CAUSE OF DEATH

MORTALITY RATE PER
100,000 POPULATION

#1

Unintentional injuries

32.4

Accidents (unintentional
injuries)

14.3

#2

Assault (homicide)

21.6

Intentional self-­harm (suicide)

5.2

#3

Intentional self-harm

16.1

Malignant neoplasms

3.6

*Based on data from Heron M. Deaths: leading causes for 2018-­2019, CDC WONDER Online Database 2021. https://wonder.cdc.gov/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1188 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 155.3  Adolescent Health Outcomes by Ethnicity, United States, 2018-­2019
OUTCOME
Deaths*
Births†

WHITE

BLACK

AI/AN

API

HISPANIC

45.4

79.8

62.8

23.4§

29.3

29.2

2.7§

18.2
37.1

11.4

25.8

Obese‡‡

12.5

18.2

7.9

33.3§

Asthma‡

10.1

18.0

17.8

8.2§

12.5

16.3

11.5§

13.8
1080.4

Depressed**

14.0

9.5

Chlamydia*

857.5

4,894.0

2343.1

310.3§

Gonorrhea*

134.5

1506.1

559.9

44.9§

179.8

5.6

12.2§

7.4

HIV*

2.1

34.8

*2019 rates per 100,000 15-­ to 19-­yr-­old population by race/ethnicity.
†2019 rates of births in per 1,000 15-­ to 19-­yr-­old females by race/ethnicity.
‡Percent high school students reporting health outcome in 2018.
**Prevalence of 12-­ to 17-­yr-­olds reporting health outcome in 2017.
‡‡Percent high school students reporting health outcome in 2017.
§Rates of Asian-­only race.
AI/AN, American Indian or Alaska Native; API, Asian or Pacific Islander; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.

Table 155.4

Healthy People 2030 Adolescent Health (AH) Objectives

 

• AH-­01: Increase the proportion of adolescents who had a
preventive healthcare visit in the past year.
• AH-­02: Increase the proportion of adolescents who speak privately
with a provider at a preventive medical visit.
• AH-­03: Increase the proportion of adolescents who have an adult
they can talk to about serious problems.
• AH-­04: Increase the proportion of students participating in the
School Breakfast Program.
• AH-­05: Increase the proportion of 4th-­graders with reading skills at
or above the proficient level.
• AH-­06: Increase the proportion of 4th-­graders with math skills at or
above the proficient level.
• AH-­07: Reduce chronic school absence among early adolescents.
• AH-­08: Increase the proportion of high school students who
graduate in 4 years.
• AH-­09: Reduce the proportion of adolescents and young adults
who are not in school or working.
• AH-­10: Reduce the rate of minors and young adults committing
violent crimes.
• AH-­D01: Increase the proportion of trauma-­informed early
childcare settings and elementary and secondary schools.
• AH-­D02: Increase the proportion of children and adolescents with
symptoms of trauma who get treatment.

• AH-­D03: Reduce the proportion of public schools with a serious
violent incident.
• AH-­R01: Increase the proportion of adolescents who get support for
their transition to adult healthcare.
• AH-­R02: Increase the proportion of adolescents in foster care who
show signs of being ready for adulthood.
• AH-­R03: Increase the proportion of eligible students participating in
the Summer Food Service Program.
• AH-­R04: Increase the proportion of 8th-­graders with reading skills at
or above the proficient level.
• AH-­R0: Increase the proportion of 8th-­graders with math skills at or
above the proficient level.
• AH-­R06: Increase the proportion of schools requiring students to take
at least two health education courses from 6 to 12.
• AH-­R07: Increase the proportion of secondary schools with a start
time of 8:30 am or later.
• AH-­R08: Increase the proportion of secondary schools with a full-­time
registered nurse.
• AH-­R09: Increase the proportion of public schools with a counselor,
social worker, and psychologist.
• AH-­R10: Increase the proportion of students served under the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act who earn a high school
diploma.
• AH-­R11: Reduce the rate of adolescents and young adult victimization
from violent crimes.

From U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Healthy People 2030, available at: https://health.gov/healthypeople/about/workgroups/adolescent-­health-­workgroup.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 156 u Violent Behavior 1189

Chapter 156

Violent Behavior
Michael N. Levas and
Marlene D. Melzer-­Lange
Violence is recognized by the World Health Organization (WHO) as a
leading worldwide public health problem. The WHO defines violence
as “the intentional use of physical force or power, threatened or actual,
against oneself, another person, or against a group or community that
either results in or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death,
psychologic harm, maldevelopment or deprivation” (see Chapter 15).
Youths may be perpetrators, victims, or observers of violence (or any
combination of the three roles, wherein the roles are unclear), with
varying severity of impact on the individual, family, and larger community. Risk factors for youth violence include poverty, socially disorganized communities, war and other regional conflicts, substance misuse
(in the child or family), behavioral health disorders (attention-­deficit,
hyperactivity, conduct disorder), poor school performance, social isolation, child trafficking, runaway youth, criminal or gang involvement
(child or family), bullying, and low parental involvement.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Deaths per 100,000 people aged 10–24

In 2019 (and 2021), homicide in the United States was the third leading cause of death for 10-­to 24-­year-­olds, totaling 4,965 deaths, which
were largely males (85%) killed by a handgun (79%). The 2019 homicide rate for teens age 12-­17 years was 3.43/100,000 youth, down 63%
from 8.4/100,000 youth in 1993. The WHO reports that other than
the United States, where the youth and young adult homicide rate was
11/100,000, most countries with homicide rates above 10/100,000 are
developing nations or countries with socioeconomic instability. In the
United States the prevalence of behaviors that contribute to violence
has not decreased, as fighting, weapon carrying, and cyberbullying
remain prevalent among youth. Furthermore, the rate of homicide in
youth had been declining since the peak in the 1990s but showed an
increase in 2017 that has continued (Fig. 156.1). Adolescent reports
of physical fighting have decreased from 42% in 1991 to 22% in 2019.
Violence at U.S. schools remains a significant problem, with 8.1% of
students reporting being in a physical fight on school property one or

more times in the preceding 12 months in 2019. The 2019 Youth Risk
Behavior Surveillance System reported 13.1% of youths overall carried
a weapon such as a gun, knife, or club in the last 30 days; 2.8% carried
the weapon to school; and 7.4% reported being threatened or injured
with a type of weapon on school property. Males are more likely than
females to carry a gun or weapon and therefore may need more support and engagement at home and at school. These violence-­related
behaviors at school affect the general students’ perception of safety.
More than 8.7% of students did not go to school on one or more days
in the preceding 30 days because they felt it was unsafe. School-­based
prevention programs initiated at the elementary school level have been
found to decrease violent behaviors in students. Increased surveillance of students is warranted both on and around school property to
improve student safety.
Adolescent relationship abuse (dating violence/reproductive
coercion) occurs between two people in a close relationship and can
be physical (punching, kicking, hitting, shoving), emotional (shaming,
bullying, controlling, stalking), or sexual (forcing a partner to engage
in a sexual act when he or she does not consent to it). Incidents of adolescent relationship abuse are not uncommon, with 22.4% of females
and 15% of males experiencing some type of partner violence between
the ages of 11 and 17 years. It may start with teasing, name calling, or
shaming but often progresses electronically, with frequent calls, texting,
or posting sexual pictures of a partner on social media. Risk factors for
being a victim of adolescent relationship abuse include those who use
alcohol, believe violence is acceptable, have a lack of adult supervision,
or have a peer who is in a violent relationship. Most teens do not report
the behaviors because of fear of retaliation from the partner. Teens who
are victims of adolescent relationship abuse are more likely to experience decreased school performance, have thoughts about suicide, use
drugs and alcohol, develop an eating disorder, experience depression,
and are more likely to be victimized during college and into adulthood.
School-­based prevention programs that address attitudes and behaviors linked with adolescent relationship abuse, such as Safe Dates and
Dating Matters, offer training experiences to change social norms
among teens.

ETIOLOGY

The WHO places youth violence in a model within the context of three
larger types of violence: self-­
inflicted, interpersonal, and collective.
Interpersonal violence is subdivided into violence largely between family members or partners and includes child abuse. Community violence
occurs between individuals who are unrelated. Collective violence
incorporates violence by people who are members of an identified group

12
10
Suicide1,2
8
Homicide3

6
4
2
0
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

Fig. 156.1 Suicide and homicide death rates among people aged 10–24, United States, 2001–2021. 1No statistically significant trend from 2001–2007,

then significant increasing trend from 2007–2021 (p < 0.05). 2Rate significantly lower than the rates for homicide from 2001–2009 and significantly
higher from 2011–2019 (p < 0.05). 3No statistically significant trend for homicides from 2001–2006, then significant decreasing trend from 2006–2014,
and a significant increasing trend from 2014–2021 (p < 0.05). The rate in 2021 was not significantly different than the rate in 2020 (p < 0.05). NOTES:
Suicides are identified with International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision codes U03, X60–X84, and Y87.0, and homicides with codes U01–
U02, X85–Y09, and Y87.1. Access data table at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db471-tables.pdf#1. SOURCE: National Center for
Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, Mortality data file. (From Curtin SC, Garnett MF. Suicide and Homicide Death Rates Among Youth and
Young Adults Aged 10–24: United States, 2001–2021. NCHS Data Brief. 2023 Jun;(471):1–8. Fig 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1190 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
against another group of individuals with social, political, or economic
motivation. The types of violence in this model have behavioral links,
such that child abuse victims are more likely to experience violent and
aggressive interpersonal behavior as adolescents and adults. Overlapping
risk factors for the types of violence include firearm availability, alcohol
use, and socioeconomic inequalities. The benefit to identifying common
risk factors for the types of violence lies in the potential for intervening
with prevention efforts and gaining positive outcomes for more than one
type of violent behavior. The model further acknowledges four categories
that explore the potential nature of violence as involving physical, sexual,
or psychologic force and deprivation.
The social-­
ecologic model of public health focuses on both
population-­level and individual-­level determinants of health and their
respective interventions. On the individual level, there may be two types
of antisocial youth: life course persistent and limited. Life course–limited offenders have no childhood aberrant behaviors and are more likely
to commit status offenses such as vandalism, running away, and other
behaviors symbolic of their struggle for autonomy from parents. Life
course–persistent offenders exhibit aberrant behavior in childhood,
such as problems with temperament, behavioral development, and cognition; as adolescents they participate in more victim-­oriented crimes.
The existence of adverse childhood experiences foretells future health
issues and subsequent violence. This hypothesis proposes that precursors
such as child abuse and neglect, a child witnessing violence, adolescent
sexual and physical abuse, and adolescent exposure to violence and violent assaults predispose youths to outcomes of violent behavior, violent
crime, delinquency, violent assaults, suicide, or premature death. This
public health model also emphasizes the community environment and
resiliency of the individual and family. An additional common paradigm
for high-­risk violence behavior poses a balance of risk and protective factors at the individual, family, and community levels.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The identified risk factors for youth violence include poverty, association with delinquent peers, poor school performance or low education
status, disconnection from adult role models or mentors, prior history
of violence or victimization, poor family functioning, childhood abuse,
substance misuse, and certain mental health disorders. The most common disorders associated with aggressive behavior in adolescents are
intellectual disabilities, learning disabilities, moderately severe language disorders, and mental health disorders such as attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and mood disturbances. In general,
youth with mental health disorders are not violent. However, the link
between severe mental illness and violent behaviors is strongest for
those with coexisting alcohol or substance abuse or dependence.
Inability to master prosocial skills such as the establishment and
maintenance of positive family/peer relations and poor resolution of
conflict may put adolescents at higher risk of physical violence and other
risky behaviors. The single, most protective factor is the existence of one
or more significant adult mentors in the child’s life. Conduct disorder
and oppositional defiant disorder are specific psychiatric diagnoses
whose definitions are associated with violent behavior (Table 156.1).
They occur with other disorders such as ADHD (see Chapter 50) and
increase an adolescent’s vulnerability for juvenile delinquency, substance
use or abuse, sexual promiscuity, adult criminal behavior, incarceration,
and antisocial personality disorder. Other co-­occurring risk factors for
youth violence include use of anabolic steroids, gang tattoos, belief in
one’s premature death (inability to see oneself as surviving to adulthood), preteen alcohol use, and placement in a juvenile detention center.

DIAGNOSIS

The assessment of an adolescent at risk or with a history of violent
behavior or victimization should be a part of the health maintenance
visit of all adolescents. The answers to questions about recent history
of involvement in a physical fight, carrying a weapon, or firearms in
the household, as well as concerns that the adolescent may have about
personal safety, may suggest a problem requiring a more in-­depth
evaluation. The FISTS mnemonic provides guidance for structuring
the assessment (Table 156.2). Another screening tool, Violence Injury

Table 156.1  Oppositional Defiant Disorder and Conduct
Disorder
OPPOSITIONAL DEFIANT
DISORDER
• Often being angry or losing
one’s temper
• Often arguing with adults or
refusing to comply with adults’
rules or requests
• Often resentful or spiteful
• Deliberately annoying others
or becoming annoyed with
others
• Often blaming other people
for one’s own mistakes or
misbehavior

CONDUCT DISORDER
• Breaking serious rules, such
as running away, staying out
at night when told not to, or
skipping school
• Being aggressive in a way that
causes harm, such as bullying,
fighting, or being cruel to
animals
• Lying, stealing, or damaging
other people’s property on
purpose

Courtesy Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Children’s Mental Health, https://
www.cdc.gov/childrensmentalhealth/behavior.html, accessed August 4, 2021.

Table 156.2  FISTS Mnemonic to Assess an Adolescent’s
Risk of Violence
F: Fighting (How many fights were you in last year? What was the
last?)
I: Injuries (Have you ever been injured? Have you ever injured
someone else?)
S: Sex (Has your partner hit you? Have you hit your partner? Have
you ever been forced to have sex?)
T: Threats (Has someone with a weapon threatened you? What
happened? Has anything changed to make you feel safer?)
S: Self-­defense (What do you do if someone tries to pick a fight?
Have you carried a weapon in self-­defense?)
Adapted with permission from the Association of American Medical Colleges. Alpert
EJ, Sege RD, Bradshaw YS. Interpersonal violence and the education of physicians.
Acad Med. 1997;72:S41–S50.

Protection and Risk Screen (VIPRS), has been validated to predict
future violence among youth in the primary care setting (Table 156.3).
The additional factors of physical or sexual abuse, serious problems at
school, poor school performance and attendance, multiple incidents
of trauma, substance use, and symptoms associated with behavioral
disorders are indications for evaluation by a behavioral health professional. In a situation of acute trauma, assault victims are not always
forthcoming about the circumstances of their injuries for fear of retaliation or police involvement. Stabilization of the injury or the gathering
of forensic evidence in sexual assault is the treatment priority; however,
once this is achieved, addressing a more comprehensive set of issues
surrounding the assault is appropriate.

TREATMENT

In the patient with acute injury secondary to violent assault, the treatment plan should follow standard protocols, which include the stabilization of the injury, evaluation and treatment of the injury, evaluation
of the assault circumstance, psychologic evaluation and support, social
service evaluation of the circumstances surrounding the assault, and a
treatment plan on discharge that is designed to protect the adolescent
from subsequent injury episodes, prevent retaliation, and minimize the
development of psychologic disability. Victims and witnesses of violence are at risk for posttraumatic stress disorder and future aggressive
or violent behavior. Using a trauma-­informed care approach enables
providers to help these victims and witnesses so that they can develop
linkages to recovery and resilience. Hospital-­based violence intervention programs have shown success by supporting violently injured
youth and their families in the emergency department, hospital, or
community. Credible messenger and violence interrupter programs
have shown promise in decreasing the cycle of violence and retaliation
in the community after violent events.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 156 u Violent Behavior 1191
Table 156.3  Violence Injury and Perpetration Risk Screen (VIPRS Scale): Percent and Odds of Future Violence Perpetration by
Question Type
PROTECTIVE FACTORS

%

1. Do your parents expect you to do well at
school?
Most of the time
Sometimes
Rarely/never

93
6.1
0.6

2. Are your grades mostly
A/B average
C average
D/F average

77.9
16.6
5.5

ODDS OF ASSOCIATION WITH VIOLENCE PERPETRATION IF
PROTECTIVE FACTOR NOT PRESENT OR (95% CI)
6.1 (1.1-­33.83)

5.8 (1.7-­19.2)

% POSITIVE

ODDS OF ASSOCIATION WITH FUTURE VIOLENCE PERPETRATION IF
RISK FACTOR PRESENT (OR 95% CI)

3. Have you been suspended from school in
the last year?
Yes

17

47 (11.1-­201)

4. How many fights have you been in during
the last year?
0
1-­5

82
18

10.7 (3.2-­35.6)

5. Have you ever smoked marijuana or used
other drugs?
Yes

23

4.6 (1.5-­14.2)

6. Have you or your friends ever been in
trouble with the law?*
Yes
Males
Females

38.2
40.8
36.2

2.1 (0.72-­6.2)
8.6 (1.4-­54.2)
0.85 (0.19-­3.8)

7. Are you or your friends involved with a
gang or tagging crew?
Yes

7.0

4.6 (0.93-­23.0)

8. Do you feel you are hyperactive, or have
you ever been diagnosed with ADHD*
Yes
Males
Females

14.8
15.9
14.0

3.0 (0.88-­10.3)
0.83 (0.08-­8.5)
6.4 (1.3-­30.7)

9. Have you had any friends who have
committed suicide?
Yes

11

3.7 (0.93-­14.4)

10. Have you ever been injured in a fight?
Yes

10

4.3 (1.1-­17.6)

11. When was the last time you hurt someone
else in a fight?
In the past month
Between 1 and 6 mo ago
Between 6 and 12 mo ago
Over 1 yr ago
Never
Positive if ≤12 mo ago

4.3
6.7
3.7
11.6
73.8
14.6

24.6 (4.3-­138.7)

12. When was the last time you watched a
fight?
In the past month
Between 1 and 6 mo ago
Between 6 and 2 mo ago
Over 1 yr ago
Never
Positive if ≤12 mo ago

25
13.4
11.6
22.6
27.4
50

6.1 (1.6-­22)

RISK FACTORS

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1192 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 156.3  Violence Injury and Perpetration Risk Screen (VIPRS Scale): Percent and Odds of Future Violence Perpetration by
Question Type—cont’d
ODDS OF ASSOCIATION WITH FUTURE VIOLENCE PERPETRATION IF
RISK FACTOR PRESENT (OR 95% CI)

RISK FACTORS

% POSITIVE

13. How many times has someone beat you
up in the last 6 mo?
0
1-­6

91.2
9.8

6.2 (1.1-­34.2)

14. How many times has someone asked you
to fight in the last 6 mo?
0
1-­6

75
25

3.6 (1.1-­11.7)

*Questions 6 and 8 display gender differences, because these two questions reveal statistically significant differences between genders.
Modified from Sigel EJ, Hoffenberg A, Hart J, Dodge M. Development and psychometric properties of a violence screening tool for primary care. J Adolesc Health. 2011;48:358–365,
Table 4.

Table 156.4  Preventing Youth Violence (CDC)

Table 156.5  Prevention of Youth Violence (WHO)

STRATEGY

Promising prevention programs include:
• Life skills and social development programs designed to help
children and adolescents manage anger, resolve conflict, and
develop the necessary social skills to solve problems
• Whole-­school approaches to violence prevention in educational
facilities
• Programs that support parents and teach positive parenting skills
• Preschool programs that provide children with academic and
social skills at an early age
• Therapeutic approaches for youths at high risk of being involved
in violence
• Reducing access to alcohol
• Interventions to reduce the harmful use of drugs
• Restrictive firearm licensing
• Community and problem-­oriented policing
• Interventions to reduce concentrated poverty and to upgrade
urban environments

APPROACH

Promote family environments
that support healthy
development

Early childhood home visitation
Parenting skill and family relationship
programs

Provide quality education
early in life

Preschool enrichment with family
engagement

Strengthen youth skills

Universal school-­based programs

Connect youth to caring
adults and activities

Mentoring programs
After-­school programs

Create protective community
environments

Modify the physical and social
environment
Reduce exposure to community-­level
risks
Street outreach and community
norm change

Intervene to lessen harms
and prevent future risk

Treatment to lessen the harms of
violence exposures
Treatment to prevent problem
behavior and further involvement
in violence
Hospital-­community partnerships

From David-­Ferdon, C, Vivolo-­Kantor AM, Dahlberg LL, et al. A Comprehensive
Technical Package for the Prevention of Youth Violence and Associated Risk Behaviors.
Atlanta, GA: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention; 2016.

Multiple treatment modalities are used simultaneously in managing
adolescents with persistent violent and aggressive behavior and range
from cognitive-­behavioral therapy involving the individual and family
to specific family interventions (parent management training, multisystemic treatment) and pharmacotherapy. Treatment of comorbid
conditions, such as ADHD, depression, anxiety, and substance abuse,
appears to reduce aggressive behavior.

PREVENTION

The WHO recognizes a multifactorial approach to prevention: parenting and early childhood development strategies, school-­based academic
and social skills development strategies, strategies for young people at
higher risk of or already involved in violence, and community-­and
society-­level strategies (Tables 156.4 and 156.5). Parenting and early
childhood development approaches concentrate on working with
families to provide nonviolent parenting through home visitation and
parent groups as well as teaching coping strategies and nonviolent
conflict resolution for all children and families. School-­based social
skills development strategies focus on students’ families and peer

Preventing youth violence requires a comprehensive approach that addresses the social
determinants of violence, such as income inequality, rapid demographic and social
change, and low levels of social protection.
Courtesy World Health Organization: Youth Violence. https://www.who.int/news-­
room/fact-­sheets/detail/youth-­violence, accessed August 11, 2022.

relationships, especially those with the potential to trigger aggressive
or violent responses. Solutions include improving coping or problem-­
solving skills, anti-bullying campaigns, peer mediation, adolescent
relationship abuse prevention, and after-­school programs. Strategies for young people at higher risk of, or already involved in, violence include therapeutic behavioral health approaches, crime victim
services, vocational training, mentoring, and gang intervention. These
youth are at highest risk for repeat injury or incarceration. Community-­
and societal-­level approaches include broader advocacy and legislative
actions and changing the cultural norm toward violent behaviors.
A specific prevention strategy can incorporate several approaches, such
as the handgun/firearm prevention recommendations that include gun-­
lock safety, public education, and legislative advocacy. Other efforts are
directed toward establishing a national database to track and define the
problem of youth violence. The National Violent Death Reporting System collects and analyzes violent death data from all 50 states, the District
of Columbia, and Puerto Rico and aims to improve surveillance of current
trends, to share information state to state, to build partnerships among
state and community organizations, and to develop and implement prevention and intervention programs. The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention characterizes specific successful prevention programs, including Striving to Reduce Youth Violence Everywhere (STRYVE), and summarizes program content on its website (www.cdc.gov).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Substance Use Disorder
Cora Collette Breuner
Many adolescents engage in the use of a wide range of substances,
including alcohol, tobacco products, natural marijuana and synthetic
cannabinoids, opiates, psychoactive agents (amphetamine, cocaine,
MDMA, 3,4-­
methylenedioxymethamphetamine), hallucinogens,
inhaled products (glue, organic solvents, nitrous oxide), and stimulants. Their reactions to and the consequences of these exposures are
influenced by a complex interaction among biologic and psychosocial
development, environmental messages, legality, and societal attitudes.
The potential for adverse outcome with occasional use, such as motor
vehicle crashes, violence, and other injuries, is sufficient justification to
consider any substance use in adolescents a considerable risk.
Individuals who initiate substance use at an early age are at a greater
risk for developing a substance use disorder than those who begin
using substances in early adulthood. Substance use disorder is diagnosed when the recurrent use of the substance causes clinically significant impairment, including health problems, disability, and failure
to meet major responsibilities at work, school, or home. Substance
use in younger adolescents may act as a substitute for developing
age-­appropriate coping strategies and enhance vulnerability to poor
decision-­making. Most (88%) people report that their age of first alcohol use was <21 years old, the legal drinking age in the United States.
Inhalants have been identified as a popular first substance for youth in
eighth grade (age 13-­14 years).
Substance use disorder is a pervasive phenomenon and infiltrates
every socioeconomic and cultural segment of the population. It is one
of the costliest and most challenging public health problems facing all
societies and cultures. The challenge to the clinician is to identify youth at
risk for substance use disorder and offer early intervention. The challenge
to the community and society is to create norms that decrease the likelihood of adverse health outcomes for adolescents and promote and facilitate opportunities for adolescents to choose healthier and safer options.
Recognizing those substances with the greatest harm, and at times focusing on harm reduction with or without abstinence, is essential in the
approach to the adolescent with substance use disorder (Fig. 157.1).

ETIOLOGY

Substance use disorder has multifactorial origins (Fig. 157.2). Social
determinants of health, including economic stability, education, health
and healthcare, neighborhood environment, and social and community context, all have an impact on adolescents and can lead to
substance use disorder and use. Biologic factors, including genetic predisposition, are established contributors. Behaviors such as ineffective
self-­control, poor school performance, involvement with the juvenile
justice system, and emotional trends such as low self-­esteem are frequently associated with or predate the onset of substance use. Psychiatric disorders often coexist with adolescent substance use. Conduct
disorders and antisocial personality disorders are the most common
diagnoses coexisting with substance use, particularly in males. Teens
with depression (see Chapter 39.1), attention-­deficit disorder (Chapter
50), anxiety (Chapter 38), and eating disorders (Chapter 41) have high
rates of substance use. The determinants of adolescent substance use
disorder and substance use are explained using numerous theoretical
models and include factors at the individual level, the level of significant relationships with others, and the level of the setting or environment. These models include a balance of risk and protective or coping
factors contributing to individual differences among adolescents with
similar risk factors who escape adverse outcomes.
Risk factors for adolescent substance use disorder may differ from
those associated with adolescent substance use. Adolescent substance

3.0

1193

Class
A
B
C
No class

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Opiates*
Cocaine
Barbiturates
Street methadone
Alcohol
Ketamine
Benzodiazepines
Amphetamine
Tobacco
Buprenorphine
Cannabis
Solvents
4-MTA
LSD
Methylphenidate
Anabolic steroids
GHB
Ecstasy
Alkylnitrates
Khat

Chapter 157

Mean score (from independent experts)

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder

Fig. 157.1 Mean harm scores for 20 substances as determined by an
expert panel based on three criteria: physical harm to user, potential for
dependence, and effect on family, community, and society. Classification under the Misuse of Substances Act, when appropriate, is shown
by the color of each bar. Class A substances are deemed potentially
most dangerous; class C least dangerous. *Heroin, fentanyl, fentanyl
derivatives. (From Nutt D, King LA, Saulsbury W, et al. Development of
a rational scale to access the harm of substances of potential misuse.
Lancet 2007;369:1047–1053.)

Distal factors
addressed by developmental,
treatment, and harm-reduction
interventions
Neurobiologic damage,
social and developmental
problems

Early onset of
substance use,
deficits in early
development

High
availability
of substances

Optimal neurobiologic
development and
attachments

Levels of problems
with mental health, crime,
antisocial behavior

Level of harm from
substance abuse

Risky patterns of substance
use (including combined use),
risky settings

Delayed onset
of substance
use, increased
intelligence

Reduced
availability
of substances

Low-risk use patterns
(including abstinence)
and settings

Proximal factors
addressed by regulatory,
brief, treatment, and harmreduction interventions

Fig. 157.2 Protection and risk model for distal and proximal determinants of risky substance use disorder and related harms. (From Toumbourou JW, Stockwell T, Neighbors C, et al. Interventions to reduce harm
associated with adolescent substance use. Lancet 2007;369:1391–1571.)

use is more commonly related to social and peer factors, whereas use
disorder is more often a function of psychologic and biologic factors.
The likelihood that an otherwise normal adolescent would experiment
with substances may depend on the availability of the substance to the
adolescent, the perceived positive or otherwise functional value to the
adolescent, the perceived risk associated with use, and the presence
or absence of restraints, as determined by the adolescent’s cultural or
other important value systems.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1194 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Specific historical questions can assist in determining the severity
of the substance problem through a rating system (Table 157.1). The
type of substance used (marijuana vs cocaine), the circumstances of
use (alone or in a group setting), the frequency and timing of use (daily
before school vs occasionally on a weekend), current mental health
status, and general functional status, including sleep habits and screen
use, should all be considered in evaluating any adolescent found to be
using a substance. The stage of substance use should also be considered (Table 157.2). A teen may spend months or years in the experimentation phase trying a variety of illicit substances, including the
most common substances: alcohol, tobacco products, and marijuana.
Often it is not until regular use of substances results in negative consequences (problem use) that the adolescent is identified as having a
problem, either by parents, friends, teachers, or a healthcare provider.
Having emotionally supportive parents with open communication
styles, involvement in organized school activities, having mentors or
role models outside the home, and recognition of the importance of
academic achievement are examples of important protective factors
against developing problematic use.

of recreational or medical marijuana. The magnitude of the increase
was greater in states with legal medical or recreational marijuana. Synthetic cannabinoids have significant psychotropic effects and addictive
potential. Severe neuropsychiatric toxicity is often different from and
more severe than marijuana.
The number of 12th graders who report using any of the prescription psychotherapeutic substances, including amphetamines, sedatives (barbiturates), tranquilizers, and narcotics other than heroin,
decreased in 2019. Prevalence was 14% for ever used and 7.0% for 30-­
day use, indicating that a substantial portion of adolescents still misuse
prescription substances including opioids. Rural adolescents are also
more likely than urban adolescents to misuse prescription substances.
In a large-­scale study of 16,209 adolescent exposures to prescription
substances, 52.4% were females, and the mean age was 16.6 years. The
five most frequently misused substances were hydrocodone (32%),

EPIDEMIOLOGY

1

Potential for use

2

Experimentation: learning the euphoria

3

Regular use: seeking the euphoria

4

Regular use: preoccupation with the “high”

5

Burnout: use of substances to feel normal

Alcohol, tobacco products, and marijuana are the most commonly
reported substances used among U.S. teens (Table 157.3). The prevalence of substance use and associated risky behaviors vary by age,
gender, race/ethnicity, and other sociodemographic factors. Younger
teenagers tend to report less use of substances than do older teenagers,
except for inhalants (in 2016, 4.4% in 8th grade, 2.8% in 10th grade,
1.0% in 12th grade). In 2019, a total of 50.1% of U.S. high school students had ever used electronic vapor products, and 24.1% had ever
tried cigarette smoking. Current electronic vapor product use was
32.7%, current cigarette smoking was 6.0%, current cigar smoking was
5.7%, and current smokeless tobacco use was 3.8%. Approximately
36.5% of students were current users of any tobacco product, and 8.2%
were current users of two or more tobacco products. Males have higher
rates of substances use than females, with greatest differences seen in
their higher rates of use of tobacco products including vaping, chewing
and cigarettes/cigars, and anabolic steroids.
Fewer students engaged in some high-­risk substance use–related
behaviors from 2009 through 2019. However, approximately one in
seven students are still reporting lifetime use of any illicit drug or misuse of prescription medicine.
Marijuana use has been trending down over the past several years
among adolescents, though there is variation in the extent and rate of
use in different racial/ethnic groups. Use also depends on grade level,
urban vs rural location, class size, and state laws regarding legalization

Table 157.2  Stages of Adolescent Substance Use
STAGE

DESCRIPTION
•
•
•
•

Decreased impulse control
Need for immediate gratification
Available substances, alcohol, inhalants
Need for peer acceptance

• Use of inhalants, tobacco, marijuana, and alcohol with
friends
• Few, if any, consequences
• Use may increase to weekends regularly
• Little change in behavior
• Use of other substances (e.g., stimulants, LSD,
sedatives)
• Behavioral changes and some consequences
• Increased frequency of use; use disorder alone
• Buying or stealing substances
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Daily use of substances
Loss of control
Multiple consequences and risk taking
Estrangement from family and “straight” friends
Polysubstance use/cross-­addiction
Guilt, withdrawal, shame, remorse, depression
Physical and mental deterioration
Increased risk taking, self-­destructive, suicidal

Table 157.1  Assessing the Seriousness of Adolescent Substance Use
VARIABLE

0

+1

Age (yr)

>15

<15

Sex

Male

Female

Family history of substance use

+2

Yes

Setting of substance use

In group

Affect before substance use

Happy

School performance

Good, improving

Recently poor

Use disorder before driving

None

Yes

History of accidents

None

Time of week

Weekend

Time of day
Type of substance

Marijuana, beer, wine

Alone
Always poor

Sad

Yes
Weekdays
After school

Before or during school

Hallucinogens, amphetamines

Whiskey, opiates, cocaine,
barbiturates

Total score: 0-­3, less worrisome; 3-­8, serious; 8-­18, very serious.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 157.3  Trends in Annual Prevalence (%) of Use Disorder of Various Substances for Grades 8, 10, and 12 Combined
PEAK YEAR–2021 CHANGE

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019E 2020 2021

LOW YEAR–2021 CHANGE

2020–2021 ABSOLUTE PROPORTIONAL ABSOLUTE PROPORTIONAL
CHANGE CHANGE
CHANGE (%)a
CHANGE
CHANGE (%)a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Any illicit drugc

24.8

24.9

25.9

27.3

27.6

27.1

28.6‡

27.2

26.8

25.3

26.5

27.1

27.7

27.3

19.9

−7.4 sss

−7.8 sss

−28.1

―

―

Any illicit drug
other than
marijuanac

12.4

11.9

11.6

11.8

11.3

10.8

11.4‡

10.9

10.5

9.7

9.4

9.3

9.0

9.2

5.6

−3.6 sss

−5.3 sss

−48.7

―

―

Any illicit drug
including
inhalantsc

27.6

27.6

28.5

29.7

29.8

29.0

30.5‡

28.5

28.4

26.3

28.3

28.8

29.0

29.2

21.5

−7.8 sss

−7.8 sss

−26.6

―

―

Marijuana/hashish
Synthetic
marijuana

21.4
―

21.5
―

22.9
―

24.5
―

25.0
―

24.7
8.0

25.8
6.4

24.2
4.8

23.7
4.2

22.6
3.1

23.9
2.8

24.3
2.6

25.2
2.9

2
2.2

17.9
1.6

−6.7 sss
−0.6 ss

−12.1 sss
−6.4 sss

−40.3
−80.3

―
―

―
―

Inhalants

6.4

6.4

6.1

6.0

5.0

4.5

3.8

3.6

3.2

2.6

2.9

2.9

2.9

3.4

2.9

−0.5

−7.3 sss

−71.6

+0.2

+0.3

Hallucinogens
LSD
Hallucinogens
other than LSD
Ecstasy (MDMA)d
Salvia

3.8
1.7
3.3

3.8
1.9
3.2

3.5
1.6
3.0

3.8
1.8
3.3

3.7
1.8
3.1

3.2
1.6
2.7

3.1
1.6
2.5

2.8
1.7
2.1

2.8
1.9
1.9

2.8
2.0
1.8

2.7
2.1
1.8

2.7
2.0
1.7

2.9
2.2
1.9

3.4
2.5
2.0

2.4
1.5
1.7

−1.0 s
−0.9 ss
−0.3

−3.6 sss
−4.8 sss
−2.4 sss

−60.4
−75.6
−58.3

―
+0.1
―

―
+0.6
―

3.0
―

2.9
―

3.0
―

3.8
3.5

3.7
3.6

2.5
2.7

2.8‡
2.3

3.4
1.4

2.4
1.2

1.8
1.2

1.7
0.9

1.5
0.8

1.6
0.8

1.3
0.8

0.8
0.5

−0.5 s
−0.3 s

−2.6 sss
−3.1 sss

−76.0
−85.1

―
―

―
―

Cocaine
Crack
Other cocaine

3.4
1.5
2.9

2.9
1.3
2.6

2.5
1.2
2.1

2.2
1.1
1.9

2.0
1.0
1.7

1.9
0.9
1.7

1.8
0.8
1.5

1.6
0.7
1.5

1.7
0.8
1.5

1.4
0.6
1.2

1.6
0.7
1.3

1.5
0.6
1.3

1.4
0.7
1.3

1.4
0.6
1.4

0.7
0.4
0.5

−0.8 ss
−0.2
−0.9 sss

−3.8 sss
−2.0 sss
−3.5 sss

−85.0
−82.6
−86.6

―
―
―

―
―
―

Heroin
With a needle
Without a needle
OxyContin
Vicodin

0.8
0.5
0.7
3.5
6.2

0.8
0.5
0.6
3.4
6.1

0.8
0.5
0.5
3.9
6.5

0.8
0.6
0.6
3.8
5.9

0.7
0.5
0.5
3.4
5.1

0.6
0.4
0.4
2.9
4.3

0.6
0.4
0.4
2.9
3.7

0.5
0.4
0.3
2.4
3.0

0.4
0.3
0.3
2.3
2.5

0.3
0.3
0.2
2.1
1.8

0.3
0.2
0.2
1.9
1.3

0.3
0.2
0.2
1.7
1.1

0.3
0.2
0.2
1.7
1.0

0.2
0.2
0.1
1.4
0.9

0.2
0.1
0.1
0.9
0.6

−0.1
0.0
0.0
−0.5
−0.2

−1.1 sss
−0.6 sss
−1.0 sss
−3.0 sss
−5.9 sss

−85.5
−84.3
−92.7
−77.3
−90.6

―
―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―
―

Amphetaminesc
Ritalin
Adderall
Methamphetamine
Bath salts
(synthetic
stimulants)

6.5
2.8
―
1.4
―

5.8
2.6
―
1.3
―

5.9
2.5
4.3
1.3
―

6.2
2.2
4.5
1.3
―

5.9
2.1
4.1
1.2
―

5.6
1.7
4.4
1.0
0.9

7.0‡
1.7
4.4
1.0
0.9

6.6
1.5
4.1
0.8
0.8

6.2
1.4
4.5
0.6
0.7

5.4
1.1
3.9
0.5
0.8

5.0
0.8
3.5
0.5
0.5

5.0
0.8
3.5
0.5
0.7

4.6
0.9
3.1
0.5
―

4.6
1.0
3.3
0.7
―

2.7
0.5
1.7
0.2
―

−1.9 sss
−0.6
−1.6 sss
−0.5 ss
―

−3.9 sss
−3.7 sss
−2.8 sss
−3.9 sss
―

−59.5
−88.3
−61.3
−96.1
―

―
―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―
―

Tranquilizers

4.5

4.3

4.5

4.4

3.9

3.7

3.3

3.4

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.2

3.1

2.7

1.2

−1.4 sss

−4.3 sss

−77.8

―

―

OTC cough/cold
medicines

5.0

4.7

5.2

4.8

4.4

4.4

4.0

3.2

3.1

3.2

3.0

3.2

2.8

3.7

2.7

−1.1 s

−2.7 sss

−50.3

―

―

Rohypnol

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.8

0.9

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.7

0.5

0.4

0.5

1.0

0.2

−0.7 sss

−0.7 sss

−71.3

―

―

GHBb

0.7

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

Ketamineb

1.0

1.2

1.3

1.2

1.2

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―
Continued

Table 157.3  Trends in Annual Prevalence (%) of Use Disorder of Various Substances for Grades 8, 10, and 12 Combined—cont’d
PEAK YEAR–2021 CHANGE

LOW YEAR–2021 CHANGE

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019E 2020 2021

2020–2021 ABSOLUTE PROPORTIONAL ABSOLUTE PROPORTIONAL
CHANGE CHANGE
CHANGE (%)a
CHANGE
CHANGE (%)a

Alcohol
Been drunk
Flavored
alcoholic
beverages
Alcoholic
beverages
containing
caffeine

50.2
29.7
40.8

48.7
28.1
39.0

48.4
28.7
37.8

47.4
27.1
35.9

45.3
25.9
33.7

44.3
26.4
32.5

42.8
25.4
31.3

40.7
23.6
29.4

39.9
22.5
28.8

36.7
20.7
25.3

36.7
20.4
25.9

36.1
20.0
26.1

35.9
19.5
24.6

38.3
22.1
26.5

30.2
15.5
20.0

−8.1 sss
−6.6 sss
−6.5 sss

−31.1 sss
−21.4 sss
−24.5 sss

−50.7
−57.9
−55.1

―
―
―

―
―
―

―

―

―

―

19.7

18.6

16.6

14.3

13.0

11.2

10.6

10.1

9.2

8.6

7.8

−0.8 sss

−11.9 sss

−60.3

―

―

Any vaping
Vaping nicotine
Vaping marijuana
Vaping just
flavoring

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

21.5
13.9
6.8
17.2

28.9
21.6
9.9
21.8

31.9
27.3
15.6
18.6

30.7
27.1
16.3
15.8

22.1
19.2
11.6
10.0

−8.6 sss
−7.9 sss
−4.7 ss
−5.8 sss

−9.9 sss
−8.1 sss
−4.7 ss
−11.8 sss

−30.9
−29.7
−28.9
−54.3

+0.6
+5.3 sss
+4.8 sss
―

+2.6
+37.7
+69.7
―

Juul

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

23.8

20.6

9.1

−11.5 sss

−14.7 sss

−61.7

―

―

Dissolvable
tobacco products

―

―

―

―

―

1.4

1.4

1.2

1.1

0.9

0.9

1.0

1.0

0.9

0.7

−0.2

−0.7 s

−48.7

―

―

Snus

―

―

―

―

―

5.6

4.8

4.1

3.8

3.6

2.6

3.0

2.2

2.7

1.6

−1.1 ss

−4.0 sss

−72.0

―

―

Steroids

1.1

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.9

0.9

0.9

0.9

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.9

1.1

0.4

−0.7 sss

−1.6 sss

−79.5

―

―

aThe proportional change is the percent by which the most recent year deviates from the peak year (or the low year) for the drug in question. So, if a drug was at 20% prevalence in the peak year and declined to 10% prevalence in the most recent year, that

would reflect a proportional decline of 50%.
bQuestion was discontinued among 8th and 10th graders in 2012.
cIn 2013, for the questions on the use of amphetamines, the text was changed on two of the questionnaire forms for 8th and 10th graders and four of the questionnaire forms for 12th graders. This change also affected the any illicit drug indices. Data

presented here include only the changed forms beginning in 2013.
dIn 2014, the text was changed on one of the questionnaire forms for 8th, 10th, and 12th graders to include “molly” in the description. The remaining forms were changed in 2015. Data for both versions of the question are presented here.
eDrug prevalence results in 2019 combine results from paper-­and-­pencil surveys with those completed using electronic tablets. In 2019, students in a randomly selected half of schools completed MTF surveys on paper-­and-­pencil and students in the other

half completed the surveys using electronic tablets. Analysis of this randomized controlled trial demonstrated that these results did not significantly differ across survey mode (Miech RA, Couper MP, Heeringa SG, et al. The impact of survey mode on US
national estimates of adolescent drug prevalence: results from a randomized controlled study, Addiction). Results for student attitudes and beliefs in 2019 are based on answers from paper-­and-­pencil surveys only because these appear more susceptible
to survey mode effects.
Notes: – indicates data not available. ‡ indicates a change in the question text. When a question change occurs, peak levels after that change are used to calculate the peak year to current year difference. Values in bold equal peak levels since 1991. Values
in italics equal peak level before wording change. Level of significance of difference between classes: s = 0.05, ss = 0.01, sss = 0.001. Any apparent inconsistency between the change estimate and the prevalence estimates for the two most recent years is
the result of rounding.
Modified from Miech RA, Johnston LD, O’Malley PM, et al. Monitoring the Future National Survey Results on Drug Use, 1975–2021: Volume I, Secondary School Students. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan; 2022.
Available https://monitoringthefuture.org/wp-­content/uploads/2022/12/mtf2022.pdf

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder
amphetamines (18%), oxycodone (15%), methylphenidate (14%),
and tramadol (11%). Many of these substances can be found in the
home of friends; some are over-­the-­counter (OTC) substances (dextromethorphan, pseudoephedrine), whereas others are purchased from
substance dealers at schools and colleges. Adolescents often combine
opioids with marijuana, alcohol, cocaine, and tranquilizers, putting
them at risk for serious complications and overdose.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although manifestations vary by the specific substance of use, adolescents who use substances often present in an office setting with no
obvious physical findings. Substance use disorder is more frequently
detected in adolescents who experience trauma such as motor vehicle crashes, bicycle injuries, or violence. Eliciting appropriate historical information regarding substance use, followed by blood alcohol
and urine substance screens, is recommended in emergency settings.
Although waning in popularity, the illicit substances known as “club
drugs” still need to be considered in the differential diagnosis of a teen
with an altered sensorium. An adolescent presenting to an emergency
setting with an impaired sensorium should be evaluated for substance
use as a part of the differential diagnosis (Table 157.4). Screening
for substance use is recommended for patients with psychiatric and
behavioral diagnoses. Other clinical manifestations of substance use
are associated with the route of use; intravenous substance use is associated with venous “tracks” and needle marks, and nasal mucosal injuries are associated with nasal insufflation of substances. Seizures can
be a direct effect of substances such as cocaine, synthetic marijuana,
and amphetamines or an effect of substance withdrawal in the case of
barbiturates or tranquilizers.

1197

SCREENING FOR SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS

In a primary care setting the annual health maintenance examination
provides an opportunity for identifying adolescents with substance
use disorder. The direct questions and the assessment of school performance, family relationships, and peer activities may necessitate a
more in-­depth interview if there are suggestions of difficulties in those
areas. Several self-­report screening questionnaires also are available,
with varying degrees of standardization, length, and reliability. The
CRAFFT mnemonic is specifically designed to screen for adolescents’
substance use in the primary care setting (Table 157.5). Privacy and
confidentiality must be established when asking the teen about specifics of their substance experimentation or use. Interviewing the parents can provide additional perspective on early warning signs that
go unnoticed or disregarded by the teen. Examples of early warning
signs of teen substance use disorder are change in mood, appetite, or
sleep pattern; decreased interest in school or school performance; loss
of weight; secretive behavior about social plans; or valuables such as
money or jewelry missing from the home. The use of urine substance
screening is recommended when select circumstances are present: (1)
psychiatric symptoms to rule out comorbidity or dual diagnoses, (2)
significant changes in school performance or other daily behaviors,
(3) frequently occurring accidents, (4) frequently occurring episodes
of respiratory problems, (5) evaluation of serious motor vehicular or
other injuries, and (6) as a monitoring procedure for a recovery program. Most initial screening uses an immunoassay method, such as the
enzyme-­multiplied immunoassay technique, followed by a confirmatory test using highly sensitive, highly specific gas chromatography–
mass spectrometry. The substances that can cause false-­positive results
should be considered, especially when there is a discrepancy between

Table 157.4  Most Common Toxic Syndromes
ANTICHOLINERGIC SYNDROMES
Common signs
Common causes

Delirium with mumbling speech, tachycardia, dry, flushed skin, dilated pupils, myoclonus, slightly elevated temperature,
urinary retention, and decreased bowel sounds. Seizures and dysrhythmias may occur in severe cases.
Antihistamines, antiparkinsonian medication, atropine, scopolamine, amantadine, antipsychotic agents, antidepressant
agents, antispasmodic agents, mydriatic agents, skeletal muscle relaxants, and many plants (notably jimsonweed and
Amanita muscaria).

SYMPATHOMIMETIC SYNDROMES
Common signs
Delusions, paranoia, tachycardia (or bradycardia if the substance is a pure α-­adrenergic agonist), hypertension, hyperpyrexia,
diaphoresis, piloerection, mydriasis, and hyperreflexia. Seizures, hypotension, and dysrhythmias may occur in severe cases.
Common causes
Cocaine, amphetamine, methamphetamine (and its derivatives 3,4-­methylenedioxyamphetamine, 3,4-­methylenedioxymetha
mphetamine, 3,4-­methylenedioxyethamphetamine, and 2,5-­dimethoxy-­4-­bromoamphetamine), some synthetic marijuana,
and OTC decongestants (phenylpropanolamine, ephedrine, and pseudoephedrine). In caffeine and theophylline
overdoses, similar findings, except for the organic psychiatric signs, result from catecholamine release.
OPIATE, SEDATIVE, OR ETHANOL INTOXICATION
Common signs
Coma, respiratory depression, miosis, hypotension, bradycardia, hypothermia, pulmonary edema, decreased bowel sounds,
hyporeflexia, and needle marks. Seizures may occur after overdoses of some narcotics, notably propoxyphene.
Common causes
Narcotics, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, ethchlorvynol, glutethimide, methyprylon, methaqualone, meprobamate, ethanol,
clonidine, and guanabenz.
CHOLINERGIC SYNDROMES
Common signs
Confusion, central nervous system depression, weakness, salivation, lacrimation, urinary and fecal incontinence,
gastrointestinal cramping, emesis, diaphoresis, muscle fasciculations, pulmonary edema, miosis, bradycardia or
tachycardia, and seizures.
Common causes
Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides, physostigmine, edrophonium, and some mushrooms.
From Kulig K. Initial management of ingestions of toxic substances. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1677–1681.

Table 157.5  CRAFFT Mnemonic Tool
• Have you ever ridden in a Car driven by someone (including yourself)
who was high or had been using alcohol or substances?
• Do you ever use alcohol or substances to Relax, feel better about
yourself, or fit in?
• Do you ever use alcohol or substances while you are by yourself
(Alone)?

• Do you ever Forget things you did while using alcohol or substances?
• Do your Family or Friends ever tell you that you should cut down
on your drinking or substance use?
• Have you ever gotten into Trouble while you were using alcohol or
substances?

From the Center for Adolescent Substance Use Research (CeASAR). The CRAFFT Screening Interview. (Copyright John R. Knight, MD, Boston Children’s Hospital, 2015.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1198 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
the physical findings and the urine substance screen result. Current
guidelines strongly discourage routine home-­based or school-­based
testing.

RISK FACTORS

DIAGNOSIS

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-­5) no
longer identifies substance use disorder as those of abuse or of dependence. A substance use disorder is defined by a cluster of cognitive,
behavioral, and physiologic symptoms that indicate that an adolescent
is using a substance even though there is evidence that the substance
is harming the adolescent. Even after detoxification, a substance use
disorder may leave persistent changes in brain circuits with resulting
behavioral changes. There are 11 criteria that describe a pathologic
pattern of behaviors related to use of the substance, falling into four
categories: impaired control, social impairment, increased risk, and
pharmacologic criteria. The first category, impaired control, describes
an individual taking increasing amounts of the substance who
expresses a persistent desire to decrease use, with unsuccessful efforts.
The individual may spend a great deal of time obtaining the substance,
using the substance, or recovering from its effects and expresses an
intense desire for the substance, usually in settings where the substance
had been available, such as a specific type of social situation. The second cluster of criteria (5-­7) reflects social impairment, including the
inability to perform as expected in school, at home, or at a job; increasing social problems; and withdrawing from the family. The third cluster
addresses increased risk associated with use of the substance, and the
fourth cluster addresses pharmacologic responses (tolerance and/or
withdrawal). The total number of criteria present is associated with a
determination of a mild, moderate, or severe disorder.
These criteria may have limitations with adolescents because of
differing patterns of use, developmental implications, and other age-­
related consequences. Adolescents who meet diagnostic criteria should
be referred to a program for substance use disorder treatment unless the
primary care physician has additional training in addiction medicine.

COMPLICATIONS

Substance use disorder in adolescence is associated with significant
comorbidities and acts of juvenile delinquency. Youth may engage in
other high-­risk behaviors such as robbery, burglary, substance dealing, or prostitution for the purpose of acquiring the money necessary
to buy substances. Regular use of any substance eventually diminishes
judgment and is associated with unprotected sexual activity with its
consequences of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections,
including HIV, as well as physical violence. Substance use disorder is
closely associated with trauma in the adolescent population. Several
studies of adolescent trauma victims have identified cannabinoids and
cocaine in blood and urine samples in significant proportions (40%),
in addition to the more common identification of alcohol. Any use of
injected substances involves the risk of hepatitis B and C viruses and
HIV (see Chapter 322).

TREATMENT

Adolescent substance use disorder is a complex condition requiring a
multidisciplinary approach that attends to the needs of the individual,
not just substance use. Fundamental principles for treatment include
accessibility to treatment, using a multidisciplinary approach, employing individual or group counseling, offering mental health services,
monitoring of substance use while in treatment, and understanding that recovery from substance use/addiction may involve multiple
relapses. For most patients, remaining in treatment for a minimum
period of 3 months may result in a significant improvement.

PROGNOSIS

Table 157.6  Domains of Risk and Protective Factors for
Substance Use Prevention

For adolescent substance users who have been referred to a substance
treatment program, positive outcomes are directly related to regular
attendance in posttreatment groups. Outcomes are worse for males
with learning problems or conduct disorder than for those without
such disorders. Peer use patterns and parental use have a major influence on outcome for males. The chronicity of a substance use disorder

DOMAIN

PROTECTIVE FACTORS

Early aggressive
behavior

Individual

Self-­control

Lack of parental
supervision

Family

Parental monitoring

Substance use

Peer

Academic competence

Substance
availability

School

Anti–substance use disorder
policies

Poverty

Community

Strong neighborhood attachment

From National Institute on Substance Use. Preventing Substance Use Disorder Among
Children and Adolescents: A Research-­Based Guide for Parents, Educators, and
Community Leaders, NIH Pub No 04-­4212(B), 2nd ed. Bethesda, MD: NIDA; 2003.

makes relapse an issue that must always be considered when managing
patients after treatment, and appropriate assistance from a healthcare
professional qualified in substance use disorder treatment should be
obtained.

PREVENTION

Preventing substance use disorder among adolescents requires prevention efforts aimed at the individual, family, school, and community levels. The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) of the U.S. National
Institutes of Health has identified essential principles of successful prevention programs. Programs should enhance protective factors (parent
support) and reduce risk factors (poor self-­control), should address all
forms of substance use (legal and illegal), should address the specific
type(s) of substance use within an identified community, and should be
culturally competent to improve effectiveness (Table 157.6). Prevention
programs need to target emotionally and socially intense times such as
life/school transitions for adolescents to adequately anticipate potential
substance use disorder. Examples of effective research-­based substance
use prevention programs featuring a variety of strategies are listed on
the NIDA website (www.drugabuse.gov) and on the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention website (www.prevention.samhsa.gov).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.1 Alcohol
Cora Collette Breuner
Alcohol is the most widely used substance of abuse among America’s
youth, and a higher proportion use alcohol than use tobacco or other
substances, but the numbers are trending down. According to the 2020
Monitoring the Future (MTF) study, by the end of high school, 61.5% of
students had reported ever using alcohol and 26% of eighth graders had
reported ever using alcohol. Early initiation of alcohol use increases the
risk for a variety of developmental problems during adolescence and
is frequently an indicator of future substance use. Drinking by children, adolescents, and young adults has serious negative consequences
for the individuals, their families, their communities, and society as a
whole. Underage drinking contributes to a wide range of costly health
and social problems, including motor vehicle crashes (the greatest
single mortality risk for underage drinkers); suicide; interpersonal
violence (e.g., homicides, assaults, rapes); unintentional injuries such
as burns, falls, and drowning; brain impairment; alcohol dependence;
risky sexual activity; academic problems; and alcohol and other drug
poisoning.
Multiple factors can affect a young teen’s risk of developing a drinking problem at an early age (Table 157.7). One third of high school
seniors admit to combining drinking behaviors with other risky behaviors, such as driving or taking additional substances. Binge drinking

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder
Table 157.7  Risk Factors for a Teen Developing a
Drinking Problem
FAMILY RISK FACTORS
• Low parental supervision
• Poor parent to teen communication
• Family conflicts
• Severe or inconsistent family discipline
• Having a parent with an alcohol or substance problem
INDIVIDUAL RISK FACTORS
• Poor impulse control
• Emotional instability
• Thrill-­seeking behaviors
• Behavioral problems
• Perceived risk of drinking is low
• Begins drinking before age 14 yr

remains especially problematic among older teens and young adults;
31% of high school seniors report having five or more drinks in a row
in the last 30 days. Higher rates of alcohol use disorder are seen in
males (23.8%) than in females (19.8%). Teens with binge-­drinking patterns are more likely to be assaulted, engage in high-­risk sexual behaviors, have academic problems, and be injured than those teens without
binge-­drinking patterns.
Alcohol contributes to more deaths in young individuals in the
United States than all the illicit substances combined. Among studies of
adolescent trauma victims, alcohol is reported to be present in 32–45%
of hospital admissions. Motor vehicle crashes are the most frequent
type of event associated with alcohol use, but the injuries span several
types, including self-­inflicted wounds.
Alcohol is often mixed with energy drinks (caffeine, taurine, sugars), which can result in a spectrum of alcohol-­related negative behaviors. Caffeine may counter the sedative effects of alcohol, resulting in
more alcohol consumption and a perception of not being intoxicated,
thus leading to risk-­taking behavior such as driving while intoxicated.
In addition, aggressive behavior, including sexual assaults and motor
vehicle or other injuries, has been reported. Both alcohol and caffeine
overdoses have also been reported.

PHARMACOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Alcohol (ethyl alcohol or ethanol) is rapidly absorbed in the stomach and
is transported to the liver and metabolized by two pathways. The primary
metabolic pathway contributes to the excess synthesis of triglycerides, a
phenomenon that is responsible for producing a fatty liver, even in those
who are well nourished. Engorgement of hepatocytes with fat causes necrosis, triggering an inflammatory process (alcoholic hepatitis), later followed
by fibrosis, the hallmark of cirrhosis. Early hepatic involvement may result
in elevation in γ-­glutamyltransferase (GGT) and serum glutamic-­pyruvic
transaminase (alanine transaminase). The second metabolic pathway,
which is used at high serum alcohol levels, involves the microsomal enzyme
system of the liver, in which the cofactor is reduced to nicotinamide-­
adenine dinucleotide phosphate. The net effect of activation of this pathway
is to decrease metabolism of substances that share this system and to allow
for their accumulation, enhanced effect, and possible toxicity.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Alcohol acts primarily as a central nervous system (CNS) depressant.
It produces euphoria, grogginess, talkativeness, impaired short-­term
memory, and an increased pain threshold. Alcohol’s ability to produce vasodilation and hypothermia is also centrally mediated. At very
high serum levels, respiratory depression occurs. Its inhibitory effect
on pituitary antidiuretic hormone release is responsible for its diuretic
effect. The gastrointestinal (GI) complications of alcohol use can occur
from a single large ingestion. The most common is acute erosive gastritis, manifesting as epigastric pain, anorexia, vomiting, and heme-­
positive stools. Less frequently, vomiting and mid-­abdominal pain may

1199

be caused by acute alcoholic pancreatitis; the diagnosis is confirmed
by the finding of elevated serum amylase and lipase levels.

DIAGNOSIS

Primary care settings provide the opportunity to screen teens for alcohol use disorder or problem behaviors. Brief alcohol screening instruments such as CRAFFT (see Table 157.5) perform well in a clinical
setting as techniques to identify alcohol use disorders A score of 2 or
higher is a positive screen, indicating a need for additional assessment.
Teenagers in the early phases of alcohol use exhibit few physical
findings. Recent use of alcohol may be reflected in elevated GGT and
aspartate transaminase levels.
In acute care settings the alcohol overdose syndrome should be
suspected in any teenager who appears disoriented, lethargic, or comatose. Although the distinctive aroma of alcohol may assist in diagnosis,
confirmation by analysis of blood is recommended. At levels >200 mg/
dL, the adolescent is at risk of death, and levels >500 mg/dL (median
lethal dose) are usually associated with a fatal outcome. When the level
of obtundation appears excessive for the reported blood alcohol level,
head trauma, hypoglycemia, or ingestion of other substances should be
considered as possible confounding factors.

TREATMENT

The usual mechanism of death from alcohol overdose syndrome is respiratory depression; artificial ventilatory support must be provided until
the liver can eliminate sufficient amounts of alcohol from the body. In a
patient without chronic alcohol use, it generally takes 20 hours to reduce
the blood level of alcohol from 400 mg/dL to zero. Dialysis should be
considered when the blood level is >400 mg/dL. As a follow-­up to acute
treatment, referral for treatment of the alcohol use disorder is indicated.
Group counseling, individualized counseling, and multifamily educational intervention have proved to be effective interventions for teens.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.2 Tobacco, E-­Cigarettes, and Other
Tobacco Products
Brian P. Jenssen

CIGARETTES

Tobacco use and addiction often start in childhood or adolescence, a
period when the brain has heightened susceptibility to nicotine addiction. Nearly 90% of adult cigarette smokers began smoking before age
18. Factors associated with youth tobacco use include exposure to
smokers (friends, parents), tobacco availability, low socioeconomic
status, poor school performance, low self-­esteem, lack of perceived risk
of use, and lack of skills to resist influences to use tobacco.
The landscape of tobacco product use among youth has shifted dramatically over the past decade. Various sources are used to capture
data on tobacco use. Similar trends have been observed across cross-­
sectional surveys with data on youth use, including, for example, the
National Youth Tobacco Survey, Monitoring the Future, and the Youth
Risk Behavior Surveillance system.
Based on 2022 data, current use of any tobacco product was reported
by 11.3% (3.08 million) of all students, including 16.5% (2.51 million)
of high school and 4.5% (530,000) of middle school students. E-cigarettes
were the most used tobacco product among high school (14.1%; 21.4
million) and middle school (3.3%; 380,000) students. Among high
school students, 5.2% reported current use of any combustible tobacco
product. By product, current use among high school students was highest for e-cigarettes (14.1%), followed by cigars (2.8%), cigarettes (2.0%),
smokeless tobacco (1.6%), hookahs (1.5%), nicotine pouches (1.4%),
heated tobacco products (1.1%), and pipe tobacco (0.7%). Among middle
school students, 1.6% reported current use of any combustible tobacco
product. By type of product, current use among middle school students

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1200 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
was highest for e-cigarettes (3.3%), followed by cigarettes (1.0%), smokeless tobacco (0.7%), heated tobacco products (0.7%), cigars (0.6%), hookahs (0.5%), nicotine pouches (0.5%), and pipe tobacco (0.3%).
Tobacco use tends to be higher among males compared to females
and by those identifying as lesbian, gay, or bisexual compared to heterosexual or uncertain sexual identity. Tobacco is used by teens in all
regions of the world, although the form of tobacco used differs. In the
Americas and Europe, cigarette smoking is the predominant form of
tobacco use, followed by cigars and smokeless tobacco; in the Eastern
Mediterranean, hookah use is prevalent; in Southeast Asia, smokeless
tobacco products are used; in the Western Pacific, betel nut is chewed
with tobacco; and pipe, snuff, and rolled tobacco leaves are used in
Africa. Cigarette use by teens in low-­and middle-­income nations is
increasing.

PHARMACOLOGY

Nicotine, the primary active ingredient in cigarettes, is addictive. Nicotine is absorbed by multiple sites in the body, including the lungs, skin,
GI tract, and buccal and nasal mucosa. The action of nicotine is mediated through nicotinic acetylcholine receptors located on noncholinergic presynaptic and postsynaptic sites in the brain and causes increased
levels of dopamine. Nicotine also stimulates the adrenal glands to
release epinephrine, causing an immediate elevation in blood pressure,
respiration, and heart rate. The dose of nicotine delivered to the user
in a cigarette depends on a variety of factors, including puffing characteristics. A smoker typically takes 10 puffs within the span of 5 minutes
and absorbs 1-­2 mg of nicotine (range: 0.5-­3 mg). The Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) is planning to reduce the permissible amount of
nicotine in cigarettes. Cotinine, the major metabolite of nicotine, has
a biologic half-­life of 19-­24 hours and can be detected in urine, serum,
and saliva.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cigarettes are addictive by design and result in life-­shortening diseases in half of their long-­term users. Each year, approximately
480,000 deaths are attributable to smoking, responsible for 1 of every
5 deaths and 1 of every 3 cancer deaths in the United States. Cigarette smoking has severe adverse health consequences for youth and
young adults, including increased prevalence of chronic cough, sputum production, wheezing, and worsening asthma. Smoking during
pregnancy increases prenatal and perinatal morbidity and mortality,
either causing or exacerbating the risks of preterm birth, low birthweight, congenital malformations, stillbirth, and sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS) and sudden unexplained infant death (SUID).
Withdrawal symptoms, including irritability, decreased concentration, increased appetite, and strong cravings for tobacco, can occur
when adolescents try to quit.

ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES (E-­CIGARETTES)

E-­cigarettes are handheld devices that produce an aerosol created
from a solution of nicotine, flavoring chemicals, humectants such as
propylene glycol, and often other constituents unknown and unadvertised to the consumer. There is wide variability in terminology, product design, and engineering of these products, with alternative names
including e-­cigs, electronic cigars, electronic hookah, e-­hookah, and
vaping devices. The tobacco industry continues to develop new products that contain nicotine but may not be recognized as a tobacco
product by teens. The unique flavors offered in e-­cigarette solutions,
the majority of which are confectionary in nature and appealing to
children, have been shown to encourage youth experimentation, regular use, and addiction.
Known harmful toxicants and carcinogens have been found in
e-­cigarette solutions, in device emissions, and within the bodies of
adolescent users. Multiple systematic reviews and meta-­analyses have
found e-­cigarette use is associated with an increased risk of subsequent cigarette smoking initiation and current cigarette smoking
in young people. There is a critical need for e-­cigarette regulation,

legislative action, and counter-­promotion to prevent children, adolescents, and young adults from transitioning from e-­cigarettes to
traditional cigarettes and minimize the potential public health harm
from e-­cigarette use. The FDA should regulate all tobacco and nicotine products to protect public health.

HOOKAH

Hookah (water pipe) smoking uses specially treated tobacco that comes
in a variety of flavors. Many teens believe incorrectly that hookah
does not contain nicotine. Emerging evidence indicates that hookah
may involve comparable health risks to cigarettes, including nicotine
dependence. Both human and machine simulation studies of hookah
use consistently find that smoke content and user toxicant exposure,
including carbon monoxide, tar, and nicotine, are at least comparable
to that of cigarettes. Secondhand smoke from hookahs can be a health
risk for nonsmokers exposed to harmful toxicants.

TREATMENT

The 2020 U.S. Surgeon Report on smoking cessation emphasizes that
smoking cessation is beneficial at any age, reducing the risk of premature death, adding as much as a decade to life expectancy, while also
reducing the risk of many adverse health effects. More than half of
adolescents who use tobacco products report that they want to quit,
and more than half report making at least one quit attempt in the past
year. Thus for adolescents who want to stop tobacco or e-­cigarette use,
it is reasonable to consider referral to behavioral cessation supports.
Behavioral interventions for adults have significant evidence supporting their effectiveness, and many youth and young adult supports are
modeled off of these programs.
Little research has been conducted assessing the effectiveness
of pharmacologic therapies for combustible tobacco use among
adolescents. The 2020 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation concluded there was inadequate evidence on the benefits and harms of medications for tobacco cessation in children
and adolescents. Nonetheless, consensus panels recommend that
for adolescents who want to stop tobacco or e-­cigarette use with
moderate to severe tobacco dependence, it is reasonable to consider
pharmacotherapy, especially nicotine replacement therapy (NRT).
Cessation medications are not approved by the FDA for use with
children or adolescents, and NRT cannot be purchased OTC by persons younger than 18 years of age. However, cessation medications
can be prescribed for and used by youth under the supervision of
a physician. NRT is also available as a patch, gum, inhaler, nasal
spray, lozenge, or microtab (Table 157.8). Tobacco dependence
treatment for youth should be tailored to the patient’s level of nicotine dependence and readiness for change. Given the very high rates
of nonadherence during therapy and relapse after discontinuation
of therapy among adolescents in the trials of these medications,
close follow-­up is recommended.
Pediatric clinicians can connect patients to effective behavioral
interventions, including telephone, text message, smartphone app,
internet, and community-­
based resources. Free telephone-­
based
treatment (800-­
QUIT-­
NOW) has been shown to improve smoking cessation rates. Smoke-­free TXT, offered by the National Cancer
Institute, engages teens to quit smoking using free, daily text messaging. Teens can sign up online (teen.smokefree.gov) or text QUIT
to iQUIT (47848). A smartphone-­based app, quitSTART, helps teens
track cravings, monitor moods, use cessation tips, and follow quitting attempts. Truth Initiative has an evidence-­based program, This Is
Quitting, which is targeted to teens who want to stop using e-­cigarettes
(https://truthinitiative.org/thisisquitting). The American Academy
of Pediatrics offers a brief, practical guide that is designed to support pediatric health clinicians in providing behavioral and pharmacologic support to help youth quit (https://services.aap.org/en/pati
ent-­care/tobacco-­control-­and-­prevention/youth-­tobacco-­cessation/).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder

1201

Table 157.8  Smoking Cessation Pharmacotherapy Available in the United States*
THERAPY
BRAND

NAME

FDA-­APPROVED ADULT DOSING

AVAILABILITY†

STUDIED IN
ADOLESCENTS

The 4-­mg strength should be used by patients
who smoke ≥25 cigarettes a day; otherwise,
2-­mg strength should be used.
Wk 1-­6: 1 piece every 1-­2 hr
Wk 7-­9: 1 piece every 2-­4 hr
Wk 10-­12: 1 piece every 4-­8 hr
6-­16 cartridges a day for up to 12 wk

OTC*

Yes

Rx

No

The 4-­mg strength should be used by patients
who smoke their first cigarette within 30 min
of waking; otherwise, 2-­mg strength should
be used.
Wk 1-­6: 1 lozenge every 1-­2 hr
Wk 7-­9: 1 lozenge every 2-­4 hr
Wk 10-­12: 1 lozenge every 4-­8 hr
1-­2 sprays/hr up to a maximum of 80 sprays
per day
For patients who smoke >10 cigarettes daily:
Step 1: one 21-­mg patch daily for wk 1-­6
Step 2: one 14-­mg patch daily for wk 7-­8
Step 3: one 7-­mg patch daily for wk 9-­10
For patients who smoke <10 cigarettes daily:
Begin with 14-­mg patch daily for 6 wk, followed
by 7-­mg patch for 2 wk.

OTC

No

Rx

Yes

OTC

Yes

150 mg PO in morning for 3 days, then increase
to 150 mg PO bid

Rx

Yes

0.5 mg PO in morning for 3 days; increase to
0.5 mg PO bid for 4 days, then increase to
1 mg PO bid

Rx

Yes

STRENGTHS

NICOTINE REPLACEMENT THERAPY
Gum‡

Nicorette

2 mg, 4 mg

Inhaler

4 mg

Lozenge

Nicotrol
Inhaler
Commit,
Nicorette
mini

Nasal spray

Nicotrol NS

0.5 mg/spray

Transdermal
patch‡

NicoDerm
CQ

7, 14, 21 mg/24 hr

NONNICOTINE THERAPY
Bupropion SR‡ Zyban
Varenicline

Chantix

2 mg, 4 mg

150-­mg
sustained-­
release tablets
0.5-­, 1-­mg tablets

*None are FDA approved for use in patients younger than 18 years of age.
†OTC, Over the counter; Rx, prescription product; PO, by mouth (orally); bid, twice daily.
‡Generics are available.

From JP Karpinski et al: Smoking cessation treatment for adolescents. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2010;15:249–260

157.3 Marijuana
Cora Collette Breuner
Marijuana (cannabis, pot, weed, hash, grass), derived from the
Cannabis sativa hemp plant, is the most commonly used illicit substance. The main active chemical, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
is responsible for its hallucinogenic properties. THC is absorbed
rapidly by the nasal or oral routes, producing a peak of subjective
effect at 10 min and 1 hour, respectively. Marijuana is generally
smoked as a cigarette (reefer, joint), in a pipe, or ingested (edibles).
Although there is much variation in content, each cigarette contains
8–10% THC. Another popular form that is smoked, a “blunt,” is a
hollowed-­out small cigar (tobacco leaf) refilled with marijuana, and
thus also contains nicotine. Marijuana products (hash oil or leaf)
can also be used in some vaping devices or hookah pens. Hashish is
the concentrated THC resin in a sticky black liquid or oil. Although
marijuana use by U.S. teens has declined in the last decade, ∼25%
of high school students have used marijuana at least once during
the previous 30 days. About 8% of students report having tried
marijuana before age 13, with a range of 4.3–18.5% across various
states, indicating the need for early prevention efforts. Adolescents
living in states where medical marijuana is legal report a higher use

40
*Past-year
use in 12th
graders.

30
20
10
0
1993
Using

2003

2013

Perceived harm
(saw great risk in smoking marijuana occasionally)

Fig. 157.3 As the perceived harm of marijuana drops, use disorder
goes up. The 36.4% using in 2013 equates to about 11 students in the
average class. (From NIH National Institute on Substance Use.)
of cannabis edibles. It is important to recognize that as perceived
harm drops, marijuana use increases. (Fig. 157.3). In addition, the
potency of cannabis has increased substantially in part to marketing
and legal sales.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1202 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 157.9  Acute and Chronic Adverse Effects of
Cannabis Use
ACUTE ADVERSE EFFECTS
• Anxiety and panic, especially in naïve users
• Psychotic symptoms (at high doses)
• Road crashes if a person drives while intoxicated
• Cannabis hyperemesis syndrome
CHRONIC ADVERSE EFFECTS
• Cannabis dependence syndrome (in about 1 in 10 users)
• Chronic bronchitis and impaired respiratory function in regular
smokers
• Psychotic symptoms and disorders in heavy users, especially those
with a history of psychotic symptoms or a family history of these
disorders
• Impaired educational attainment in adolescents who are regular
users
• Subtle cognitive impairment in those who are daily users for 10 yr
or more
• Impaired tasks of sequencing ability, cognitive processing speed,
inhibition, and sustained attention
Modified from Hall W, Degenhardt L. Adverse health effects of non-­medical cannabis
use. Lancet. 2009;374:1383–1390.

Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) is characterized by
recurrent episodes of vomiting associated with abdominal pain and
nausea; patients often find relief by taking a hot shower or bath (Table
157.10). Cannabis use typically has been chronic (>1-­2 year) and frequent (multiple times per week). There is considerable similarities
between CHS and cyclic vomiting syndrome (see Chapter 390). Treatment of CHS includes stopping marijuana use, antiemetics, and topical
capsaicin.
The increased THC content of marijuana of 5-­to 15-­fold compared to that of the 1970s is related to the observation of a withdrawal syndrome occurring 24-­48 hours after discontinuing the
substance. Heavy users experience malaise, irritability, agitation,
insomnia, substance craving, shakiness, diaphoresis, night sweats,
and GI disturbance. The symptoms peak by the fourth day and
resolve in 10-­14 days. Certain substances may interact with marijuana to potentiate sedation (alcohol, diazepam) and stimulation
(cocaine, amphetamines) or may be antagonistic (propranolol,
phenytoin).
Behavioral interventions, including cognitive-­behavioral therapy
(CBT) and motivational incentives, have shown to be effective in treating marijuana dependency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.4 Inhalants
Table 157.10  Rome IV Criteria for CHS Diagnosis
CATEGORY

FEATURES

Essential

Stereotypical episodic vomiting resembling
CVS in terms of onset, duration, and
frequency
Presentation after prolonged, excessive
cannabis use
Relief of vomiting episodes by sustained
cessation of cannabis use

Supportive remarks

May be associated with pathologic bathing
behavior (prolonged hot baths or showers)

CHS, Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome; CVS, cyclic vomiting syndrome.
From Zhu JW, Gonsalves CL, Issenman RM, Kam AJ. Diagnosis and acute management
of adolescent cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome: a systematic review. J Adolesc
Health. 2021;68:246–254, Table 1, p. 248.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In addition to the desired effects of elation and euphoria, marijuana
may cause impairment of short-­term memory, poor performance of
tasks requiring divided attention (e.g., those involved in driving), loss
of critical judgment, decreased coordination, and distortion of time
perception (Table 157.9). Visual hallucinations and perceived body
distortions occur rarely, but “flashbacks” or recall of frightening hallucinations experienced under marijuana’s influence may occur, usually
during stress or with fever.
Smoking marijuana for a minimum of 4 days/week for 6 months
appears to result in dose-­related suppression of plasma testosterone
levels and spermatogenesis, prompting concern about the potential
deleterious effect of smoking marijuana before completion of pubertal growth and development. There is an antiemetic effect of oral
THC or smoked marijuana, often followed by appetite stimulation,
which is the basis of the substance’s use in patients receiving cancer
chemotherapy.
An amotivational syndrome has been described in long-­term marijuana users who lose interest in age-­appropriate behavior; proof of the
causative relationship remains equivocal. Chronic use is associated
with increased anxiety and depression, learning problems, poor job
performance, hyperemesis, and respiratory problems such as pharyngitis, sinusitis, bronchitis, and asthma (see Table 157.9).

Cora Collette Breuner
Inhalants, found in many common household products, comprise
a diverse group of volatile substances whose vapors can be inhaled
to produce psychoactive effects. The practice of inhalation is popular among younger adolescents and decreases with increasing age.
Young adolescents are attracted to these substances because of
their rapid action, easy availability, and low cost. Products that are
abused as inhalants include volatile solvents (paint thinners, glue,
e-­cigarette solvents known as “dripping,” toluene, acetone, refrigerants, gasoline, cleaning fluids, correction fluids), aerosols (spray
paint, nitrous oxide, hair spray), gases (propane tanks, lighter fluid),
nitrites (“poppers” or “video head cleaner”), and propellants used in
whipped cream dispensers. The most popular inhalants among young
adolescents are glue, shoe polish, and spray paint. The various products contain a wide range of chemicals with serious adverse health
effects (Table 157.11). Huffing, the practice of inhaling fumes, can be
accomplished using a paper bag containing a chemical-­soaked cloth;
spraying aerosols directly into the nose/mouth; or using a balloon,
plastic bag, or soda can filled with fumes. The percentage of adolescents using inhalants has remained stable, with 5.8% of high school
students reporting having ever used inhalants. Eighth and ninth
graders report highest use, suggesting targeted prevention strategies
for this age-­group.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The major effects of inhalants are psychoactive (Table 157.12). The
intoxication lasts only a few minutes, so a typical user will huff repeatedly over an extended period (hours) to maintain the high. The immediate effects of inhalants are similar to alcohol: euphoria, slurred
speech, decreased coordination, and dizziness. Toluene, the main
ingredient in model airplane glue and some rubber cements, causes
relaxation and pleasant hallucinations for up to 2 hours. Euphoria is
followed by violent excitement; coma may result from prolonged or
rapid inhalation. Volatile nitrites, such as amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite,
and related compounds marketed as room deodorizers, are used as
euphoriants, enhancers of musical appreciation, and sexual enhancements among older adolescents and young adults. They may result in
headaches, syncope, and lightheadedness; profound hypotension and
cutaneous flushing followed by vasoconstriction and tachycardia;
transiently inverted T waves and depressed ST segments on electrocardiography; methemoglobinemia; increased bronchial irritation;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder

1203

Table 157.11  Hazards of Chemicals Found in Commonly
Used Inhalants

Table 157.13  Documented Clinical Presentations of Acute
and Chronic Volatile Substance Use

Amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite (“poppers,” “video head cleaner”): sudden
sniffing death syndrome, suppressed immunologic function, injury
to red blood cells (interfering with oxygen supply to vital tissues)
Benzene (found in gasoline): bone marrow injury, impaired
immuno­logic function, increased risk of leukemia, reproductive
system toxicity
Butane, propane (found in lighter fluid, hair and paint sprays):
sudden sniffing death syndrome via cardiac effects, serious burn
injuries (because of flammability)
Freon (used as a refrigerant and aerosol propellant): sudden sniffing
death syndrome, respiratory obstruction and death (from sudden
cooling/cold injury to airways), liver damage
Methylene chloride (found in paint thinners and removers,
degreasers): reduction of oxygen-­carrying of blood, changes to the
heart muscle and heartbeat
Nitrous oxide (“laughing gas, Whippits, i.e., whipped cream
dispensers), hexane: death from lack of oxygen to the brain,
altered perception and motor coordination, loss of sensation, limb
spasms, blackouts caused by blood pressure changes, depression
of heart muscle functioning; vitamin B12 deficiency
Toluene (found in gasoline, paint thinners and removers, correction
fluid): brain damage (loss of brain tissue mass, impaired cognition,
gait disturbance, loss of coordination, loss of equilibrium, limb
spasms, hearing and vision loss), liver and kidney damage
Trichloroethylene (found in spot removers, degreasers): sudden sniffing
death syndrome, cirrhosis of the liver, reproductive complications,
hearing and vision damage

Ventricular fibrillation
Asystolic cardiac arrest
Myocardial infarction
Ataxia
Agitation
Limb and trunk incoordination
Tremor
Visual loss
Tinnitus
Dysarthria
Vertigo
Hyperreflexia
Acute confusional state
Conjunctivitis
Acute paranoia
Depression
Oral and nasal mucosal ulceration
Halitosis
Convulsions/fits
Headache
Peripheral neuropathy
Methemoglobinemia
Acute trauma

Table 157.12  Stages in Symptom Development After
Use of Inhalants

cause pulmonary hypertension, restrictive lung defects or reduced
diffusion capacity, peripheral neuropathy, hematuria, tubular acidosis, and possibly cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. Chronic inhalant use has long been linked to widespread brain damage and
cognitive abnormalities that can range from mild impairment
(poor memory, decreased learning ability) to severe dementia.
High-­frequency inhalant users were significantly more likely than
moderate-­and low-­frequency users to experience adverse consequences of inhalant intoxication, such as behavioral, language, and
memory problems. Certain risky behaviors and consequences, such
as engaging in unprotected sex or fighting while high on inhalants, were dramatically more common among high-­f requency than
low-­frequency inhalant users. Death in the acute phase may result
from cerebral or pulmonary edema or myocardial involvement (see
Table 157.13).

STAGE

SYMPTOMS

1: Excitatory

Euphoria, excitation, exhilaration, dizziness,
hallucinations, sneezing, coughing, excess
salivation, intolerance to light, nausea and
vomiting, flushed skin and bizarre behavior

2: Early CNS
depression

Confusion, disorientation, dullness, loss of
self-­control, ringing or buzzing in the head,
blurred or double vision, cramps, headache,
insensitivity to pain, and pallor or paleness

3: Medium CNS
depression

Drowsiness, muscular incoordination, slurred
speech, depressed reflexes, and nystagmus or
rapid involuntary oscillation of the eyeballs

4: Late CNS
depression

Unconsciousness that may be accompanied
by bizarre dreams, epileptiform seizures, and
EEG changes

CNS, Central nervous system; EEG, electroencephalogram.
From Harris D. Volatile substance use. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2006;91:ep93–
ep100.

and increased intraocular pressure. There may be dermatologic
findings, including perianal/perioral dermatitis (“huffer rash”),
frostbite, and contact dermatitis, as well as epistaxis, nasal ulcers,
and conjunctivitis.

COMPLICATIONS

Model airplane glue is responsible for a wide range of complications related to chemical toxicity, to the method of administration
(in plastic bags, with resultant suffocation), and to the dangerous
setting in which the inhalation occurs (roof tops). Common neuromuscular changes reported in chronic inhalant users include difficulty coordinating movement, gait disorders, muscle tremors, and
spasticity, particularly in the legs (Table 157.13). Chronic use may

Muscle weakness
Abdominal pain
Cough
Aspiration pneumonia
Chemical pneumonitis
Coma
Visual and auditory hallucinations
Acute delusions
Nausea and vomiting
Pulmonary edema
Photophobia
Rash
Jaundice
Anorexia
Slurred speech
Diarrhea
Weight loss
Epistaxis
Rhinitis
Cerebral edema
Visual loss
Burns
Renal tubular acidosis

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of inhalant abuse is difficult because of the ubiquitous nature
of the products and decreased parental awareness of the dangers. In the
primary care setting, providers need to ask parents if they have witnessed any unusual behaviors in their teen; noticed high-­risk products
in the teen’s bedroom; seen paint on the teen’s hands, nose, or mouth;
or found paint-­or chemical-­coated rags. Complete blood count, coagulation studies, and hepatic and renal function studies may identify the
complications. In extreme intoxication, a user may manifest symptoms
of restlessness, general muscle weakness, dysarthria, nystagmus, disruptive behavior, and occasionally hallucinations. Toluene is excreted
rapidly in the urine as hippuric acid, with the residual detectable in the
serum by gas chromatography.

TREATMENT

Treatment is generally supportive and directed toward control of
arrhythmia and stabilization of respirations and circulation. Withdrawal symptoms do not usually occur.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1204 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

157.5 EVALI

having ever used MDMA was 8.4% of college students; 12th-­grade lifetime use was 2.8% in 2021.

E-­cigarette or vaping use–associated lung injury.
See Chapter 450.

Clinical Manifestations

Several naturally occurring and synthetic substances are used by
adolescents for their hallucinogenic properties. They have chemical
structures similar to neurotransmitters such as serotonin, but their
exact mechanism of action remains unclear. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy, MDMA), and
hallucinogenic magic mushrooms (psilocybins) are the most commonly reported hallucinogens used. Peyote (mescaline) derived from
a cactus flower is chemically related to MDMA. Ayahuasca is another
plant-­derived hallucinogen found in South America whose active
agents are N,N-­dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and harmala alkaloids,
which act as a monoamine oxidase inhibitor. Another hallucinatory
agent is derived from a poisonous toad (Bufo alvarius), native to the
Sonoran Desert, which produces 5-­MeO-­DMT in its venom gland.
251-­NBOMe (N-­Bomb) is a designer substance that interacts with the
5HT-­2a receptor and has sympathomimetic and hallucinogenic properties (Table 157.14).

Euphoria, a heightened sensual awareness, and increased psychic and
emotional energy are acute effects. Compared to other hallucinogens,
MDMA is less likely to produce emotional lability, depersonalization,
and disturbances of thought. Nausea, jaw clenching, teeth grinding, and
blurred vision are somatic symptoms, whereas anxiety, panic attacks,
and psychosis are the adverse psychiatric outcomes. A few deaths have
been reported after ingestion of the substance. In high doses, MDMA
can interfere with the body’s ability to regulate temperature. The resultant hyperthermia in association with vigorous dancing at a “rave” has
resulted in severe liver, kidney, and cardiovascular system failure and
death. No specific treatments are recommended for acute toxicity.
Chronic MDMA use can lead to changes in brain function, affecting
cognitive tasks and memory. These symptoms may occur because of
MDMA’s effects on neurons that secrete serotonin as a neurotransmitter. The serotonin system plays an important role in regulating mood,
aggression, sexual activity, sleep, and sensitivity to pain. A high rate of
dependence has been found among MDMA users. MDMA exposure may
be associated with long-­term neurotoxicity and damage to serotonin-­
containing neurons. In nonhuman primates, exposure to MDMA for
only 4 days caused damage to serotonin nerve terminals that was evident 6-­7 years later. There are no specific pharmacologic treatments for
MDMA addiction. Substance use recovery groups are recommended.

LYSERGIC ACID DIETHYLAMIDE

PHENCYCLIDINE

157.6 Hallucinogens
Cora Collette Breuner

LSD (acid, big “d,” blotters) is a very potent hallucinogen that is made
from lysergic acid found in ergot, a fungus that grows on rye and other
grains. Its high potency allows effective doses to be applied to absorbent paper, or it can be taken as a liquid or a tablet. The onset of action
can be 30-­60 minutes, and it peaks at 2-­4 hours. By 10-­12 hours, individuals return to the preingestion state. Among U.S. 12th graders, 4%
report trying LSD at least once.

Clinical Manifestations

The effects of LSD can be divided into three categories: somatic (physical effects), perceptual (altered changes in vision and hearing), and
psychic (changes in sensorium). The common somatic symptoms are
dizziness, dilated pupils, nausea, flushing, elevated temperature, and
tachycardia. The sensation of synesthesia, or “seeing” smells and “hearing” colors, as well as major distortions of time and self, have been
reported with high doses of LSD. Delusional ideation, body distortion,
and suspiciousness to the point of toxic psychosis are the more serious of the psychic symptoms. LSD is not considered to be an addictive substance because it does not typically produce substance-­seeking
behavior.

Treatment

An individual is considered to have a “bad trip” when the sensory experiences cause the user to become terrified or panicked. These episodes
should be treated by removing the individual from the aggravating
situation and placing them in a quiet room with a calming friend. In
situations of extreme agitation or seizures, use of benzodiazepines may
be warranted. “Flashbacks,” or LSD-­induced states after the drug has
worn off, and tolerance to the effects of the drug are additional complications of its use.

METHYLENEDIOXYMETHAMPHETAMINE

MDMA (“X,” ecstasy, Molly), a phenylisopropylamine hallucinogen, is
a synthetic compound similar to hallucinogenic cactus-­derived mescaline and the stimulant methamphetamine. Like other hallucinogens,
this substance is proposed to interact with serotoninergic neurons in
the CNS. It is the preferred substance at “raves,” all-­night dance parties, and is also known as one of the “club substances” along with γ-­
hydroxybutyrate (GHB) and ketamine. Nationwide, the prevalence of

Phencyclidine (PCP) (Sernyl, angel dust, hog, peace pill, sheets) is an
arylcyclohexalamine whose popularity is related in part to its ease of
synthesis in home laboratories. One of the by-­products of home synthesis can cause cramps, diarrhea, and hematemesis. It is a “dissociative
substance” that produces feelings of detachment from the surrounding
environment and self. The substance is thought to potentiate adrenergic effects by inhibiting neuronal reuptake of catecholamines. PCP
is available as a tablet, liquid, or powder, which may be used alone or
sprinkled on cigarettes (joints). The powders and tablets generally contain 2-­6 mg of PCP, whereas joints average 1 mg for every 150 mg of
tobacco leaves, or approximately 30-­50 mg per joint. The prevalence
of PCP use (a hallucinogenic substance) among U.S. 12th graders is
approximately 1%.

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical manifestations are dose related and produce alterations
of perception, behavior, and autonomic functions. Euphoria, nystagmus, ataxia, and emotional lability occur within 2-­3 minutes after
smoking 1-­5 mg and last for 4-­6 hours. At these low doses the user is
likely to experience shallow breathing, flushing, generalized numbness
of extremities, and loss of motor coordination. Hallucinations may
involve bizarre distortions of body image that often precipitate panic
reactions. With doses of 5-­15 mg, a toxic psychosis may occur, with
disorientation, hypersalivation, and abusive language lasting for >1
hour. Hypotension, generalized seizures, and cardiac arrhythmias typically occur with plasma concentrations of 40-­200 mg/dL. Death has
been reported during psychotic delirium from hypertension, hypotension, hypothermia, seizures, and trauma. The coma of PCP may
be distinguished from that of the opiates by the absence of respiratory
depression; the presence of muscle rigidity, hyperreflexia, and nystagmus; and lack of response to naloxone. PCP psychosis may be difficult
to distinguish from schizophrenia. In the absence of a history of use,
the diagnosis depends on urinalysis.

Treatment

Management of the PCP-­intoxicated patient includes placement in a
darkened, quiet room on a floor pad, safe from injury. Acute alcohol
intoxication may also be present. For recent oral ingestion, gastric
absorption is poor, and induction of emesis or gastric lavage is useful.
Diazepam, in a dose of 5-­10 mg orally or 2-­5 mg intravenously, may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder

1205

Table 157.14  Classes of Hallucinogens
CHEMICAL NAMES

PLANTS OR NATURAL SOURCES; SYNTHETIC AGENTS; “SLANG NAMES”

INDOLEAMINES
Lysergamides (Ergolines)
d-­Lysergic acid diethylamide
d-­Lysergic acid amide

Alkytryptamines
α-­Methyltryptamine
N,N-­dimethyltryptamine (DMT)
5-­Methoxy-­N,N-­dimethyltryptamine (5-­MeO-­DMT)
Psilocybin (4-­phophoryloxy-­DMT)
Psilocin (4-­OH-­DMT)
5-­Methoxy-­N,N-­diisopropyltryptamine (5-­MeO-­DIPT)
Bufotenine (5-­OH-­DMT)
Diethyltryptamine
Ibogaine
PHENYLETHYLAMINES
Mescaline (3,4,5-­trimethoxyphenethylamine)
3,4-­methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)
3,4-­methylenedioxyethamphetamine (MDEA)
Methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA)
4-­Bromo-­2,5-­dimethoxyamphetamine (DOM)
Paramethoxyamphetamine (PMA)
ARYLCYCLOHEXYLAMINES (PIPERIDINE DERIVATIVES)
Phencyclidine (PCP)
Ketamine
Dextromethorphan
PIPERAZINES
Benzylpiperazine (BZP)
Trifluoromethylphenylpiperazine (TFMPP)
Methylenedioxybenzylpiperazine (MDBP)
m-­Chlorophenylpiperazine (mCPP)
p-­Methoxyphenylpiperazine (MeOPP)

LSD; Delysid; “acid,” “blotter,” “stamps,” “dots,” “trips,” “paper,”
“a-­bombs,” “pyramids”
Ipomoea violacea (morning glory), Rivea corymbosa (Mexican ololiuqui),
Argyreia nervosa (Hawaiian baby woodrose), Merremia tuberose
(Hawaiian woodrose)
AMT; “alpha”
Piptadenia peregrina, Anadenanthera peregrina, Prestonia amazenicum,
Mimosa hostilis, Vivola calophylla; “businessman’s trip”
Bufo alvarius
Psilocybe sp, Panaeolus sp, Conocybe sp, Inocybe sp, Gymnopilus sp,
Lycoperdon sp, Pluteus genus; “magic mushrooms,” “shrooms,” “alice”
“Foxy methoxy,” “foxy”
Ch’an Su
DET
Tabernanthe iboga
Peyote cactus (Lophophora williamsii)
Ecstasy; “XTC,” “X,” “E,” “Adam,” “the hug drug”
“Eve”
“Serenity, tranquility, and peace” [STP]

Angel dust; “hog,” “wacky weed,” “T,” “killer weed”
Ketalar, ketaject, ketanest, “special K,” “K,” “K-­hole,” “vitamin K”
“DXM,” “dex,” “robotripping,” “CCC,” “skittles,” “red devils”
“Legal E,” “legal X,” “A2”

TETRAHYDROCANNABINOIDS
Tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-­THC, Δ1-­THC)

Dronabinol (Marinol); Cannabis sativa (marijuana, hashish)

DITERPENE ALKALOIDS
Salvinorin A, C
Myrisicin, saffron

Salvia divinorum; sage
Myristica fragrans (nutmeg, mace)

ANTICHOLINERGIC AGENTS
Atropine (d,l-­hyoscyamine)
Scopolamine (L-­hyoscine)

Atropa belladonna (deadly nightshade), Datura stramonium (jimson weed)
Transderm Scop; Datura stramonium (jimson weed), Hyoscyamus
niger (henbane)

From Traub SJ. Hallucinogens. In Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds. Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2007: Table 45.1.

be helpful if the patient is agitated and not comatose. Rapid excretion
of the substance is promoted by acidification of the urine. Supportive
therapy of the comatose patient is indicated with particular attention
to hydration, which may be compromised by PCP-­induced diuresis.
Inpatient and/or behavioral treatments can be helpful for chronic
PCP users.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.7 Cocaine
Cora Collette Breuner
Cocaine, an alkaloid extracted from the leaves of the South American
Erythroxylum coca, is supplied as the hydrochloride salt in crystalline
form. With snorting, it is rapidly absorbed into the bloodstream from
the nasal mucosa, detoxified by the liver, and excreted in the urine as
benzoylecgonine. Smoking the cocaine alkaloid (freebasing) involves
inhaling the cocaine vapors in pipes or cigarettes mixed with tobacco

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1206 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
or marijuana. Accidental burns are potential complications of this
practice. With crack cocaine, the crystallized rock form, the smoker
feels “high” in <10 seconds. The risk of addiction with this method is
higher and more rapidly progressive than from snorting cocaine. Tolerance develops, and the user must increase the dose or change the
route of administration, or both, to achieve the same effect. To sustain
the high, cocaine users repeatedly use cocaine in short periods known
as “binges.” Substance dealers often place cocaine in plastic bags or
condoms and swallow these containers during transport. Rupture
of a container produces a sympathomimetic crisis (see Table 157.4).
Cocaine use disorder among U.S. high school students has decreased
in the last decade, with 2.5% of 12th graders having tried the substance
(any route) at least once.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cocaine is a strong CNS stimulant that increases dopamine levels by
preventing reuptake. Cocaine produces euphoria, increased motor
activity, decreased fatigability, and mental alertness. Its sympathomimetic properties are responsible for pupillary dilation, tachycardia,
hypertension, and hyperthermia. Snorting cocaine chronically results
in loss of sense of smell, nosebleeds, and chronic rhinorrhea. Injecting cocaine increases risk for HIV infection. Chronic users experience
anxiety, irritability, and sometimes paranoid psychosis. Lethal effects
are possible, especially when cocaine is used in combination with other
substances, such as heroin, in an injectable form known as a “speedball.” When taken with alcohol, cocaine is metabolized by the liver to
produce cocaethylene, a substance that enhances the euphoria and is
associated with a greater risk of sudden death than with cocaine alone.
Pregnant adolescents who use cocaine place their fetus at risk of premature delivery, complications of low birthweight, and possibly developmental disorders.

TREATMENT

There are no FDA-­approved medications for treatment of cocaine
addiction. CBT has been shown to be effective when provided in combination with additional services and social support. Oral sustained-­
release dexamphetamine has been shown to be partially effective in
adults with cocaine dependence.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.8 Amphetamines
Cora Collette Breuner
Methamphetamine, commonly known as meth, is a nervous system stimulant and Schedule II substance with a high potential for
abuse. Most of the methamphetamine currently used is produced
in illegal laboratories. It is a white, odorless, bitter-­tasting powder
that is particularly popular among adolescents and young adults
because of its potency and ease of absorption. It can be ingested
orally, smoked, needle-­injected, or absorbed across mucous membranes. Amphetamines have multiple CNS effects, including release
of neurotransmitters and an indirect catecholamine agonist effect.
Approximately 0.6% of 12th graders reported using methamphetamine at least once.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Methamphetamine rapidly increases the release and blocks the reuptake of dopamine, a powerful “feel good” neurotransmitter (Table
157.15). The effects of amphetamines can be dose related. In small
amounts, amphetamine effects resemble other stimulants: increased
physical activity, rapid and/or irregular heart rate, increased blood
pressure, and decreased appetite. High doses produce slowing of cardiac conduction in the face of ventricular irritability. Hypertensive and
hyperpyrexic episodes can occur, as can seizures (see Table 157.4).
Binging may result in the development of psychotic ideation with the
potential for sudden violence. Cerebrovascular damage, psychosis,
severe receding of the gums with tooth decay, and infection with HIV
and hepatitides B and C can result from long-­term use. A withdrawal
syndrome is associated with amphetamine use, with early, intermediate, and late phases (see Table 157.15). The early phase is characterized as a “crash” phase with depression, agitation, fatigue, and desire
for more of the substance. Loss of physical and mental energy, limited
interest in the environment, and anhedonia mark the intermediate
phase. In the final phase, substance craving returns, often triggered by
particular situations or objects.

TREATMENT

Acute agitation and delusional behaviors can be treated with haloperidol or droperidol. Phenothiazines are contraindicated and may cause

Table 157.15  Signs and Symptoms of Intoxication and Withdrawal
OPIATES

AMPHETAMINES/COCAINE

BENZODIAZEPINES

Behavior

Apathy and sedation; disinhibition;
psychomotor retardation; impaired
attention and judgment

Euphoria; apathy and sedation; abusiveness or
aggression; labile mood; impaired attention;
anterograde amnesia; impaired psychomotor
performance; interference with personal
functioning

Signs

Drowsiness; slurred speech; pupillary
constriction (except anoxia from
severe overdose—dilation);
decreased level of consciousness

Overdose

Respiratory depression; hypothermia

Euphoria and sensation of increased
energy; hypervigilance; grandiosity,
aggression, argumentative; labile mood;
repetitive stereotyped behaviors;
hallucinations, usually with intact
orientation; paranoid ideation;
interference with personal functioning
Dilated pupils; tachycardia (occasionally
bradycardia, cardiac arrhythmias);
hypertension; nausea/vomiting; sweating
and chills; evidence of weight loss;
dilated pupils; chest pain; convulsions
Sympathomimetic symptoms

Withdrawal

Craving to use; lacrimation; yawning;
rhinorrhea/sneezing; muscle aches or
cramps; abdominal cramps; nausea/
vomiting/diarrhea; sweating;
dilated pupils; anorexia; irritability;
tremor; piloerection/chills;
restlessness; disturbed sleep

INTOXICATION

Dysphoric mood (sadness/anhedonia);
lethargy and fatigue; psychomotor
retardation or agitation; craving;
increased appetite; insomnia or
hypersomnia; bizarre or unpleasant
dreams

Unsteady gait; difficulty in standing; slurred
speech; nystagmus; decreased level
consciousness; erythematous skin lesions or
blisters
Hypotension; hyperthermia; depression of gag
reflex; coma
Tremor of tongue, eyelids, or outstretched
hands; nausea or vomiting; tachycardia;
postural hypotension; psychomotor agitation;
headache; insomnia; malaise or weakness;
transient visual, tactile, or auditory
hallucinations or illusions; paranoid ideation;
grand mal convulsions

From Haber PS, Demirkol A, Lange K, et al. Management of injecting substance users admitted to hospital. Lancet. 2009;374:1284–1292.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder
a rapid drop in blood pressure or seizure activity. Other supportive
treatment consists of a cooling blanket for hyperthermia and treatment of the hypertension and arrhythmias, which may respond to
sedation with lorazepam or diazepam. For the chronic user, comprehensive CBT interventions have been demonstrated as effective treatment options.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.9 Stimulant Use and Diversion
Cora Collette Breuner
In MTF 2021, 4.6% of 12th graders reported using OTC diet pills in
their lifetime and 1.1% in the past 30 days. These include nonprescription stimulants of two general types: pseudoamphetamines, usually
sold by internet/mail order, and OTC stimulants, primarily diet and
“stay-­awake” pills. These substances usually contain caffeine, ephedrine, and/or phenylpropanolamine.
The misuse of a stimulant medication, defined as taking a stimulant not prescribed by a healthcare provider and not in accordance
with healthcare provider guidance, has been growing over the past
two decades, with an increase in prevalence rates of nonprescription
stimulant use among both adolescents and young adults in the past
10 years. Nonprescription use of methylphenidate (MPH) in 2000 was
1.2%, increasing to 2% for MPH and 7.5% for nonprescription mixed
amphetamine salts (AMPs) in 2015.
The majority of nonprescription stimulant users reported obtaining
the substances by diversion, a process for obtaining the substance from
peers. Diversion occurs quite often and can begin in childhood, adolescence, or young adulthood. Lifetime rates of diversion ranged from
16–29% of students with stimulant prescriptions. One survey reported
that 23.3% of middle and high school students taking prescribed stimulants had been solicited to divert their medication to others at a rate that
increased from middle to high school. It has been shown that 54% of
college students prescribed stimulants for attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) had been approached to divert their medication.
In U.S. college students, nonprescription use of stimulants is more prevalent among particular subgroups (males; members of fraternities/sororities; with lower grade point averages; more likely to use alcohol, cigarettes,
marijuana, MDMA, or cocaine) and types of colleges (northeastern region,
with more competitive admission standards). Lifetime prevalence of nonprescription stimulant use was 6.9% and past-­month prevalence 2.1%.
According to a survey of 334 ADHD-­diagnosed college students taking
prescription stimulants, 25% misused their own prescription medications.
Scholastic pressures, including the need to succeed academically, and persistent social and financial demands place many students at an increased
risk for misuse of various substances, especially at the end of school terms.
A web-­based survey of medical and health profession students found that
the most common reason for nonprescription stimulant use was to focus
and concentrate during studying.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Misuse of stimulants is associated with psychosis, seizures, dysrhythmias, myocardial infarction, cardiomyopathy, and even sudden death.
Intentional misuse of MPH or AMPs in combination with other substances leads to adverse medical consequences. Importantly, 14% of the
emergency department (ED) visits for stimulant use were associated
with cardiovascular (CV) events. Psychosis includes visual hallucinations, delusions, anorexia, flattening of affect, and insomnia mediated by
dopaminergic excess. The CV effects include hypertension, arrhythmias,
tachycardia, cardiomyopathy, cardiac dysrhythmias, necrotizing vasculitis, and CV accidents. Case reports include serious CV adverse drug reactions (ADRs), sudden death, and psychiatric disorders. Many patients
report sleep difficulties (72%), irritability (62%), dizziness and lightheadedness (35%), headaches (33%), stomachaches (33%), and sadness (25%).
Other health risks include loss of appetite, weight loss, and nervousness.
Many users are involved in heavy episodic alcohol use while using MPH

1207

or AMPs. Most users of MPH or AMPs are unaware of these adverse
effects and predominantly “feel good” about taking these medications.
Despite reports that MPH misuse is a healthcare issue, >82% of primary
care physicians did not suspect misuse of prescribed ADHD medication in
one report, and <1% thought that their patients were diverting prescribed
ADHD medication. Improved monitoring for malingering and patient
misuse may assist stopping diversion of these medications. An ADHD
diagnosis should be confirmed in those requesting ADHD medication,
and they should be screened for use of other substances.

TREATMENT

Treatment for nonprescription stimulant overdose is similar as that for
amphetamine overdose. Haloperidol or droperidol is recommended
for acute agitation and delusional behaviors. Phenothiazines are contraindicated and may cause a rapid drop in blood pressure or seizure
activity. Hyperthermia may require use of a cooling blanket, and
sedation with a benzodiazepine is recommended for treatment of the
hypertension and arrhythmias. In those with chronic use, inpatient or
outpatient substance use interventions using CBT have been shown to
be the most effective treatment option.
Monitoring of the diversion and misuse of pharmaceutical stimulants must be a priority. More data need to be obtained on the prevalence, patterns, and harmful effects in adolescents and young adults.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.10 Opiates/Opioids
Cora Collette Breuner
Opiates refers to natural derived drugs (morphine, codeine, opium),
whereas opioids refers to natural, semisynthetic, and synthetic agents.
Heroin is a highly addictive synthetic opiate substance made from a naturally occurring substance (morphine) in the opium poppy plant. It is a
white or brown powder that can be injected (intravenously or subcutaneously), snorted/sniffed, or smoked. Intravenous (IV) injection produces
an immediate effect, whereas effects from the subcutaneous route occur
in minutes, and from snorting, in 30 minutes. After injection, heroin
crosses the blood-­brain barrier, is converted to morphine, and binds to
opiate receptors. Tolerance develops to the euphoric effect, and the chronic
user must take more heroin to achieve the same intense effect. Heroin use
among U.S. teens peaked in the mid-­1990s but is resurgent in some suburban communities, as is the use of prescription opioids found in the home.
Nationwide, 2.9% of high school students report having tried heroin at least
once. Fentanyl is a more potent opiate and is responsible for many opiate
overdoses. Other opioid drugs are noted in Table 157.16. Synthetic opioid
fentanyl-derived analogues or nitrazene drugs (novel potent opioids:NPO)
are much more potent than fentanyl and require higher and multiple doses
of naloxone to reverse an overdose. NPOs include brorphine, isotonitazene, metonitazene, and N-piperidinyl etonitazene. Fentanyl is often illicitly manufactured and may be mixed with other substances, including
xylazine, a nonopioid sedative. Xylazine, also known as tranq, is a veterinary drug that in humans produces central nervous system and respiratory
depression, as well as bradycardia and hypotension. Xylazine also produces
poorly healing cutaneous ulcerations at the site of injection and at distal
sites. In 2022, fentanyl-xylazine combinations have been responsible for
a significant number of overdose deaths; there is no antidote for xylazine.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations are determined by the purity of the heroin
or its adulterants, combined with the route of administration (oral
vs injection). The immediate effects include euphoria, diminution in
pain, flushing of the skin, and pinpoint pupils (see Table 157.15). An
effect on the hypothalamus is suggested by the lowering of body temperature. The most common dermatologic lesions are the “tracks,”
the hypertrophic linear scars that follow the course of large veins.
Smaller, discrete peripheral scars, resembling healed insect bites, may
be easily overlooked. The adolescent who injects heroin subcutaneously may have fat necrosis, lipodystrophy, and atrophy over portions

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1208 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 157.16  Types and Actions of the Most Commonly Prescribed and Used Opioids
TYPE OF OPIOID

ACTION ON OPIOID RECEPTOR

Alfentanil

Fully synthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors

Buprenorphine

Semisynthetic

Partial agonist of μ-­receptors and NOP receptors; antagonist of κ-­receptors

Codeine

Natural

Weak agonist of μ-­receptors

Diamorphine (heroin)

Semisynthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors, δ-­receptors, and κ-­receptors; predominant binding to μ-­receptors

Dihydrocodeine

Semisynthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors

Fentanyl

Fully synthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors, δ-­receptors, and κ-­receptors; predominant binding to μ-­receptors

Hydromorphone

Semisynthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors and κ-­receptors; predominant binding to μ-­receptors

Methadone

Fully synthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors

Morphine

Natural

Agonist of μ-­receptors, δ-­receptors, and κ-­receptors; predominant binding to μ-­receptors

Oxycodone

Semisynthetic

Weak agonist of μ-­receptors, δ-­receptors, and κ-­receptors; predominant binding to
μ-­receptors

Pentazocine

Fully synthetic

Partial agonist of δ-­receptors and κ-­receptors; antagonist of μ-­receptors

Pethidine (meperidine)

Fully synthetic

Agonist of κ-­receptors

Tramadol

Fully synthetic

Weak agonist of μ-­receptors

Information presented is from the DrugBank and PubChem databases.
NOP, Nociceptin opioid peptide.
From Fountas A, Van Uum S, Karavitaki N. Opioid-­induced endocrinopathies. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2020;8:68–80.

of the extremities. Attempts to conceal these stigmata may include
amateur tattoos in unusual sites. Skin abscesses secondary to unsterile techniques of substance administration are usually found. There
is a loss of libido; the mechanism is unknown. The chronic heroin
user may resort to prostitution to support the habit, thus increasing
the risk of sexually transmitted diseases (including HIV), pregnancy,
and other infectious diseases. Constipation results from decreased
smooth muscle propulsive contractions and increased anal sphincter
tone. The absence of sterile technique in injection may lead to cerebral microabscesses or endocarditis, usually caused by Staphylococcus aureus or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Abnormal serologic reactions
are also common, including false-­positive Venereal Disease Research
Laboratories and latex fixation tests. Infectious complications are
usually not seen with oral prescription opioid use unless the pills are
dissolved and injected.

WITHDRAWAL

After ≥8 hours without heroin, the addicted individual undergoes
a series of physiologic disturbances over 24-­36 hours, referred to
collectively as “withdrawal” or abstinence syndrome (see Table
157.15). The earliest sign is yawning, followed by lacrimation,
mydriasis, restlessness, insomnia, “goose flesh,” cramping of the
voluntary musculature, bone pain, hyperactive bowel sounds and
diarrhea, tachycardia, and systolic hypertension. Although the
administration of methadone is the most common method of
detoxification, buprenorphine, an opiate agonist-­
antagonist, is
available for detoxification and maintenance treatment of heroin
and other opiates. Buprenorphine has the advantage of offering less
risk of addiction, overdose, and withdrawal effects and can be dispensed in the privacy of a physician’s office. Combined with behavioral interventions, it has a greater success rate of detoxification.
A combination substance, buprenorphine plus naloxone, has been
formulated to minimize use during detoxification. Clonidine and
tramadol have also been used to manage opioid withdrawal.
Substances used to treat opioid use disorder, a chronic relapsing
problem, traditionally include methadone maintenance and buprenorphine. Use-­
deterrent opioid pill formulations (when pain control
requires an opioid) include pills resistant to crushing that form a viscous gel when dissolved or pills with a sequestered opioid antagonist
(naltrexone).

OVERDOSE SYNDROME

Overdose syndrome is an acute reaction after administration of an opiate. It is the leading cause of death among substance users. Many opiate
overdoses are complicated by polydrug use (Fig. 157.4). The clinical
signs include stupor or coma, seizures, miotic pupils (unless severe
anoxia has occurred), respiratory depression, cyanosis, and pulmonary
edema. The differential diagnosis includes CNS trauma, diabetic coma,
hepatic (and other) encephalopathy, Reye syndrome, and overdose of
alcohol, barbiturates, PCP, or methadone. Diagnosis of opiate toxicity
is facilitated by IV administration of naloxone 0.1 mg/kg, not to exceed
2 mg, which causes dilation of pupils constricted by the opiate. Diagnosis is confirmed by the finding of opiates in the urine and/or serum.

TREATMENT

Treatment of acute heroin overdose consists of maintaining adequate oxygenation and continued administration of naloxone, a pure opioid antagonist (see Chapter 94). It may be given intravenously, intramuscularly,
subcutaneously, as a nasal spray, or by endotracheal tube. Naloxone has
an ultra-­rapid onset of action (1 minute) and duration of action of 20-­60
minutes. Naloxone is often available in the field, carried by first responders. Take-­home naloxone may also be given to substance users, their family, or friends; such programs have been effective in treating overdoses. If
there is no response, other etiologies for the respiratory depression must be
explored. Naloxone may have to be repeated if given by nasal route or continued for 24 hours if methadone, rather than shorter-­acting heroin, has
been taken. Higher and prolonged naloxone dosing is required for novel
potent opioid overdoses. Admission to the intensive care unit is indicated
for patients who require continuous naloxone infusions (rebound coma,
respiratory depression) and for those with life-­threatening arrhythmias,
shock, and seizures.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.11 Synthetic Cannabinoids
Cora Collette Breuner
Bath salts refers to a group of previously OTC, but now illicit, often
home synthesized, substances containing one or more chemicals similar to cathinone, an amphetamine-­like stimulant found in the khat

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder
Milwaukee County, WI (n=459)

Cook County, IL (n=1867)

Connecticut (n=1258)

Dallas-Fort Worth Metro Area,
TX (n=310)

Jefferson County, AL
(n=292)

1209

Methamphetamine
Heroin
Cocaine
Fentanyl and fentanyl analogs

Los Angeles County, CA (n=2327)

Tarrant, Parker, Johnson, and
Denton counties

Fig. 157.4 Proportional drug combinations involved in fatal overdoses in U.S. jurisdictions with detailed medical examiner data available, 2020.

Based on death investigations that were completed at the time of data request. Official counts by jurisdictions may differ as all investigations are
completed. These areas were chosen to provide a country-­wide view. (From Humphreys K, Shover CL, Andrews CM, et al. Responding to the opioid
crisis in North America and beyond: recommendations of the Stanford-­Lancet commission. Lancet. 2022;399:555–604, Fig. 5.)

plant. The bath salts, marketed under ever-­changing brand names (e.g.,
Lunar Wave, Cloud Nine, Vanilla Sky), are sold online or in substance
paraphernalia stores as a white or brown crystalline powder and can be
ingested, inhaled, or injected. The most current information about teen
use of bath salts is from the 2016 MTF survey of 8th, 10th, and 12th
graders, who report use of 0.9%, 0.8%, and 0.8%, respectively. The synthetic cathinones found in bath salts include methylone, mephedrone,
and 3,4-­methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV), all of which are chemically similar to amphetamines and MDMA (ecstasy).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The chemicals in bath salts raise brain dopamine levels, causing the user
to feel a surge of euphoria, with increased sociability and sex drive.
In addition, the user may experience a surge in norepinephrine, causing
reactions such as an elevated heart rate, chest pain, vasoconstriction,
diaphoresis, hyperthermia, dilated pupils, seizures, arrhythmias, and
high blood pressure. Users also experience psychiatric symptoms such
as aggressive behavior, panic attacks, paranoia, psychosis, delirium,
self-­mutilation, and hallucinations caused by elevated serotonin levels.
Intoxication from bath salts may cause excited delirium syndrome,
which includes dehydration, rhabdomyolysis, and kidney failure.

TREATMENT

Treatment of overdose should be directed at specific complications
but often includes benzodiazepines or propofol for agitation and other
neuropsychiatric manifestations. The synthetic cathinones in bath salts
are highly addictive, triggering intense cravings in those who consume
them frequently. This may result in dependence, tolerance, and strong
withdrawal symptoms, as seen in other highly addictive substances.
The sale of two of the synthetic cathinones, mephedrone and MDPV, is
illegal in the United States.

SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS (MARIJUANA)

Spice, K2, crazy clown, aroma, black mamba, blaze, dream, and
funky monkey are some of the common street names for synthetic

marijuana, which is a mixture of herbs or plant materials that have
been sprayed with artificial chemicals similar to THC, the psychoactive ingredient in marijuana. One active group of chemicals is the
carboxamides, which are not detected by standard assays to detect
THC. In the United States the chemicals in “spice” are designated
a Schedule I controlled substance (as is marijuana) by the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA), thereby making it illegal to
sell, buy, or possess them. Nonetheless, synthetic marijuana is the
second most common illicit substance used by high school seniors.
More than 10% of high school seniors used synthetic marijuana in
the last year.
Synthetic marijuana is mainly used by smoking, or mixed with
marijuana, or brewed as a tea for drinking. The chemicals in synthetic marijuana affect the same receptors as THC and produce
similar effects as seen in cannabis use, such as relaxation, elevated
mood, and altered perception. In addition, sympathomimetic symptoms are quite common and are the cause of significant toxicity.
Symptoms of intoxication depend on the individual compounds in
the community and include vomiting, tachycardia, hypertension,
hyperthermia, confusion, extreme anxiety, profuse sweating, agitation, aggression, dysphoria, hallucinations, seizures, rhabdomyolysis, dystonia, unresponsiveness, confusion, catatonia, “zombie-­like”
behaviors, psychosis, coma, and myocardial ischemia. Some of
the neuropsychiatric manifestations may last for 1-­4 weeks and at
times resemble autoimmune encephalitis syndromes. Patients often
require psychopharmacology for agitation or frank psychosis. In
response to legislation to ban the chemicals in OTC synthetic marijuana products, manufacturers alter and substitute the chemicals in
the product, keeping it on the legal market and leaving teens particularly vulnerable to potential health effects.
Synthetic marijuana is not detected by standard toxicology screening but can be identified in specialized laboratories.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1210 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

Chapter 158

Chapter 159

The Breast

Menstruation-­Related
Disorders

Cynthia M. Holland-­Hall
Breast development is often the first visible sign of puberty in the
adolescent female. Pediatric practitioners must be able to distinguish normal breast development, including normal variants, from
pathologic breast disorders. Visual inspection of the breast tissue
should routinely be a component of the adolescent’s general physical examination. Breast development during puberty is described
using the Sexual Maturity Rating (SMR) scale, progressing from
SMR 1 to SMR 5 as the breast becomes more mature (see Chapter
150, Fig. 150.2).

FEMALE DISORDERS
See Chapter 588.

MALE DISORDERS

Pubertal gynecomastia, benign glandular proliferation in the male
breast, occurs in up to 65% of healthy adolescent males (see Chapter
625). The incidence of gynecomastia has increased over the past
20 years, suggesting that changes in the endogenous or exogenous
sex-­steroid environment have occurred. It is thought that an imbalance of estrogen and androgen concentrations contributes, at least
in part, to the development of gynecomastia. Elevations of insulin-­
like growth factor (IGF)-­1 have also been demonstrated. The onset
of physiologic gynecomastia typically is between 10 and 13 years,
peaking at SMR 3-­4. Careful physical examination is essential to
distinguish between true gynecomastia, characterized by a discrete disk of palpable glandular tissue under the nipple-­areolar
complex, and pseudogynecomastia, characterized by more diffuse,
bilateral adiposity of the anterior chest wall. Physiologic gynecomastia regresses spontaneously in up to 90% of adolescents within
18-­24 months but may transition into lipomastia. Reassurance and
continued observation are recommended in most patients; surgery
may be indicated in severe or persistent cases. No medical therapies
for gynecomastia have been approved for use in adolescents by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Small, noncontrolled trials of
antiestrogens, such as tamoxifen, appear promising, but more evidence is needed. Conditions associated with nonphysiologic gynecomastia include endocrine disorders, liver disease, neoplasms,
chronic disease, and trauma. It can also be seen as a late effect in
childhood cancer survivors. Although dozens of medications are
implicated as possible causes of gynecomastia, convincing evidence
exists only for a few, including several antiandrogens and other
exogenous hormones, isoniazid, antiretrovirals, and histamine-­2
receptor blockers. Calcium channel blockers, isotretinoin, statins,
certain antipsychotics, proton pump inhibitors, lavender, and tea
tree oil may be causative. Among drugs of misuse, alcohol, opioids, and anabolic steroids may be associated with gynecomastia,
but minimal evidence supports an association with marijuana or
amphetamines.
Other breast pathology in males is uncommon. Benign masses such
as neurofibromas, lipomas, and dermoid cysts have been reported in
the male breast. Males with Klinefelter syndrome have an elevated risk
of breast cancer (see Chapter 623), but this malignancy is otherwise
exceedingly rare in adolescents.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fareeda Haamid and Gina S. Sucato
See also Chapter 587.
At least 400 lifetime episodes of menstruation are predicted in those
who menstruate, yet many adolescents consistently report stigma,
inadequate health education, and hesitance to discuss their menses
with trusted adults. Clinicians should normalize menstruation and
avoid unnecessarily medicalizing this natural process. Menstrual disturbances, including delayed onset, irregularity, heavy flow, and pain,
occur in 75% of adolescent females. For adolescents with minor variations from normal (Table 159.1), an explanation of symptoms and reassurance may be all that is needed. Severe dysmenorrhea or prolonged
menstrual bleeding can be not only frightening but a cause of persistent
morbidity requiring more intensive management, potentially including
referral to a specialist in adolescent gynecology.

NORMAL MENSTRUATION

The average age of menarche, or first menses, was thought to vary
according to ethnic origin and socioeconomic status (SES). A prospective U.S. study of nearly 1,100 diverse females demonstrated no
correlation between SES and menarche yet a statistically significant
correlation with SES and thelarche; lower SES was associated with
earlier pubertal onset. There is often a close concordance of the age at
menarche between mother and daughter, which suggests genetic factors are determinants in addition to individual factors such as weight,
exercise level, and chronic medical conditions. The age of menarche
has declined in countries and populations experiencing improved
nutritional standards and other living conditions. In U.S. females, the
average age of menarche, 12.5 years, has been relatively stable over the
last few decades. Higher body mass index (BMI) is associated with earlier onset of menarche.
The onset of breast budding (thelarche) is the first sign of puberty in
most females, though it has decreased worldwide by a mean of roughly
3 months per decade from 1977 to 2013. Menarche typically occurs
within 2-­3 years of thelarche during breast sexual maturity rating
(SMR; i.e., Tanner stage) 4. Longer cycle lengths ranging between 21
and 45 days occur initially then periods gradually become more regular. However, for most adolescents, by 3 years postmenarche, menstrual
cycle patterns are similar to adults, occurring every 21-­35 days.

MENSTRUAL IRREGULARITIES

In young adolescents, many menstrual variations are explained by
anovulation caused by immaturity of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­ovarian
Table 159.1  Characteristics of Normal Menses*
Cycle length**

21-­35 days
21-­45 days during first 3 yr after menarche

Duration of menses

7 or fewer days

Blood flow

6 or fewer soaked menstrual products per day
Infrequent overflow of menstrual cups

*Adolescents with two or more cycles outside this range or who skip their period for 3
consecutive months warrant evaluation.
**A cycle begins with the first day of one period and extends to the first day of the next.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 159 u Menstruation-Related Disorders
axis governing the menstrual cycle. Significant deviations from normal
should prompt a search for organic pathology in a logical and cost-­
effective manner. An accurate menstrual history is an important, but
often lacking, first step toward a diagnosis. At menarche, all patients
should be encouraged to track their periods.
A range of terms has previously been used to describe abnormal
menstrual bleeding. Terms such as “menorrhagia and metrorrhagia”
are imprecise, confusing, and not linked to any specific underlying
pathology. Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) is the preferred term
for uterine bleeding that is abnormal in regularity, volume, frequency, or duration. AUB is further specified by adding descriptive
terms such as heavy menstrual bleeding or intermenstrual bleeding.
A qualifier is added to categorize the etiology of abnormal bleeding.
Of the nine categories, the three most relevant to adolescents are
ovulatory dysfunction (AUB-­O), previously referred to as dysfunctional uterine bleeding and discussed in Chapter 159.2; coagulopathy (AUB-­C); and not otherwise classified (AUB-­N).
In addition to a standard medical history noting hospitalizations,
chronic illness, and medication and supplement use, a complete history for evaluating a patient with menstrual irregularity should include
the timing of pubertal milestones, such as onset of pubic and axillary
hair and breast development; a detailed patient menstrual history; age
of menarche and overall menstrual pattern of mother and sisters; and a
family history of gynecologic problems. The complete review of systems
should elicit any changes in headache pattern or vision; the presence of
galactorrhea; and any changes in skin, hair, or bowel patterns. Changes
in diet, level of exercise, and sports participation are also important
factors when generating a differential diagnosis. The patient should be
interviewed alone, and the confidential history should assess substance
use, consensual sexual activity, forced sexual behavior, abuse, and other
psychosocial stressors.
Assessment of basic growth parameters should include weight,
height, and BMI and a thorough review of the growth chart. Physical examination should document heart rate, blood pressure, SMR,
signs of androgen excess, such as hirsutism or severe acne, and signs
suggestive of an eating disorder (see Chapter 41), such as bradycardia, cachexia, lanugo, or knuckle calluses. A careful external genital
examination should be performed. An internal pelvic examination is
rarely necessary in the absence of sexual activity. Any internal exam
being considered for young adolescents should be performed with
proper equipment and technique by a clinician with expertise in this
age-­group. Transabdominal pelvic ultrasound can be a useful adjunct
for evaluating anatomic abnormalities in the adolescent; when indicated, MRI can provide greater detail of pelvic anatomy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

159.1 Amenorrhea
Fareeda Haamid and Gina S. Sucato
Amenorrhea, the absence of menstruation, generally requires evaluation at age 15 years, or if there has been no menstruation within 3 years
of the onset of puberty (primary amenorrhea), or if there has been no
menstruation for the length of three previous cycles in a postmenarchal patient (secondary amenorrhea). However, the following caveats exist: lack of any pubertal signs by age 13 years in a female should
prompt evaluation for pubertal delay; in sexually active patients, or
those with other symptoms suggesting pathology, evaluation should
be initiated without waiting for three missed cycles; in patients whose
breast development started between age 8 and 9 years, observation
for >3 years may be warranted in some cases, given data suggesting
that the age of thelarche has decreased but the age of menarche has
not. Conversely, expectant management with close follow-­up can be

1211

Table 159.2  Causes of Primary or Secondary Amenorrhea
Pregnancy (regardless of history can cause primary or secondary
amenorrhea)
Functional hypothalamic states (stress, weight loss, undernutrition,
high levels of exercise, energy deficit even at normal weight)
Relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-­S) (inadequate energy intake
causing impaired physiologic function, including amenorrhea,
bradycardia, and low bone density)
Eating disorders
Premature ovarian insufficiency (autoimmune, idiopathic, galactosemia,
or secondary to radiation or chemotherapy)
Hypothalamic and/or pituitary damage (e.g., irradiation, tumor,
traumatic brain injury, surgery, hemochromatosis, midline central
nervous system defects such as septooptic dysplasia, autoimmune
pituitary hypophysitis)
Thyroid disease (hyper-­ or hypo-­; hypothyroidism more likely to be
associated with increased bleeding)
Prolactinoma
Systemic disease (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, cyanotic
congenital heart disease, sickle cell disease, cystic fibrosis, celiac
disease)
Hyperandrogenism (polycystic ovary syndrome, nonclassic congenital
adrenal hyperplasia, adrenal tumor or dysfunction)
Drugs and medications (e.g., illicit drugs, atypical antipsychotics,
hormones)
Turner syndrome (including mosaicism)

Table 159.3  Additional Causes of Primary Amenorrhea
Physiologic/constitutional delay
Anatomic abnormalities
Müllerian agenesis
Imperforate hymen
Transverse vaginal septum
Genetic disorders
46,XY disorders of sexual development (e.g., androgen insensitivity
syndrome, 5α-­reductase deficiency, 17α-­hydroxylase deficiency)
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis (associated with various chromosome
patterns)
Turner syndrome (resulting from 45,X or a variety of mosaic or other
abnormal karyotypes)
Genetic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (e.g., X-­linked Kallmann
syndrome)

considered in a patient whose history, physical examination showing
some pubertal development, and family history suggest constitutional
delay of puberty.
The differential diagnosis of amenorrhea is broad (Table 159.2) and
requires a careful history and physical exam to guide any necessary diagnostic studies. Understanding the timing and tempo of the patient’s pubertal milestones is key to the evaluation. The first step in the amenorrhea
evaluation is to ascertain whether the patient has ever had any menstrual
bleeding. Conditions that can interrupt the menstrual cycle can also prevent menarche; therefore some aspects of the evaluation of primary and
secondary amenorrhea are identical. In females with primary amenorrhea,
genetic and anatomic conditions must also be considered (Table 159.3).

HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Important historical elements include dietary intake, exercise level, and
a thorough review of any ongoing symptoms, including fever, headache,
vision changes, chronic respiratory or gastrointestinal (GI) complaints,
bowel habit changes, galactorrhea, changes in hair or nails, excessive body
hair, severe acne, unexplained musculoskeletal complaints, and changes in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1212 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
vaginal discharge, which may decrease in females who are hypoestrogenic.
Any underlying medical conditions and the adequacy of their control
should be noted, as well as the presence of any renal or skeletal anomalies,
some of which may have associated reproductive system anomalies. Clinicians should document medications, particularly those for psychiatric
conditions. Family history of menarcheal age, eating disorders (see Chapter 41), and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS; see Chapter 589) should
be elicited. A thorough social history is necessary, especially concerning
the presence or absence of sexual activity or abuse (see Chapter 16.1).
Physical examination should begin with careful attention to growth
chart trajectories. In addition to a search for undiagnosed systemic disease, clues to an eating disorder, thyroid disease, or hyperandrogenism
should be sought. The exam should assess for BMI, orthostatic pulses,
blood pressure, abnormal dentition, anosmia or hyposmia (suggestive
of Kallmann syndrome; see Chapter 623.2), parotid enlargement, thyroid gland palpation, hepatosplenomegaly, abdominal mass, lymphadenopathy, and SMR (see Chapter 150). Skin examination should note any
lanugo, dry or doughy skin, loss of hair from scalp or eyebrows, striae,
acanthosis nigricans, or acne. Clinicians should assess for glandular
breast tissue via palpation in patients with primary amenorrhea. The
external genital exam should note SMR and appearance of the vagina,
which should be pink and moist; thin, dry, reddened mucosa suggests
estrogen deficiency. The clitoral width should be <1 cm. In the patient
with primary amenorrhea, vaginal patency can be painlessly assessed
using a slender saline-­moistened swab and careful avoidance of the
hymen. If physical assessment of the cervix and uterus is not tolerated, a
transabdominal pelvic ultrasound is advisable in patients with primary
amenorrhea, followed by MRI if more detail is needed.

LABORATORY STUDIES

A urine pregnancy test, serum prolactin levels, thyroid-­stimulating hormone, and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) are reasonable to measure in all patients presenting with amenorrhea (Fig. 159.1). Elevation
of FSH (>30 mIU/mL) in an amenorrheic female suggests ovarian insufficiency, and if confirmed with repeat testing, should be followed with a

First-line evaluation
of amenorrhea:
TSH, Prolactin,
FSH, HCG
(and US if primary
amenorrhea)

Probable diagnosis of:
thyroid disease,
hyperprolactinemia,
pregnancy and/or
anatomic abnormalities
should be referred for
appropriate management

Low or normal FSH suggests

Elevated FSH suggests

Hypothalamic/pituitary injury
Female athlete/eating disorders
Systemic illness
Constitutional delay
Hyperandrogenic disorders

Ovarian insufficiency
as a result of cancer
treatment, autoimmune
or systemic disease,
genetic, and other
uncommon disorders
Repeat FSH
Evaluate for celiac and
other autoimmine disorders
Consider karyotype
MRI pelvis, adrenal
antibodies and
specialist referral

Fig. 159.1 Initial diagnostic testing algorithm to evaluate amenorrhea. FSH, Follicle-­stimulating hormone; HCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging;
US, ultrasound.

pelvic ultrasound, karyotype, and specialist referral. Diagnostic tests in the
patient presenting with amenorrhea should be tailored to the history and
physical exam.
In patients with signs of androgen excess (e.g., severe acne or hirsutism) or other physical stigmata associated with PCOS (rapid pubertal weight gain, acanthosis nigricans) consider measuring levels of
17-­hydroxyprogesterone (17-­OHP), free and total testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS), and androstenedione; all preferably
collected in the morning. PCOS affects up to 15% of females; diagnostic
criteria for adolescents are controversial but include variations of menstrual irregularity (ranging from amenorrhea to AUB) and clinical or
biochemical hyperandrogenism. The interpretation of polycystic ovarian
morphology identified on ultrasound in adolescents can be challenging,
and an ultrasound is not necessary for diagnosis in adolescents.
With the exceptions of pregnancy, constitutional delay, and imperforate hymen, conditions causing primary amenorrhea are associated with
reduced fertility; thus their diagnosis may cause profound emotional
responses in patients and families. Therefore before ordering studies to
confirm these diagnoses (e.g., karyotype, MRI of reproductive anatomy),
the clinician should carefully consider the implications and be prepared to
refer to specialists with experience managing the long-­term treatment of
such diagnoses.
In patients presumed to have hypothalamic amenorrhea, based on
prepubertal luteinizing hormone (LH) and low FSH levels using an
ultrasensitive assay and consistent history and physical exam, MRI of the
brain is not necessary in all patients. However, MRI should be considered for patients presenting with a headache history that has changed
from baseline; persistent emesis; change in thirst, urination, or vision;
elevated prolactin or galactorrhea; or other neurologic symptoms.

TREATMENT

Treatment for amenorrhea widely varies depending on the underlying cause. Many diagnoses require referral to clinicians in specialties
such as endocrinology, adolescent medicine, and gynecology; often,
collaboration with other disciplines such as psychology or nutrition
is indicated. The mainstay of PCOS treatment is suppression of ovarian androgens, typically with combined hormonal contraception
(i.e., estrogen and progestin) and lifestyle modifications to decrease
obesity and insulin resistance. Patients with abnormal glucose tolerance may benefit from the addition of metformin. Spironolactone,
an androgen receptor blocker, can also be used to reduce androgen
effects, including hirsutism. Metabolic syndrome is highly prevalent
in PCOS; thus clinicians should evaluate for comorbid diabetes and
hyperlipidemia with periodic lipid and hemoglobin A1c screening. It is
crucial to normalize weight and improve nutritional status for patients
with eating disorders or other hypoestrogenic conditions of energy
imbalance. It is not routinely recommended to initiate hormonal therapy in these patients. However, short-­term use of transdermal estrogen therapy (E2) to protect bone health may be considered for those
who remain amenorrheic after a trial of nutritional and activity modification. For females with amenorrhea due to partial or total ovarian
insufficiency, exogenous hormones are required for all pubertal development. Experts recommend starting at age 10-­12 years with low-­dose
transdermal estrogen, progressing to increased doses of estrogen and
cyclic progestin. Continued maintenance therapy can be accomplished
with higher-­dose combination products, as found in typical combined
hormonal contraceptive pills, patches, and vaginal rings.
In the absence of a clear indication such as PCOS, hormonal medications (e.g., combined hormonal methods) to produce monthly
bleeding are not recommended for patients with secondary amenorrhea because it will mask the patient’s subsequent menstrual pattern. However, in patients with normal postpubertal estrogen levels,
progesterone can be useful to periodically (every 4-­12 weeks) induce
shedding of the endometrial lining to avoid buildup and subsequent
heavy menses. One commonly used regimen is medroxyprogesterone 10 mg PO daily for the first 7-­14 days of the month.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 159 u Menstruation-Related Disorders

159.2 Abnormal Uterine Bleeding
Fareeda Haamid and Gina S. Sucato
Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) is a broad term used to describe any
menstrual bleeding pattern that deviates from physiologic patterns.
Clinicians are encouraged to categorize the abnormal pattern based
on the patient’s complaint, which is typically irregular (AUB/IMB:
intermenstrual bleeding) or heavy (AUB/HMB: heavy menstrual
bleeding).

IRREGULAR MENSTRUAL BLEEDING

Menstrual status should be treated as a vital sign; at every preventative
care or comprehensive visit clinicians should document the first day of
the last menstrual period and the menstrual pattern. Although menses are frequently irregular in the early postmenarcheal years, further
evaluation is necessary when menstrual patterns vary too widely from
what is normal for age. Even in the first postmenarcheal year, menses are usually not less frequent than every 45 days. Menses become
increasingly regular with age, and by 3 years after menarche typically
occur every 21-­35 days, lasting 3-­7 days. Personal cycle duration is usually established by age 19 or 20 years.
In the early postmenarcheal years, the most common cause of AUB in
adolescents is anovulation caused by immaturity of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­ovarian axis. In the absence of a mid-­cycle LH surge to
stimulate ovulation, there is no corpus luteum production of progesterone. Without the stabilizing effects of progesterone on the endometrial lining, there is increased risk of irregular bleeding. AUB caused

1213

by ovulatory dysfunction (AUB-­O; previously termed dysfunctional
uterine bleeding), describes irregular bleeding in the absence of specific anatomic, systemic, or endocrinologic disease. Although it is the
most common cause of abnormal menstrual bleeding in adolescents,
AUB-­O is a diagnosis of exclusion. It is important to remember that
most conditions that cause amenorrhea can first cause anovulation,
which is a key risk for heavy irregular bleeding. Table 159.4 lists the
causes of AUB and vaginal bleeding. Adolescents rarely present with
complaints of unusually short or light menses. However, short, light,
or infrequent menstrual patterns that have changed from a previously
established pattern may need to be evaluated similarly to secondary
amenorrhea.
Unscheduled bleeding during the use of hormonal contraception
frequently occurs, particularly with progestin-­only methods. Common
causes include medication nonadherence, interactions with prescribed
or over-­the-­counter medications, and smoking. Patients should be
reassured such bleeding is benign and not an indication to stop an otherwise satisfactory contraceptive method.

HEAVY AND PROLONGED MENSTRUAL BLEEDING

Irregular bleeding, particularly from anovulation, can be long and
heavy (see Table 159.4). However, a hematologic cause (AUB-­C)
should be strongly considered in patients with regular, cyclic menses
that are long and/or heavy, especially if heavy menses occurs at the
onset of menarche and bleeding disorder symptoms are present. von
Willebrand disease and other coagulation disorders are found in up to
13% and 20%, respectively, of patients with heavy menstrual bleeding.
Other symptoms suggestive of bleeding disorders include changing

Table 159.4  Causes of Vaginal Bleeding in Adolescence
CAUSES OF VAGINAL BLEEDING

EXAMPLES

FEATURES

Immature hypothalamic-­pituitary-­
ovarian axis (AUB-­O)

Patient within 2 yr of menarche

Patient responds to hormonal treatment.

Weight changes, disordered eating,
or excessive exercise

Anorexia nervosa, bulimia, weight gain or loss of
more than 10 pounds from any etiology

Weight loss more frequently results in lighter, less
frequent menses.

Endocrinologic causes

Thyroid disease, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)

Bleeding typically increases with hypothyroidism
and decreases with PCOS and hyperthyroidism.

Pregnancy complication

Threatened abortion, postpartum or postabortal
endometritis

History of sexual activity and/or pregnancy

Infection

Cervicitis, condyloma, pelvic inflammatory disease

Bleeding is usually not heavy and may occur during
or after sexual intercourse.

Trauma

Sexual assault, straddle injuries

History will be evident in patients of menstruating
age unless there is cognitive disability.

Vaginal foreign body

Toilet paper, broken condoms, tampons

Associated with odor and vaginal discharge, but
usually not heavy bleeding.

Hematologic causes
(AUB-­C)

Type 1, 2, 3 von Willebrand disease, platelet function
disorders, thrombocytopenia (idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura, drug induced),
symptomatic hemophilia carrier, clotting factor
deficiency, leukemia, aplastic anemia

Bleeding is heavy and/or long and frequently
regular, may present at menarche, and may be
accompanied by a suggestive personal or family
history
(hysterectomy, uterine ablation, cautery for epistaxis)
or physical exam (ecchymoses, petechiae).

Medications

Estrogens and progestins in combined hormonal
contraception
Androgens
Drugs that affect prolactin (estrogens,
phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants,
metoclopramide)
Anticoagulants (heparin, warfarin, aspirin, NSAIDs)
SSRIs

Affect the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­ovarian axis,
endometrial lining, platelets, or coagulation
pathway.

Anatomic

Partial obstruction of vagina or uterus causing
asynchronous bleeding; cervical or endometrial
polyps or myomas; hemangioma; uterine vascular
malformation; genital/reproductive tract cancer

Most of these entities are extremely rare, especially
reproductive tract cancers.

Systemic disease

Celiac disease, rheumatoid arthritis, Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome and other connective tissue disorders

Accompanied by other condition-­specific signs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1214 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
a pad or tampon more than hourly, passing clots larger than 1 inch
in diameter, iron deficiency, menses longer than 7 days, a history of
hemorrhagic ovarian cysts, excessive bleeding from wounds or postoperatively, mucosal bleeding (epistaxis or GI tract), and first-­degree
relatives with heavy menses or epistaxis requiring medical treatment.
Inherited collagen disorders such as Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome are associated with vascular collagen abnormalities; thus patients with heavy
menses and manifestations of joint hyperflexibility may require a
hematology referral.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Table 159.5 lists laboratory tests to consider in patients with long, heavy
bleeding. Females with persistent heavy bleeding despite negative first-­
line testing should be referred to a hematologist for testing for platelet
function disorders, factor deficiencies, and other less common disorders. In the initial evaluation, rapidity of blood loss in conjunction with
the hemoglobin establishes the bleeding severity: mild (hemoglobin
10-­11 g/dL), moderate (hemoglobin 7-­10 g/dL), or severe (hemoglobin <7 g/dL). Iron deficiency is defined as serum ferritin of <15 μg/mL.

TREATMENT

In bleeding that has resulted in mild anemia, the patient should
keep a menstrual calendar to follow the subsequent flow patterns.
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; e.g., naproxen)
are more effective than placebo in treating heavy bleeding and can
also treat concurrent dysmenorrhea. Clinicians may need to educate patients and families about the noncontraceptive medical indications for hormonal contraception given the unnecessary stigma
commonly associated with these medications. Active bleeding typically responds well to cycling with any combined hormonal contraceptive method containing estrogen and progestin starting with
once-­daily dosing; up to twice-­daily dosing may be considered until
bleeding stops. Patients with estrogen contraindications such as
migraine with aura, uncontrolled hypertension, or thrombotic risks
can be treated with progestins alone, such as medroxyprogesterone
10 mg orally daily or norethindrone acetate 5-­10 mg PO daily, either
continuously or for 10-­14 days per month. The latter regimen will
be followed by monthly bleeding.
Iron deficiency with or without anemia should be treated with 65 mg
elemental oral iron once daily until serum ferritin >30 μg/mL. Dosing more frequently than daily has not been shown to be beneficial.
Ferritin and hemoglobin should be repeated 4 weeks after treatment

Table 159.5  Laboratory Tests to Evaluate Patients with
Abnormal Uterine Bleeding
Complete blood count with platelets
Ferritin
Urine pregnancy test (regardless of history)
Thyroid function studies
Total and free testosterone*
Liver and kidney function studies
Nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) or equivalent testing for
Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Trichomonas
vaginalis
Prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time
von Willebrand factor antigen, vWF activity (such as ristocetin cofactor),
and factor VIII† activity
Pelvic ultrasound (if palpable mass or bleeding persists despite
treatment)
*In patients with signs or symptoms suggestive of polycystic ovary syndrome, such as
acne, hirsutism, obesity, acanthosis nigricans, and a history of infrequent menses.
†Any abnormalities should be referred to a hematologist. False-­negative von Willebrand tests and false-­positive platelet function studies have been observed in the
setting of anemia. It is preferable to obtain tests before estrogen treatment is started
to minimize false-­negative results. Repeat testing is common in patients for whom
there is a high pretest suspicion.

is initiated. Once anemia is corrected, iron should be continued once
daily for 3 months to replenish iron stores. A referral to hematology
may be warranted for insufficient response or intolerance of oral iron
for consideration of intravenous (IV) iron therapy.
With moderate anemia, any of the hormonal regimens noted earlier can be used. However, it may be necessary in patients with more
brisk bleeding to start with three to four combined oral contraceptive (COC) pills (or three to four doses of medroxyprogesterone
10 mg) per day, with additional medication to control nausea. The
dose can usually be tapered to daily dosing over the next 2 weeks.
Patients with ongoing rapid bleeding, syncope or lightheadedness,
hemodynamic instability, or hemoglobin of <7 g/dL should be
treated in the hospital.
Patients with severe anemia should be treated with one of the
hormone tapers described earlier, in addition to IV fluid or blood
products as indicated; it is advisable to draw necessary hematologic
laboratory studies before transfusion. Patients with emesis or other significant symptoms may be initially treated with conjugated estrogens
25 mg IV every 4-­6 hours for 1-­2 days. A COC or progestin regimen
should be added within 24-­48 hours because progestin is needed to
stabilize the endometrial lining and can be used as maintenance therapy after hospital discharge. In the exceptionally rare case of a patient
whose bleeding cannot be controlled hormonally, options for gynecologic interventions include intrauterine Foley balloon placement or
uterine packing to tamponade the uterus mechanically. Dilation and
curettage, performed frequently in adults, is almost never indicated
in adolescents and can increase blood loss in patients with bleeding
disorders.
Hormonal AUB treatment should continue for at least 3-­
6
months, depending on the patient’s age, prior menstrual history,
and severity of presentation, before reassessing the need for ongoing
therapy. Additional options for maintenance therapy include combined hormonal transdermal patches and vaginal rings; depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate 150 mg intramuscularly (IM) or 104
mg subcutaneously (SC) every 3 months; and placement of a levonorgestrel intrauterine device (IUD), depending on the patient’s
preference and/or concurrent need for long-­term contraception.
For patients who need or choose to avoid hormonal therapy, antifibrinolytics such as tranexamic acid 1,300 mgPO 3 times daily can
be used for up to 5 days during monthly menstruation in patients
who do not have an increased risk of thrombosis.
Females with a known bleeding disorder may be up to 5 times more
likely to develop heavy menstrual bleeding. Therefore it can be helpful
while the patient is premenarcheal to devise a proactive plan in collaboration with the patient’s hematology team in the event of acute heavy
menstrual bleeding, which can occur at menarche.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

159.3 Dysmenorrhea
Fareeda Haamid and Gina S. Sucato
Dysmenorrhea, painful uterine cramps that precede and accompany
menses, occur in up to 90% of 17-­to 24-­year-­olds. Although dysmenorrhea is frequently severe enough to interfere with school and other
activities, many adolescents undertreat their symptoms, and fewer seek
medical care.
Dysmenorrhea may be primary or secondary. Primary dysmenorrhea, characterized by the absence of any specific pelvic pathologic
condition, is the more commonly occurring form, accounting for
approximately 90% of cases. After ovulation, withdrawal of progesterone results in synthesis of prostaglandins by the endometrium, which
stimulates local vasoconstriction, uterine ischemia and pain, and
smooth muscle contraction, explaining uterine and GI symptoms.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 159 u Menstruation-Related Disorders
Secondary dysmenorrhea results from underlying pathology,
such as anatomic abnormality, or infection, such as pelvic inflammatory disease. However, the most common cause of secondary dysmenorrhea in adolescents is endometriosis, a condition in which
implants of endometrial tissue are found outside the uterus, usually near the fallopian tubes and ovaries. Often, other family members have endometriosis. Severe menstrual pain is characteristic of
endometriosis; however, adolescents may also have noncyclic pain.
Although primary dysmenorrhea is almost always the cause, a careful
history and physical examination are required for adolescents who
present with pelvic pain. An internal pelvic exam is not required in

1215

females who are not sexually experienced and whose presentation is
consistent with primary dysmenorrhea. Constipation can vary cyclically in many females, especially those with irritable bowel syndrome,
and often significantly contributes to the pain. Mittelschmerz, brief
severe pain with ovulation, occurs at mid-­cycle. Table 159.6 lists the
differential diagnosis and “red flags” for secondary dysmenorrhea.
Ovarian cysts, a frequent concern of families, are usually transient
and painless.
Treatment for primary dysmenorrhea is aimed at preventing or decreasing prostaglandin production. The mainstay of first-­line treatment is prostaglandin synthetase inhibition with NSAIDs (Table 159.7) beginning at,

Table 159.6  Differential Diagnosis of Dysmenorrhea in Adolescents*
PRESENTATION

DIAGNOSIS

Primary

Crampy pelvic pain may be accompanied by aching/
heaviness in lower back and upper thighs, nausea,
emesis, diarrhea, headache, mastalgia, fatigue,
and dizziness; symptoms begin at or shortly before
menstrual flow onset and last 1-­3 days.

Normal physical exam; internal exam only for sexually active
adolescents. Ultrasound can be reserved for patients with
atypical presentations (e.g., onset at menarche) or pain
despite NSAIDs and hormonal therapy.

Endometriosis and
adenomyosis†

Increasingly severe dysmenorrhea despite
adequate therapy; pain exacerbated during
menses or noncyclical pain.

Increased risk in patients with obstructive anomalies and
possibly bleeding disorders; however, most adolescents
with endometriosis have normal anatomy and bleeding
indices; visual diagnosis is made during surgery and
confirmed by tissue sample.

Müllerian anomalies with
partial outflow
obstruction

Pain begins at or shortly after menarche and
occurs with bleeding; presence of known renal tract
anomaly (often coexists with müllerian anomaly).

Pelvic ultrasound will demonstrate uterine anomalies (e.g.,
rudimentary uterine horn); MRI may be required to identify
some lesions (e.g., obstructed hemivagina).

Pelvic inflammatory
disease

Abrupt onset of dysmenorrhea more severe
than baseline in a sexually active adolescent;
presentation can range from mild discomfort to
acute abdomen.

Clinical diagnosis made by finding lower abdominal
tenderness plus cervical motion tenderness, uterine
or adnexal tenderness on bimanual pelvic examination
(see Chapter 146); supporting features include dysuria,
dyspareunia, vaginal discharge, fever, and increased white
blood cell count.

Pregnancy complication

Coincident pain and bleeding may be
misdiagnosed as dysmenorrhea.

Urine test positive for human chorionic gonadotropin.

*Bold entries indicate “red flags” for diagnosis.
†Adenomyosis is the presence of endometrial tissue within the uterine myometrium.

Table 159.7  Treatment for Dysmenorrhea
NSAIDs (for up to 5 days)

MEDICATION

REGIMEN

COMMENTS

Ibuprofen 200 mg
Naproxen sodium 275 mg

2 tablets PO q4-­6h
550 mg loading dose, then 275 mg PO
q6h
400 mg loading dose, then 200 mg PO
q12h prn pain

Over-­the-­counter
Patients may prefer the equivalent 550 mg
PO q12h dosing regimen.
Can be used for patients with bleeding
disorders.

Continuous hormone regimens vs
standard 21 hormone days followed
by 7 placebo days may offer better
relief but may increase the risk
of unscheduled intermenstrual
bleeding.
DMPA 150 mg IM or 104 mg SC q3mo;
levonorgestrel intrauterine device for
up to 8 yr; etonogestrel implant

Treatment can be based on patient
preference.

11.25 mg IM q3mo

Consider for presumed endometriosis
unresponsive to hormonal methods; add-­
back hormones advised to prevent bone
loss.

Celecoxib (cyclooxygenase
[COX]-­2 inhibitor)*
Hormonal contraception

Combined hormonal
contraceptive

Progestin-­only methods

Gonadotropin-­releasing
hormone agonist

Depot leuprolide

DMPA has potential side effects of weight
gain, interference with expected bone
density increase during adolescence, and
higher discontinuation rates than LARC
methods.

*This medication may cause serious cardiovascular and gastrointestinal events. Use with caution in patients with impaired renal or liver dysfunction, heart failure, or a history of GI
bleeding or ulcer. Full prescribing information can be found at https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2018/020998s050lbl.pdf
DMPA, Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate; LARC, long-­acting reversible contraceptive; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1216 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 159.8  Criteria for Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
A. In the majority of menstrual cycles, at least five symptoms must
be present in the final week before the onset of menses, start to
improve with a few days after the onset of menses, and become
minimal or absent in the week post menses.
B. One (or more) of the following symptoms must be present:
1. Marked affective lability (e.g., mood swings; feeling suddenly
sad or tearful, or increased sensitivity to rejection).
2. Marked irritability or anger or increased interpersonal conflicts.
3. Marked depressed mood, feelings of hopelessness, or self-­
deprecating thoughts.
4. Marked anxiety, tension, and/or feelings of being keyed up or
on edge.
C. One (or more) of the following symptoms must additionally be
present, to reach a total of five symptoms when combined with
symptoms from criterion B.
1. Decreased interest in usual activities (e.g., work, school,
friends, and hobbies).
2. Subjective difficulty in concentration.
3. Lethargy, easy fatigability, or marked lack of energy.
4. Marked change in appetite, overeating, or specific food
cravings.
5. Hypersomnia or insomnia.
6. A sense of being overwhelmed or out of control.
7. Physical symptoms such as breast tenderness or swelling, joint
or muscle pain, a sensation of “bloating,” or weight gain.
Note: The symptoms in criteria A-­C must have been met for most
menstrual cycles that occurred in the preceding year.
D. The symptoms are associated with clinically significant distress or
interference with work, school, usual social activities, or relationships
with others (e.g., avoidance of social activities; decreased
productivity and efficiency at work, school, or home).
E. The disturbance is not merely an exacerbation of the symptoms of
another disorder, such as major depressive disorder, panic disorder,
persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), or a personality disorder
(although it may co-­occur with any of these disorders).
F. Criterion A should be confirmed by prospective daily ratings
during at least two symptomatic cycles. (Note: The diagnosis may
be made provisionally prior to this confirmation.)
G. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment)
or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed., pp. 171–172.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

or preferably the day before, menstruation. High doses of around-­the-­
clock treatment are rarely needed for more than the first 2 days. More
data are needed to make specific treatment recommendations regarding
exercise, but females should be reassured that participation in usual sports
and extracurricular activities is not only permissible but a benchmark of
adequate treatment.
For those adolescents whose pain does not optimally respond to
dosed NSAIDs, or who also require contraception, the currently
available forms of hormonal contraception will improve dysmenorrhea. Up to three cycles may be required to appreciate the full
benefit. Methods and regimens that eliminate a placebo interval
may provide better relief. Despite various studies of adjuvant treatments including heat, aromatherapy, acupressure, acupuncture,

transcutaneous nerve stimulation, herbal remedies, yoga, and
dietary supplements, hormonal medications are the mainstay of
second-­line treatment. Females whose pain persists despite more
than 3 months of adequate hormonal therapy require further evaluation and treatment and referral to a specialist, as endometriosis
has been found in up to 69% of adolescents who underwent laparoscopy for persistent pelvic pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

159.4 Premenstrual Syndrome and
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Fareeda Haamid and Gina S. Sucato
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS), which occurs in up to 30% of adolescents, is marked by symptoms such as mood changes, bloating,
and breast tenderness that begin in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle (i.e., the time between ovulation and the first day of
bleeding) and improve within a few days after the onset of menses.
Adolescents are often reassured by education about the relationship
of symptoms to the menstrual cycle. Lifestyle interventions such
as exercise and stress reduction sometimes provide adequate relief.
For more severe symptoms, cognitive-­behavioral therapy may be
useful. Current data do not support routine recommendations for
any vitamin, mineral, or other dietary supplements in the absence
of documented deficiency. There is not strong evidence supporting
the effectiveness of combined hormonal contraceptive methods for
PMS. However, some experts suggest this treatment option for adolescents who also have dysmenorrhea, acne, or contraceptive needs.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is distinguished
from other depressive disorders by its timing; mood symptoms are
precipitated by ovulation, recur in the luteal phase, and disappear
at the end of menstruation. It is distinguished from PMS by the
severity and consequences of the affective symptoms. PMDD causes
significant distress and functional impairment and may be accompanied by physical and behavioral symptoms (Table 159.8). It is a
distinct, treatment-­responsive depressive disorder. PMDD occurs
in 2–6% of menstruating females worldwide. Accurate diagnosis
requires use of a menstrual calendar to prospectively document
cyclic symptoms. Other mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety disorders may be exacerbated before or during
menses, but symptoms will occur throughout the cycle.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are first-­line
therapy for PMDD and severe PMS. In contrast to the treatment of
depression, SSRIs can be rapidly effective for premenstrual symptoms and thus can be prescribed either continuously or intermittently, beginning at ovulation (or whenever in the luteal phase
symptoms begin) and ending when symptoms resolve. Adolescents
can be prescribed the standard regimens used for adults, such as
fluoxetine 20 mg PO daily. For adolescents who also need contraception, the drospirenone 3 mg and ethinyl estradiol 0.02 mg combination pill delivered for 24 days followed by 4 inactive days has
been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for PMDD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 160 u Contraception

Chapter 160

Contraception
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
The consequences of sexual activity, including unintended pregnancy
(see Chapter 161) and sexually transmitted infections (STIs; Chapter
163), occur in adolescents at higher rates than in adults. Significant
barriers, including access to confidential care, may delay an adolescent’s ability to access reproductive healthcare until after initiation of
sexual activity, and many may become pregnant and/or acquire an STI
during this interval. Early and appropriate counseling and education
with adolescents, including direct discussion of the risks of unintended
pregnancy and STI prevention, can help to mitigate these risks; adolescents who plan sexual initiation are 75% more likely to use contraception at sexual debut. Therefore appropriate patient-­centered counseling
and provision of contraception as warranted are an essential component of comprehensive healthcare for adolescents. Female refers to cis-­
female but theoretically would include all those with a uterus engaging
in sexual behaviors that put them at risk for pregnancy.

CONTRACEPTIVE EFFECTIVENESS

To decrease rates of unintended pregnancy, the American Academy of
Pediatrics (AAP) and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommend that healthcare providers counsel about
and ensure access to all contraceptive methods for their adolescent

1217

patients. Comparing typical effectiveness of contraceptive methods,
Figure 160.1 illustrates a tiered system of contraceptive methods ranging from more effective to least effective. These tiers are categorized by
typical-­use failure rates, which reflect the effectiveness of a method for
the average person who may not always use the method consistently
or correctly (Table 160.1). For example, for oral contraceptive pills, the
typical-­use failure rate is 7%, whereas the perfect-­use failure rate is <1%.
Tier 1 methods, the most effective, include those with failure rates of
<1 pregnancy per 100 women in a year of typical use, and reversible
Tier 1 methods include intrauterine devices (IUDs) and implants. Tier
2 methods have failure rates of 4-­7 pregnancies per 100 women in a year
of typical use and include injectable contraception, oral contraceptive
pills, contraceptive patches, and the vaginal ring. Tier 3 methods have
failure rates of >13 pregnancies per 100 women per year of typical use
and include the male and female condom, the diaphragm, withdrawal,
the sponge, fertility awareness–based methods, and spermicides.

160.1 Contraceptive Use
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman

SEXUAL ACTIVITY

According to the 2021 Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System, 30% of
U.S. high school students had ever had sexual intercourse and approximately 22% reported being currently sexually active. These numbers
have been decreasing since 2015. However, significant decreases noted
from 2019 to 2021 may be attributable to the effect of the COVID pandemic on behaviors.

How to make your method
most effective

More effective
Less than 1 pregnancy per
100 women in 1 year
TIER 1

After procedure follow healthcare provider’s
instructions on when to resume sexual
activity with no concerns or risk of pregnancy.
IUD/Implant: May depend on timing of insertion
and/or contraceptive use prior to insertion.
Implant

Vasectomy*

Tubal
occlusion/
ligation*

IUD

Vasectomy: *Please note that it would be highly
unlikely for an adolescent to undergo vasectomy
or tubal ligation/occlusion, as these are mostly
permanent methods of preventing pregnancy
that require informed consent from the individual.

Injectable: Get repeat injections on time

4-7 pregnancies per
100 women in 1 year
TIER 2

Pills: Take a pill each day
Injectable

Male
Condom

Pill

Fertility AwarenessBased Methods

Less effective
More than 13 pregnancies per
100 women in 1 year
TIER 3

Withdrawal

Patch

Ring

Patch, ring: Keep in place, change on time

Condoms, sponge, withdrawal,
spermicides, diaphragm: Use
correctly every time you have sex
Diaphragm

Sponge
Fertility awareness-based
methods: Abstain or use condoms
on fertile days. May utilize FDA-approved
app (Natural Cycles) to better track ovulation.

Female
Condom

Spermicides

Fig. 160.1 Effectiveness of contraceptive methods. (Modified from Trussell J, Aiken ARA, Micks E, Guthrie K. Contraceptive efficacy, safety, and
personal considerations. In: Hatcher RA, Nelson AL, Trussell J, et al., eds. Contraceptive Technology, 21st ed. New York: Ayer Company Publishers;
2018:102.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1218 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 160.1  Efficacy of Contraceptives
FAILURE RATE (%)*
METHOD

TYPICAL USE

PERFECT USE

Implant
Nexplanon

0.1

0.1

Intrauterine Devices (IUDs)

ParaGard T380A
Mirena

0.8
0.1

0.6
0.1

Liletta

0.1

0.1

Kyleena

0.2

0.2

Skyla

0.4

0.3

4

0.2

Combination Oral
Contraceptives

7

Progestin-­
Only Oral
Contraceptives

SOME ADVANTAGES

SOME ADVERSE EFFECTS AND
DISADVANTAGES

Convenience; long-­term
contraception; efficacy not
dependent on patient adherence;
rapid return of fertility after
removal

Irregular bleeding; amenorrhea, insertion and/or
removal complications

Convenience; long-­term
contraception; efficacy not
dependent on patient adherence;
rapid return of fertility after
removal
Effective for 10 yr; nonhormonal
Effective for 8 yr; decreased
menstrual bleeding and improved
symptoms of dysmenorrhea

Rare uterine perforation; risk of infection with
insertion

Decreased menstrual bleeding
and improved symptoms of
dysmenorrhea
Smaller T-­frame and narrower
insertion tube
Smaller T-­frame and narrower
insertion tube

Irregular/heavy bleeding and dysmenorrhea
Irregular bleeding in first 3-­6 mo, followed by
amenorrhea; unpredictable suppression of
ovulation and potential ovulatory SE (ovarian
cysts, PMS, dysmenorrhea)
Irregular bleeding in first 3-­6 mo; unpredictable
suppression of ovulation and potential ovulatory
SE (ovarian cysts, PMS, dysmenorrhea)
Irregular bleeding in first 3-­6 mo; unpredictable
suppression of ovulation and potential ovulatory SE
(ovarian cysts, PMS, dysmenorrhea), unpredictable
bleeding pattern for the duration of use
Irregular bleeding in first 3-­6 mo; unpredictable
suppression of ovulation and potential ovulatory SE
(ovarian cysts, PMS, dysmenorrhea), unpredictable
bleeding pattern for the duration of use

Convenience of q3mo injections;
same as progestin-­only oral
contraceptives

Delayed return to fertility, irregular bleeding, and
amenorrhea; weight gain; decreased bone mineral
density while receiving injections

0.3

Protection against ovarian and
endometrial cancer; suppresses
ovulation, which can improve
symptoms of PMS, PMDD, and
dysmenorrhea; quick return to
fertility upon discontinuation

Increased rate of thromboembolism, which
increases with age and in those with underlying
risks for blood clots, nausea; headache;
contraindicated with breastfeeding

7

0.3

Safe in breastfeeding women and
those with underlying risk of
blood clots

Irregular, unpredictable bleeding; must take at
same time every day, unpredictable suppression
of ovulation

Transdermal Patch

7

0.3

Convenience of once-­weekly
application; same benefits as
combination oral contraceptives

Application site reactions; detachment; increased
estrogen exposure as compared with oral
contraceptives

Vaginal Ring

7

0.3

Convenience of once-­monthly
application, benefits similar to
combination oral contraceptive
pills

Discomfort of ring or with insertion; vaginal
discharge

Diaphragm with
Spermicide

17

16

Low cost

High failure rate; cervical irritation; there can be
increased risk of urinary tract infection and toxic
shock syndrome with improper and prolonged
use; some require fitting by healthcare
professional; may be difficult to obtain; available
only by prescription

21

5

Protection against STIs; covers
external genitalia; OTC

13

2

Protection against STIs, OTC, male
participation

High failure rate; difficult to insert; may be less
appealing because of need to stop during sexual
activity
High failure rate; allergic reactions; may be less
appealing because of need to stop during sexual
activity; breakage possible

Cervical Cap

16–32

9–26

Effective for 48 hr; can be used for
∼2 yr

High failure rate, cervical irritation, risk of toxic
shock, limited sizes, requires prescription

Withdrawal

20

4

No drugs or devices

High failure rate

Sponge

14–27

9–20

OTC; low cost; no fitting required;
provides 24 hr of protection

High failure rate; contraindicated during menses;
increased risk of toxic shock syndrome with
improper and prolonged use

Injectable
Depo-­Provera

Condoms Only
Female
Male

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

Chapter 160 u Contraception

1219

Table 160.1  Efficacy of Contraceptives—cont’d
FAILURE RATE (%)*

SOME ADVERSE EFFECTS AND
DISADVANTAGES

METHOD

TYPICAL USE

PERFECT USE

Fertility
Awareness–
Based Methods

15

—

Low cost; no drugs or devices

High failure rate; can be difficult to use properly if
periods/ovulation are not well established/regular,
requires periods of abstinence

21

16

Available OTC
—

Phexxi

14

5

Microbicidal effect, increased
viscosity as compared to other
spermicides

High failure rate; local irritation; must be reapplied
with repeat intercourse; unknown effect on HIV
transmission, cost
Requires a prescription, local irritation; must be
reapplied with repeat intercourse; cannot be
used with vaginal ring, cost/insurance coverage

No Method

85

85

—

—

Spermicide
Nonoxynol-­9

SOME ADVANTAGES

*Risk of unintended pregnancy during first year of use; data from Trussel J et al: In: Hatcher RA, Nelson AL, Trussell J, et al., eds. Contraceptive Technology, 21st ed. New York: Ayer
Company Publishers; 2018.
STIs, Sexually transmitted infections; OTC, over the counter; N-­9, Nonoxynol 9.
Adapted from Choice of contraceptives. Med Lett 2018;60(1557):161.

greatly increased over the last 50 years. Factors associated with contraceptive use at first sex include increasing age among teens up to age 17
years, time spent in college, and planning their sexual debut.
More than half of sexually experienced female teens are currently
using the most effective reversible contraceptives or moderately effective contraceptive methods. U.S. teens’ use of hormonal methods at last
intercourse is less frequent compared with teens in other developed
countries. A higher likelihood of female current contraceptive use is
associated with older age at sexual initiation, aspirations for higher
academic achievement, acceptance of one’s own sexual activity, and a
positive attitude toward contraception. Despite the importance of dual-­
method use to protect against both unwanted pregnancy and STIs, only
33% of sexually active female U.S. teens report using a barrier method
(condoms) plus another method of contraception at last sexual activity.

Switzerland
Netherlands
Denmark
Finland
Germany
Greece
Canada
Australia
United States

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.
0

5

10

15

Fig. 160.2 Teen birthrates in high-­income countries, 2020. Live births

per 1,000 females age 15-­19 yr. (Data from The World Bank Group.
United Nations Population Division, World Population Prospects. https:
//data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.ADO.TFRT.)

Although U.S. teens and European teens have similar levels of sexual activity and ages of sexual debut, U.S. teens are less likely to use
contraception and less likely to use the most effective methods. Teen
pregnancy rates have been declining worldwide—a result of delayed
initiation of sexual activity and increased contraceptive use. Despite
this decline, the United States still had the highest teen birthrate in the
Western industrialized world as of 2020, with 16.7 live births per 1,000
females age 15-­19 years (Fig. 160.2). This is 8 times higher than the teen
birthrate in Switzerland, which has the lowest rate in Western Europe.
As of 2020 the teenage pregnancy rate in the United States is 31 pregnancies per 1,000 women, with a rate of 13.6/1,000 in those 15-­17 years
and 56.9/1,000 in those 18-­19 years. The majority of these pregnancies
are unintended, and one in five births are a repeat birth, indicating an
unmet need for reliable, effective contraception that teens will correctly
and consistently use.

USE OF CONTRACEPTION AMONG TEENS

According to the 2017–2019 National Survey of Family Growth, 78%
of females and 89% of males who had their first sexual intercourse
before age 20 years used a contraceptive method at first intercourse.
The method most used by teenage females is the condom, followed by
withdrawal (both least effective methods) and then the pill (a moderately effective method). IUDs and implants, the most effective reversible methods, are used by 20% of females 15-­19 years, with the implant
being more commonly used (15%). Use of contraception at first sex has

160.2 Contraceptive Counseling
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
The adolescent preventive health visit offers opportunities for confidential discussions with all adolescents and the opportunity to identify
and discuss sexual practices that may be putting the adolescent at risk
for STIs or unintended pregnancy. It is also a time to discuss safe sexual
behaviors, including abstinence (see Chapter 151). It is important to
ask specifically about adolescents’ sexual behaviors to make sure your
counseling is appropriate for their sexual activity. Adolescents with
medical conditions, either chronic or acute, are particularly vulnerable to having sexual and reproductive health omitted from their visits,
although they have similar sexual health and contraceptive needs (see
Chapter 756). Their comorbidities or concurrent medication use may
make STIs and unintended pregnancy an increased health risk and
may affect contraceptive counseling/options. The U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use (MEC) outlines medical conditions associated with increased risk for adverse health events with
pregnancy and provides recommendations for who can safely use specific contraceptive methods.
The goals of adolescent contraceptive counseling are to (1) understand adolescent experiences, preferences, perceptions, and misperceptions about pregnancy and use of contraceptives; (2) help adolescents
understand the risks of unprotected sexual intercourse, including STIs
and unintended pregnancy; (3) educate adolescents about the various contraceptive methods available using information that is medically accurate, balanced, and provided in a nonjudgmental manner;
and (4) engage in patient-­centered counseling so the adolescent feels
empowered to choose a safe and effective method that can either be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1220 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
provided on site or be easily obtained through prescription or by referral. If adolescents are comfortable and willing to include their parents
in this discussion, it is also always helpful to engage parents in the
decision-­making process and address any parental questions and concerns. Providers should be aware of state laws affecting confidentiality
and an adolescent’s ability to access confidential contraceptive services
(see Chapter 151). Most states allow adolescents confidential access
to contraceptive services, but given that many adolescents are under
their parents’ insurance plan, confidentiality may be unintentionally
breached through billing and explanation of benefit statements, as well
as through the open notes mandate. This should be discussed with
adolescents, especially those who are very concerned about disclosing
sexual health information to their parents or guardians.
Counseling should include a review of all contraceptive methods
available that the adolescent can use safely (see U.S. MEC). Long-­
acting reversible contraception (LARC/IUDs and implants) is a safe
and effective option for many adolescents, including those who have
not been pregnant or given birth. The adolescent should be counseled
about method effectiveness using typical-­use failure rates. Although
it is important to highlight the methods most effective at preventing
pregnancy, it is also imperative to provide contraceptive counseling
within the framework of reproductive justice and to avoid any coercion
due to provider preference or bias. The focus of contraceptive counseling should be on the priorities of the adolescent, and the adolescent
should be allowed to explore all options and determine which method
is most appropriate for their contraceptive needs and priorities. It is
important to ask about use of withdrawal and discuss its risks given
that 60% of female teens have used it for contraception and it has a
typical-­use failure rate of 20%. Abstinence should also be discussed as
an option even if teens have engaged in sexual intercourse in the past.
Abstinence may be the best option if adolescents do not have another
method available at a particular time.
Necessary concepts to address while discussing individual methods include how effective the method is, how long the method works,
what behaviors are required for correct and consistent use, what side
effects may be seen, any noncontraceptive benefits of the method (e.g.,
reduced menstrual bleeding, protection from STIs), and what signs
or symptoms of complications should prompt a return visit. Reviewing common side effects allows teens to anticipate and cope with any
changes with reassurance and may avoid method discontinuation.
Weighing the possibility of certain side effects with the possibility of
an unintended pregnancy may also help with the conversation. It is
also important to address any specific misperceptions teens may have
for certain contraceptives regarding side effects, effectiveness, or effect
on future fertility.
Once an adolescent chooses a method, the provider and adolescent
should discuss clear plans on correct and consistent use of the chosen
method and strategies for appropriate follow-­up (see Table 160.1). Providers should help the adolescent consider potential barriers to correct and consistent use (e.g., forgetting to take a pill daily) and develop
strategies to deal with each barrier (e.g., use of reminder systems such
as daily text messages or phone alarms). The provider should assess
whether the teen understood the information discussed and may confirm by asking the teen to repeat back key concepts.
The U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations for Contraceptive Use
provides guidance for providers regarding when to start contraception,
how to be certain the woman is not pregnant at contraception initiation, and what examinations and tests are recommended before initiating contraception. Generally, women may start a contraceptive method
other than an IUD at any time, and an IUD may be placed when a
provider is reasonably certain that a woman is not pregnant. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) defines this as a patient
who has no symptoms or signs of pregnancy, is ≤7 days after the start
of normal menses, has not had sexual intercourse since the start of last
normal menses, and has been correctly and consistently using a reliable
method of contraception
Most women do not require any special exam or additional screening for STIs before initiating contraception if they have been recently
screened according to the CDC’s STI treatment guidelines. A blood

pressure reading is advisable. A pelvic examination is only required
for placement of an IUD, unless otherwise indicated. STI screening
is appropriate at and/or before IUD placement, even if a patient does
not report sexual activity, as some patients may choose to not disclose
this information to their provider. Gonorrhea and chlamydia screening using a self-­or provider-­collected vaginal swab or urine sample is
recommended unless symptoms require a pelvic exam. IUD placement
should not be delayed to receive screening results. Cervical cancer
screening is not recommended until age 21.
Providers should offer confidential services to adolescents and
observe all relevant state laws and legal obligations (e.g., notification
or reporting of sexual abuse). Chapter 151 discusses confidentiality
and consent issues related to contraceptive management. Providers
should also encourage adolescents to involve parents or guardians in
their healthcare decisions, while giving parents clear information on
their teen’s right to confidentiality, privacy, and informed consent. All
services should be provided in a youth-­friendly manner, meaning that
they are accessible, equitable, acceptable, appropriate, comprehensive,
effective, and efficient. Resources are available that describe ways to
ensure a teen-­friendly reproductive health visit.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.3 Long-­Acting Reversible Contraception
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
Long-­acting reversible contraception (LARC) includes four levonorgestrel (LNG) IUDs, the copper (Cu) IUD, and the etonogestrel subdermal implant. LARC methods are the only Tier 1 methods that are
reversible (see Fig. 160.1). Their efficacy is the result of the fact that
LARC does not require frequent office or pharmacy visits and does
not depend on user adherence for effectiveness. In the Contraceptive
CHOICE Project in St. Louis, Missouri, >9,000 women were given the
contraceptive method of their choice at no cost and were followed for
2-­3 years. The failure rates among women of all ages, including adolescents who used oral contraceptive pills, transdermal patch, or vaginal ring, were >20 times higher than the failure rates for those using a
LARC method. Acceptance, continuation, and satisfaction in this project were also higher among adolescents using LARC compared with
adolescents using non-­LARC methods. ACOG and AAP support the
use of LARC methods for adolescents. The U.S. MEC supports safe use
of both IUDs and implants for adolescents and nulliparous women.
Implants are considered Category 1 for all ages, and IUDs are considered Category 2 for women <20 years old and for nulliparous women
(Table 160.2).

INTRAUTERINE DEVICES

IUDs are small, flexible, plastic objects introduced into the uterine cavity through the cervix. They differ in size, shape, presence or absence
of hormone, and dose of hormone delivered daily. In the United States,
five IUDs are currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA): the CuT380A (Paragard) and four LNG IUDs (Liletta,
Kyleena, Mirena, and Skyla).
The LNG IUDs also have various actions, from thickening of cervical
mucus and inhibiting sperm survival to suppressing the endometrium.
LNG IUDs are effective and approved for use from 3 to 8 years. The
Cu IUD releases copper ions into the uterine cavity, which induces an
inflammatory response within the endometrium. Copper also impairs
sperm motility/migration, inhibits the acrosomal reaction, and impairs
implantation. As with the other IUDs, the Cu IUD is reversible, safe for
use in nulliparous women, and effective for at least 10 years. All IUDs
have typical-­use failure rates of <1% (see Fig. 160.1). All LARC methods are appropriate and safe to use in the postpartum period.
Mirena is FDA approved for the treatment of heavy menstrual
bleeding, and studies in adults have demonstrated an 80% reduction
in menstrual blood loss in Mirena users, with 50% of users reporting amenorrhea after 2 years of use. Among the other LNG IUDs,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 160 u Contraception
Table 160.2  Categories of Medical Eligibility Criteria for
Contraceptive Use
Category 1: A condition for which there is no restriction for the use
of the contraceptive method
Category 2: A condition for which the advantages of using the
method generally outweigh the theoretical or proven risks
Category 3: A condition for which the theoretical or proven risks
usually outweigh the advantages of using the method
Category 4: A condition that represents an unacceptable health risk
if the contraceptive method is used

Table 160.3  Conditions Classified as Category 3 and 4 for
Combined Hormonal Contraceptive Use
Category 4 (a condition that represents an unacceptable health risk
if the contraceptive method is used)
Complicated valvular heart disease
Current breast cancer
Severe decompensated cirrhosis
Deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism (acute; history, not
on anticoagulation or on established therapy for at least 3 mo with
higher risk recurrence; major surgery with prolonged immobilization)
Complicated diabetes with nephropathy, retinopathy, neuropathy, or
other vascular disease or duration of diabetes >20 yr
Migraine with aura
Poorly controlled hypertension (blood pressure >160/100 mm Hg) or
hypertension with vascular disease
Ischemic heart disease (history of or current)
Hepatocellular adenoma
Malignant liver tumor
Peripartum cardiomyopathy (diagnosed <6 mo before or with
moderately or severely impaired cardiac function)
Postpartum <21 days
History of cerebrovascular accident
Systemic lupus erythematosus with positive antiphospholipid
antibodies
Thrombogenic pathogenic variants
Viral hepatitis (acute or flare)
Category 3 (a condition for which the theoretical or proven risks
usually outweigh the advantages of using the method)
Past breast cancer with no evidence of disease for 5 yr
Breastfeeding and <1 mo postpartum
Deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism (history of DVT/PE
with lower risk recurrence)
Gallbladder disease (current, medically treated)
History of malabsorptive bariatric surgery
History of cholestasis and past combined oral contraceptive–related
Hypertension (adequately controlled or blood pressure
<160/100 mm Hg)
Peripartum cardiomyopathy with mild impairment or >6 mo
Postpartum 21-­42 days with other risk factors for venous
thromboembolism
Drug interactions (ritonavir-­boosted protease inhibitors; certain
anticonvulsants; rifampin or rifabutin)
First-­degree family member with a history of a blood clot/clotting
disorder/thromboembolic event
From Curtis KM, Tepper NK, Jatlaoui TC, et al. U.S. medical eligibility criteria for
contraceptive use, 2016, MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65(RR-­3):1–104.

amenorrhea at 2 years is reported at 26% for Liletta users, and Kyleena
and Skyla report prolonged and irregular bleeding at 1 year in 5–20%
of users. Heavier bleeding patterns and increased dysmenorrhea are
reported in users of the Cu-­IUD. Patients should be counseled on
bleeding patterns and expected changes to their menstrual bleeding
after IUD insertion (Table 160.3).
Common misconceptions of IUDs among healthcare providers are
that IUDs can cause or increase the risks of infections, cause infertility,

1221

and generally are not safe or tolerated by teens or nulliparous women;
these misconceptions can be a barrier for teens desiring an IUD to
access these highly effective and safe methods. IUDs do not increase
risk of infertility and may be inserted safely in teenagers regardless of
parity (Category 2; see Table 160.2).
Although early studies suggested an increased risk for upper genital
tract infection, because of the passing of a foreign body through the
cervix, new studies have refuted these concerns. Therefore clinicians
are encouraged to consider the use of IUDs in adolescents despite relatively high prevalence rates of STIs in this population. Teens should
be screened for gonorrhea and chlamydia at and/or before IUD placement, although placement should not be delayed if results have not
returned and there are no signs of current infection (e.g., purulent discharge, erythematous cervix). If STI testing is positive with an IUD
in place, the patient may be treated without removing the IUD if she
wants to continue the method.
There has been evidence that rates of IUD expulsion are higher in
adolescents as compared to older women. The data are limited, but the
risk seems to be higher with Cu-­IUD vs hormonal IUD, previous IUD
expulsion, and concomitant use of the menstrual cup. A paracervical
block with lidocaine may reduce patient discomfort during placement
and, along with other medications (e.g., NSAIDs, anxiolytics), may be
considered on an individual patient basis, but these are not routinely
recommended.

IMPLANTS

One contraceptive implant is available in the United States. The single
rod that releases 60 μg/day of etonogestrel has been updated to a radiopaque rod with a new inserter. This progestin-­only method keeps
etonogestrel at steady serum levels for at least 3 years and primarily works to inhibit ovulation. Similar to the levonorgestrel IUD, the
progestin acts on the uterus to cause an atrophic endometrium and
thicken cervical mucus to block sperm penetration; its typical-­use failure rate is also <1% (see Fig. 160.1). Unlike the IUD, no pelvic exam is
required for insertion. A trained provider can quickly place or remove
the implant in the upper arm under local anesthesia. The most common side effect of the contraceptive implant is irregular and unscheduled/unpredictable bleeding. This can include irregular or infrequent
bleeding, amenorrhea, and less often, prolonged or frequent bleeding.
Although the continuation rates are favorable and comparable to the
IUD, the most common reason for discontinuation is dissatisfaction
with bleeding patterns. It is important that adolescents be appropriately
counseled on the potential for changes to their bleeding pattern before
insertion of the implant. Adolescents who present with troublesome
bleeding should be evaluated for any underlying gynecologic abnormalities, bleeding or blotting disorders, and the presence of an STI.
If these are not present and adolescents desire treatment, they can be
treated with a short course of NSAIDs (5-­7 days) or low-­dose combined oral contraceptives (COCs) if no contraindications to estrogen
exist (10-­20 days). Any and all adolescents desiring implant removal
because of side effects should be offered prompt removal as indicated.
One potential unique complication of this method relates to localized infection and other side effects after implantation, such as bleeding, hematoma, or scarring, and if inserted too deeply into the muscle,
neural damage or migration; however, these events are rare, occurring
in <1% of patients. Minor side effects, such as bruising or skin irritation, are more common but most often resolve without treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.4 Other Progestin-­Only Methods
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
Several progestin-­only contraceptive methods are available and include
the LNG IUDs and implant (see Chapter 160.3), as well as an injectable
and progestin-­only pills. These methods do not contain estrogen and
may be useful for teens with contraindications to estrogen use or in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1222 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 160.4  Hormonal Intrauterine Devices
MIRENA

KYLEENA

LILETTA

Duration of use

FDA approved 8 yr

FDA approved 5 yr

FDA approved 8 yr

FDA approved 3 yr

SKYLA

Daily hormone delivery
over time

20 mcg LNG/day → 9 mcg/
day (52 mcg total)

17.5 mcg LNG/day → 7.4
mcg/day
(19.5 mcg total)

19.5 mcg LNG/day → 9.8
mcg/day
(52 mcg total)

14 mcg LNG/day → 5 mcg/
day (13.5 mcg total)

Device size

32 mm × 32 mm

28 mm × 30 mm

32 mm × 32 mm

28 mm × 30 mm

Diameter of insertion rod

4.4 mm

3.8 mm diameter

4.4 mm diameter

3.8 mm diameter

FDA, Food and Drug Administration; LNG, levonorgestrel.

patients who prefer a method without estrogen such as gender-­diverse
adolescents and young adults (Table 160.4). They are considered safe
for use in teens (Category 1 or 2; see Table 160.2). Progestins thicken
cervical mucus to block sperm entry into the uterine cavity and induce
an atrophic endometrium leading to either amenorrhea or less menstrual blood loss; the implant and injectable also suppress ovulation,
whereas the progestin-­only pills and LNG IUDs may affect the frequency of ovulation but do not suppress it completely. Teens should
be provided anticipatory counseling regarding bleeding irregularities
that may normally occur in the first 3-­6 months of any hormonal contraception use.

DEPO-­PROVERA

An injectable progestin, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA,
Depo-­Provera) is a Tier 2 contraceptive method available as a deep
intramuscular (IM) injection (150 mg) or as a subcutaneous (SC)
injection (104 mg) with typical-­use failure rates of 4% (see Table 160.1).
Both preparations must be readministered every 3 months (13 weeks).
When appropriate, DMPA can be given up to 3 weeks before or 7 days
after the 13 weeks scheduled interval without any effect on contraceptive efficacy. DMPA works by inhibiting ovulation and thickening cervical mucus. DMPA may be preferred by patients or parents who are
caring for a child with intellectual disabilities. Common concerns with
DMPA include bleeding changes, bone effects, and weight gain. After
1 year of use, 50% of DMPA users develop amenorrhea, which may be
an added advantage for teens with heavy menstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhea, anemias, or blood dyscrasias. It may also be advantageous for
those desiring menstrual suppression because of physical or developmental disabilities that make hygiene difficult or those in whom menstruation causes gender dysphoria. Studies have demonstrated bone
mineral density (BMD) loss in adolescents with DMPA use, but this
has not been shown to directly increase fracture risk. It is unclear how
this decrease in BMD affects the risk for osteoporosis later in life. Other
studies have found that BMD is recovered after discontinuation of this
method, and it is thus considered safe for use in this population with
appropriate counseling and consideration of other risk factors for bone
health. Healthcare providers should speak at length with teens and parents, when appropriate, who are already at high risk for low BMD, such
as those receiving chronic corticosteroid therapy or those with eating
disorders (see Chapter 749). They should discuss and decide together
if DMPA is an appropriate contraceptive choice. Patients and providers need to balance the potential bone effects of DMPA with the bone
effects that can occur with a teenage pregnancy. Although the FDA
issued a black box warning in 2004 because of Depo’s BMD effects, the
AAP and ACOG do not recommend limiting duration of DMPA use
and do not recommend routine BMD screening for females using it.
Early weight gain may be predictive of progressive gain over time; thus
those teens gaining weight in the first 3-­6 months after the initiation
of DMPA should be monitored and continue to engage in discussions
about healthy eating and exercise habits.

PROGESTIN-­ONLY PILLS

Progestin-­only oral contraceptive pills (POPs) are available and safe
for use in adolescents. POPs (mini pills) are quickly effective after 2
days of initiation in thickening cervical mucus, but do not reliably

inhibit ovulation. Prior to 2019, the only progestin pill available in
the United States contained 0.35 mg of norethindrone. Norethindrone
has a short half-­life, and it is important that this pill is taken at the
same time every day, which can make adherence difficult. If a pill is
>3 hours late from normal time, an unintended pregnancy may occur.
POPs have a typical-­use failure rate of 7% (see Table 160.1). Norethindrone POPs are taken continuously, and as a result, the bleeding
pattern is variable—ranging from amenorrhea to irregular and unpredictable breakthrough bleeding. Acceptance by adolescents is limited
by the necessity of taking the pill at the same time daily, and bleeding
irregularities
In 2019 the FDA approved a new POP—Slynd—which contains 4
mg of drospirenone. This is higher than the dose found in COCs. Drospirenone is an analog of spironolactone with a longer half-­life of ∼25-­
30 hours, which allows for more flexibility with timing of pills. It also
has some antimineralocorticoid activity and therefore should be used
with caution in those who may take other medications or have medical
comorbidities that can put them at risk for hyperkalemia. Slynd comes
in a 28-­day pill pack with four inactive pills intended to cause a scheduled withdrawal bleed. Slynd primarily suppresses ovulation. Studies
have demonstrated its safety and efficacy along with high rates of satisfaction among users (85%). There may still be unscheduled bleeding, but it seems to be more favorable than what is experienced with
norethindrone use.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.5 Combined Hormonal Contraceptives
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
Combined hormonal contraceptives (CHCs) are methods that include
an estrogen in combination with a progestin that has progestational,
estrogenic, and androgenic properties. Methods available in the United
States include several formulations of COCs, a transdermal patch,
and a vaginal ring. The major mechanism of action of the estrogen-­
progestin combination is to prevent the surge of luteinizing hormone
and thereby inhibit ovulation. Additional effects to the reproductive
tract include thickening of the cervical mucus, which prevents sperm
penetration, and thinning of the endometrial lining, which may
decrease menstrual blood loss. Typical-­use failure rates for all CHCs
are the same at 7%.
The COCs, patch, and vaginal ring are classified together as CHCs
in the U.S. MEC for Contraceptive Use, and recommendations mostly
consider estrogen exposure for a given condition or characteristic
(see Tables 160.3 and 160.4). Thromboembolic events such as venous
thromboembolism (VTE), pulmonary embolism, or stroke are some of
the more serious potential complications of exogenous estrogen use.
These serious adverse events are exceedingly rare in adolescents who
do not have other risk factors for thromboembolic events. Although
the risk of blood clots is increased in those who smoke cigarettes, the
likelihood of its occurrence is very small in adolescents, and thus clinically insignificant, compared to the risk of morbidity and mortality
from other pregnancy-­related complications, including blood clots

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 160 u Contraception
associated with the high estrogen levels that occur during pregnancy
and in the postpartum period.

COMBINED ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES

Oral contraceptive pills (OCs) can be either COCs or POPs and are
commonly referred to as “the pill.” The pill is one of the most common
contraceptive methods used among women of all ages. To decrease risk
of pregnancy and increase continuation, providers are encouraged to
provide OCs at the time of patient presentation to start immediately
rather than waiting for next menses, as long as the provider is reasonably sure that the patient is not pregnant. Providers are also encouraged to provide up to 13 pill packs at a time, based on evidence that
more pill packs provided is associated with higher continuation rates.
However, it is important to see an adolescent in follow-­up once starting
contraception to discuss adherence and satisfaction with the method
selected. Advanced provision of emergency contraceptive pills is also
recommended should patients miss pills and have unprotected sex. The
effectiveness of COCs depends on adherence, and it can be difficult for
any patient to remember to take a pill each day. Figures 160.3 and 160.4
list the rules for missed pills or after vomiting or diarrhea.
COCs contain between 50 μg and 10 μg of an estrogenic substance,
typically ethinyl estradiol, and as many as 10 progestins are available
in the United States for combined pills. Multiple preparations are available to help select the formulation that satisfies an individual patient,
with minimal side effects. Studies looking at the effects of estrogen dosing on bone health have found lower rates of bone accrual in those
taking COCs containing 20 mcg as compared with nonusers. It is recommended that adolescents start on a COC containing 30-­35 μg of an
estrogenic substance.

If one hormonal pill is late:
(24 hours since a pill
should have been taken).

COCs can be packaged as 28-­day monophasic pills, which contain
the same dose of active pills for 21 or 24 days, followed by 7 or 4 days of
placebo pills, respectively. Monophasic formulations are also available
for extended cycles of 91 days or 1 year so that withdrawal bleeding does
not occur each month, but at the end of each extended cycle. Extended
cycling of monophasic COCs for adolescents has some anticipated
benefits associated with increased ovarian activity suppression and may
decrease failure rates. Other advantages include menstrual suppression
in those patients in whom that is a priority and diminished frequency
of hormonal withdrawal (premenstrual) effects, including headaches
and migraines, mood changes, and heavy monthly bleeding. The most
common side effect of extended-­cycle OCs is intermenstrual bleeding
and/or spotting, with the total days of bleeding over the first year of
treatment being similar for extended-­cycle users and users following
a 28-­day-­cycle regimen. The unscheduled bleeding pattern diminishes
over time. Multiphasic pill packs contain various levels of estrogen and
progestin for 21 active pills and contain 7 placebo pills. Multiphasic
formulations are not available for extended-­cycle use. Providers can
refer to the U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations for Contraceptive
Use to counsel patients on how to manage late or missed COCs.
The short-­term adverse effects of COCs, such as nausea and weight
gain, often interfere with compliance in adolescent patients. These
effects are usually transient and may be overlooked by the beneficial effects of a shortened menses and the relief of dysmenorrhea.
The inhibition of ovulation or the suppressant effect of estrogens on
prostaglandin production by the endometrium makes COCs effective in preventing dysmenorrhea (see Chapter 159). Acne is typically
improved by COCs, as estrogen can reduce the effects of circulating
androgens. There is no evidence that one particular COC is superior to

If one hormonal pill has been
missed: (24 to 48 hours since
a pill should have been taken).

• Take the late or missed pill as
soon as possible.
• Continue taking the remaining
pills at the usual time (even if it
means taking two pills on the
same day).
• No additional contraceptive
protection is needed.
• Emergency contraception is not
usually needed but can be
considered if hormonal pills
were missed earlier in the cycle
or in the last week of the
previous cycle.

1223

If two or more consecutive hormonal
pills have been missed: (48 hours since
a pill should have been taken).

• Take the most recent missed pill as
soon as possible. (Any other missed
pills should be discarded.)
• Continue taking the remaining pills at
the usual time (even if it means taking
two pills on the same day).
• Use back-up contraception (e.g.,
condoms) or avoid sexual intercourse
until hormonal pills have been taken
for 7 consecutive days.
• If pills were missed in the last week of
hormonal pills (e.g., days 15–21 for
28-day pill packs):
– Omit the hormone-free interval by
finishing the hormonal pills in the
current pack and starting a new
pack the next day.
– If unable to start a new pack
immediately, use back-up
contraception (e.g., condoms) or
avoid sexual intercourse until
hormonal pills from a new pack
have been taken for 7 consecutive
days.
• Emergency contraception should be
considered if hormonal pills were
missed during the first week and
unprotected sexual intercourse
occurred in the previous 5 days.
• Emergency contraception may also
be considered at other times as
appropriate.

Fig. 160.3 Algorithm showing recommended actions after late or missed combined oral contraceptives. (From Curtis KM, Jatlaoui TC, Tepper NK,
et al. U.S. selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65[RR-­4]:1–66, Fig. 2, p. 28.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1224 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Vomiting or diarrhea (for any
reason, for any duration) that
occurs within 24 hours after
taking a hormonal pill.

Vomiting or diarrhea, for any
reason, continuing for 24 to
48 hours after taking any
hormonal pill.

• Taking another hormonal pill
(redose) is unnecessary.
• Continue taking pills daily at the
usual time (if possible, despite
discomfort).
• No additional contraceptive
protection is needed.
• Emergency contraception is not
usually needed but can be
considered as appropriate.

Vomiting or diarrhea, for any reason,
continuing for 48 hours after taking any
hormonal pill.

• Continue taking pills daily at the usual
time (if possible, despite discomfort).
• Use back-up contraception (e.g.,
condoms) or avoid sexual intercourse
until hormonal pills have been taken
for 7 consecutive days after vomiting or
diarrhea has resolved.
• If vomiting or diarrhea occurred in the
last week of hormonal pills (e.g., days
15–21 for 28-day pill packs):
– Omit the hormone-free interval by
finishing the hormonal pills in the
current pack and starting a new
pack the next day.
– If unable to start a new pack
immediately, use back-up
contraception (e.g., condoms) or
avoid sexual intercourse until
hormonal pills from a new pack
have been taken for 7 consecutive
days.
• Emergency contraception should be
considered if vomiting or diarrhea
occurred within the first week of a new
pill pack and unprotected sexual
intercourse occurred in the previous 5
days.
• Emergency contraception may also be
considered at other times as
appropriate.

Fig. 160.4 Algorithm showing recommended steps after vomiting or diarrhea while using combined oral contraceptives. (From Curtis KM, Jatlaoui

TC, Tepper NK, et al. U.S. selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65[RR-­4]:1–66, Fig. 5, p. 30.)

another in targeting acne, but theoretically it would be better to use a
pill with nonandrogenic progestins (see Chapter 710). Drospirenone,
a progestin with antimineralocorticoid activity, has been shown to
reduce premenstrual symptomatology, but the potential for hyperkalemia as a side effect eliminates patients with renal, liver, or adrenal
diseases and patients taking certain medications.
The FDA has concluded that drospirenone-­containing OCs may be
associated with a higher risk of VTE than other progestin-­containing
pills. Although no studies have provided consistent estimates of the
comparative risk of VTE between OCs that contain drospirenone and
those that do not, or accounted for patient characteristics that may affect
VTE risk, there has been a threefold increased risk of VTE reported for
drospirenone-­containing pills as compared with products containing
levonorgestrel or other progestins. As a result, the FDA requires that
labeling be revised for the OCs marketed under the Beyaz, Safyral, Yasmin, and Yaz brands. This clot risk has not been established for Slynd,
which contains 4 mg of drospirenone and no estrogenic component.
Despite the risk of VTE with all OCs, the absolute risk remains lower
than the risk of developing VTE during pregnancy or the postpartum
period.

TRANSDERMAL PATCH

The transdermal patch releases a combination of ethinyl estradiol and
a progestin daily. It is applied to the lower abdomen, buttocks, or upper
body, excluding the breasts. It is worn continuously for 1 week and
changed weekly for a total of 3 weeks, then no patch is worn for the
fourth week, at which time bleeding occurs (see Table 160.1). Limited
studies in adolescents suggest higher rates of partial or full detachment compared with adults, with high patient satisfaction and 50–83%
continuation rates from 3 to 18 months of use (Fig. 160.5). As with
other combined hormonal methods, the patch is a Tier 2 contraceptive.
Providers can refer to the U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations to

counsel patients on how to manage delayed application or detachment
of the patch.
The first patch available was Ortho Evra, now available only in a
generic version called Xulane. It releases 35 μg ethinyl estradiol and
150 μg norelgestromin daily. Compared with the pharmacokinetics of
COCs, the area under the curve for the patch is about 55% higher for
patch users. This caused concerns about increased risk of clots with
higher estrogen exposure, although there have been no data to confirm
this risk. Studies to date have had conflicting data on the risk of VTE
in patients using nonoral combined hormonal contraception. There is
also concern for efficacy of the patch in those whose weight was >90 kg,
and this should be discussed with patients in consideration of use. The
Xulane patch can be used to extend cycles similar to COC extended-­
cycle pills. Patients may choose to wear patches consecutively without
any “patch-­free week” but should be aware that this can carry a risk of
breakthrough bleeding, as occurs with extended-­cycle COC use.
In 2020 Twirla was developed to address the need for a lower-­dose
product to reduce the cumulative estrogen exposure from patch use.
Twirla releases 30 μg ethinyl estradiol (EE) and 120 μg levonorgestrel
(LNG) daily, and the maximum steady-­state concentrations were 60%
(EE) and 18% (LNG) as compared with Xulane. Initial studies did not
demonstrate a significantly decreased clot risk as compared to other
methods of combined hormonal contraception, but as with Xulane,
efficacy seemed to be affected by body mass index (BMI), in particular
in those who were categorized by BMI as obese. Twirla was not studied
for extended use.

VAGINAL RING

The vaginal contraceptive ring is a flexible, transparent, colorless vaginal ring that is inserted into the vagina by the patient. It releases a daily
dose of ethinyl estradiol and a progestin. It remains in place for 3 weeks,
during which time these hormones are absorbed. It is then typically

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 160 u Contraception
Delayed application or detachment* for 48
hours since a patch should have been applied
or reattached.

Delayed application or detachment* for 48
hours since a patch should have been applied
or reattached.

• Apply a new patch as soon as possible. (If
detachment occurred 24 hours since the
patch was applied, try to reapply the patch
or replace with a new patch.)
• Keep the same patch change day.
• No additional contraceptive protection is
needed.
• Emergency contraception is not usually
needed but can be considered if delayed
application or detachment occurred earlier
in the cycle or in the last week of the
previous cycle.

• Apply a new patch as soon as possible.
• Keep the same patch change day.
• Use back-up contraception (e.g., condoms)
or avoid sexual intercourse until a patch has
been worn for 7 consecutive days.
• If the delayed application or detachment
occurred in the third patch week:
– Omit the hormone-free week by
finishing the third week of patch use
(keeping the same patch change day)
and starting a new patch immediately.
– If unable to start a new patch
immediately, use back-up
contraception (e.g., condoms) or avoid
sexual intercourse until a new patch has
been worn for 7 consecutive days.
• Emergency contraception should be
considered if the delayed application or
detachment occurred within the first week
of patch use and unprotected sexual
intercourse occurred in the previous 5 days.
• Emergency contraception may also be
considered at other times as appropriate.

1225

*If detachment takes place but the woman is unsure when the detachment occurred, consider the
patch to have been detached for 48 hours since a patch should have been applied or reattached.

Fig. 160.5 Algorithm showing recommended actions after delayed application or detachment with combined hormonal patch. (From Curtis KM,

Jatlaoui TC, Tepper NK, et al. U.S. Selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65[RR-­4]:1–66, Fig.
3, p. 28.)

removed for 7 days during which time a withdrawal bleed should
occur. If the ring is accidentally expelled or removed for intercourse,
it should be reinserted; however, if it is out of place ≥48 hours or the
ring is not replaced within 7 days after removal, a backup method of
contraception should be used (Fig. 160.6). The vaginal ring is a Tier 2
contraceptive. Providers can refer to the U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations to counsel patients on how to manage delayed insertion or
reinsertion with the vaginal ring.
The first contraceptive ring available was NuvaRing, which measures
about 2.1 inches in diameter and releases 1 μg ethinyl estradiol and
120 μg etonogestrel daily. Users use one ring per 4-­week cycle with 3
weeks in and 1 week out and a scheduled withdrawal bleed. It should be
noted that although it is labeled for 28 days of use, it contains enough
hormones to be used for up to 35 days and can be replaced once every
calendar month. The ring can be used to extend cycles similar to COC
extended-­cycle pills. Patients may choose to use the Nuva Ring consecutively without any “ring-­free week” but should be aware that this can
carry a risk of breakthrough bleeding, as occurs with extended-­cycle
COC use. Annovera is FDA approved and offers a single ring, which
can be reused for 13 consecutive cycles and does not require refrigeration when not in use. Annovera has a diameter of about 2.2 inches and
releases 13 μg of EE and 150 μg of segesterone acetate daily. It has not
been studied for extended use, and initial studies did not include those
with a BMI >29 kg/m2.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Contraceptive counseling should include a discussion and assessment
for any absolute or relative contraindications to estrogen use. Contraindications to the use of estrogen-­containing methods include those
conditions for which CHCs pose an unacceptable health risk (Category
4) in the U.S. MEC for Contraceptive Use (see Table 160.3); current
breast cancer; severe cirrhosis, acute deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism (DVT/PE) or history of DVT/PE with higher risk for
recurrence, major surgery with prolonged immobilization, diabetes
with nephropathy, retinopathy, or neuropathy, migraines with focal

neurologic aura, stage II hypertension, vascular disease, ischemic heart
disease, hepatocellular adenoma or malignant liver tumors, multiple
risk factors for cardiovascular disease, peripartum cardiomyopathy,
postpartum <21 day, complicated solid-­organ transplantation, history
of cerebrovascular accident, systemic lupus erythematosus with positive antiphospholipid antibodies, thrombogenic pathogenic variants,
and complicated valvular heart disease. The initial history taken before
prescribing CHCs should specifically address these risks. The U.S. MEC
provides contraceptive safety guidance with >1,800 recommendations
for >120 medical conditions or characteristics. According to the MEC,
obesity is not a contraindication to estrogen or contraceptive use, and
these adolescents would be considered at high risk for pregnancy complications. Therefore adolescents with obesity should be counseled on
and offered contraception when indicated and if desired by the patient.
Other things to discuss and consider when evaluating an adolescent
for COC use are a family history of blood clots or clotting disorders
and any medications that might interact with COCs. If a patient has
a first-­degree relative with history of VTE, evaluation for a familial
thrombophilia is advisable. There are few medication interactions for
progestin-­only methods, but there are medications that may be affected
by or affect levels of COCs. This includes certain anticonvulsants and
psychotropic medications as well as herbal supplements, which may
affect COC levels. The CDC has a resource for antiretrovirals and their
potential for interactions with hormonal contraception. Lexicomp and
UpToDate provide additional information on interactions with COCs.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.6 Emergency Contraception
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
Unprotected intercourse at mid-­
cycle carries a pregnancy risk of
20–30%. At other times during the cycle, the risk is 2–4%. Emergency

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1226 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Delayed insertion of a new ring or delayed
reinsertion* of a current ring for 48 hours
since a ring should have been inserted.

Delayed insertion of a new ring or delayed
reinsertion* for 48 hours since a ring should
have been inserted.

• Insert ring as soon as possible.
• Keep the ring in until the scheduled ring
removal day.
• No additional contraceptive protection is
needed.
• Emergency contraception is not usually
needed but can be considered if delayed
insertion or reinsertion occurred earlier in
the cycle or in the last week of the previous
cycle.

• Insert ring as soon as possible.
• Keep the ring in until the scheduled ring
removal day.
• Use back-up contraception (e.g., condoms)
or avoid sexual intercourse until a ring has
been worn for 7 consecutive days.
• If the ring removal occurred in the third
week of ring use:
– Omit the hormone-free week by
finishing the third week of ring use and
starting a new ring immediately.
– If unable to start a new ring
immediately, use back-up contraception
(e.g., condoms) or avoid sexual
intercourse until a new ring has been
worn for 7 consecutive days.
• Emergency contraception should be
considered if the delayed insertion or
reinsertion occurred within the first week of
ring use and unprotected sexual intercourse
occurred in the previous 5 days.
• Emergency contraception may also be
considered at other times as appropriate.

*If removal takes place but the woman is unsure of how long the ring has been removed, consider
the ring to have been removed for 48 hours since a ring should have been inserted or reinserted.

Fig. 160.6 Algorithm showing recommended actions after delayed insertion or reinsertion with combined vaginal ring. (From Curtis KM, Jatlaoui
TC, Tepper NK, et al. U.S. selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65[RR-­4]:1–66, Fig. 4, p. 29.)

Table 160.5  Possible Indications for Emergency
Contraception
SEXUAL ASSAULT
HIGH-­RISK SEXUAL ACTIVITY
No contraception during intercourse
Intoxication (alcohol, drugs)
Coitus interruptus
CONTRACEPTION FAILURES
Condom breaking, spillage, leaks, intentional removal
Dislodgement and/or breaking of diaphragm, female condom,
cervical cap
Expulsion of IUD
Spermicide failure to melt before coitus
DELAYED OR MISSED CONTRACEPTION
2 consecutive missed days of combined oral contraceptive
1 missed day of progestin-­only oral contraceptives
>2-­wk late injection of depot medroxyprogesterone
≥2 days late start of vaginal ring or patch cycle
Incorrect timing of spermicide/gel before sexual activity
OTHER
Exposure to teratogens in the absence of contraception
IUD, Intrauterine device.

contraception (EC) refers to methods of contraception that are used
after sexual intercourse to reduce the risk of pregnancy but do not
interrupt an existing pregnancy. EC may be used up to 120 hours after
unprotected intercourse or contraceptive failure. Table 160.5 lists the
indications for use of EC. EC methods include the Cu IUD, LNG 52-­
mg IUD, and emergency contraceptive pills, which include ulipristal acetate, LNG, and COCs following the Yuzpe method. Although

the mechanism of action of the IUD as EC is unclear, all emergency
contraceptive pills work to delay ovulation and are effective only for
intercourse that occurs before administration. Initiation of a regular
contraceptive method is necessary to prevent pregnancy for any intercourse that occurs for the remainder of the cycle and for future cycles. If
pregnancy has already occurred, emergency contraceptive pills will not
terminate an existing pregnancy or have teratogenic effects on the fetus.
Teens can access EC information through a hotline at
888-­NOT-­2-­LATE to obtain EC pills over the counter (OTC). The
Guttmacher Institute maintains an up-­
to-­
date listing on EC. The
ACOG and AAP recommend advance provision of EC pills for at-­risk
adolescents to remove barriers to access and increase awareness of the
utility of EC. No examination or testing is required before use of EC,
but a follow-­up appointment is recommended to determine the effectiveness of treatment and to diagnose a possible early pregnancy. The
visit also provides an opportunity to counsel the adolescent, explore
the situation leading up to the unprotected intercourse or contraceptive failure, test for STIs, offer HIV testing, and engage in a discussion
about contraception when appropriate. It is also important to engage
adolescent males in discussions about the availability and use of EC
if they have engaged in unprotected intercourse, especially when and
how to access Plan B, which is available OTC.

COPPER IUD

The CuT380A (Paragard) is not FDA approved for EC, but it has been
shown to be >99% effective if used within 5 days (120 hours) after
unprotected sex. The additional benefit of using the Cu IUD for EC is
that it also provides long-­term reversible contraception. Efficacy of the
Cu-­IUD is not affected by BMI.

LNG 52-­mg IUD

The Mirena IUD is not FDA approved for EC, but studies have shown
it is as effective/noninferior to the Cu-­IUD for EC if used within 5 days
(120 hours) after unprotected sex. Similar to the Cu-­IUD, it also provides
long-­term reversible contraception and efficacy is not affected by BMI.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 160 u Contraception
ULIPRISTAL ACETATE

Ulipristal acetate (UPA) is available for EC and is FDA approved for
use up to 120 hours after unprotected sex. UPA is available only by
prescription regardless of age. A few studies have shown it to be more
effective than LNG at and beyond 72 hours. If starting OC pills after
taking UPA, it is recommended to start or resume pills no sooner than 5
days after taking UPA to avoid decreased efficacy of contraceptive pills
as a result of its antiestrogenic effect. Studies have shown an increased
risk of ovulation if COC pills are started immediately after UPA use.
Studies have not looked at UPA efficacy when Depo or a progestin-­
containing LARC is initiated immediately after UPA use. If starting
a method requires an extra visit (e.g., IUDs, implant, Depo-­Provera),
starting the method at the time of ulipristal use may be considered,
weighing the risk of decreasing the effectiveness of ulipristal with the
risk of not starting a contraceptive method. Patients should be encouraged to take a pregnancy test within 3 weeks after UPA use either in
the office or on their own. Studies have suggested UPA is less effective
in overweight and obese women (BMI >25). This should be discussed
with patients, and all attempts should be made to provide UPA as soon
as possible after unprotected sexual activity.

LEVONORGESTREL

In 2013 the FDA approved the emergency contraceptive drug Plan B
One-­Step as an OTC option for all persons of childbearing potential.
Experience with adolescents has demonstrated more effective use of
EC with advance provision, and this is not associated with more frequent unprotected intercourse or less condom and/or pill use. Nausea and vomiting are uncommon side effects, and LNG has been
shown to be more effective at preventing pregnancy than the Yuzpe
method. However, LNG has been shown to be less effective than UPA
when taken ≥72 hours and in women who are obese and overweight
(BMI >25). This should be discussed with women in deciding with EC
method is most appropriate for use. Patients should be encouraged to
take a pregnancy test within 3 weeks after EC use either in the office or
on their own.

Yuzpe Method

The Yuzpe method has been replaced by the more effective methods of
EC, but may be useful for women who do not have access to other methods and/or already have COCs at home and desire EC. It is most effective
when taken up to 72 hours after unprotected intercourse. For EC, COC
pills with 200 μg ethinyl estradiol and 2 mg norgestrel or 1 mg levonorgestrel should be taken in two doses, 12 hours apart. This method is effective in reducing the risk of pregnancy by 75%. The most common side
effects are nausea (50%) and vomiting (20%), prompting some clinicians
to prescribe or recommend antiemetics along with the COCs.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.7 Condoms

1227

prevent pregnancy. Although condom use at last sexual intercourse
had steadily increased from the early 1990s to the mid-­2000s, the
percentage of students reporting condom use at last intercourse has
remained stable, with 54% of adolescents reporting condom use at last
intercourse. Earlier increases in condom use were thought to be the
result of increased awareness of HIV risks. Only 9% of high school
students reported using dual methods of contraception (condom plus
something else) at last intercourse. The main advantages of condoms
are their low price, availability without prescription, male involvement
in the responsibility for contraception, and effectiveness in preventing transmission of STIs, including HIV and human papillomavirus
(HPV). The typical-­use failure rate for male condoms is 18% for all
users and is thought to be higher in adolescents. For the most effective
dual protection, male latex condoms are recommended as protection
against STIs and should be used in conjunction with another method
of contraception. According to the National Survey of Family Growth,
only 21.3% of females used another contraceptive method along with a
condom at last sex during the past 12 months.
There is only one female condom available in the United States. It is
available OTC or can be ordered online. It is nonlatex. It can be harder to
use properly and has a higher typical-­use failure rate (21%) than the male
condoms. There are no human studies demonstrating its effectiveness
against STIs. Adolescents intending to use this method should be provided
education on proper use and hands-­on practice to ensure effective use.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.8 Other Barrier Methods
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
Although these methods are not widely available or used, they are
important to know about for patients who wish to use nonhormonal
contraception at the time of intercourse.

DIAPHRAGM, CERVICAL CAP, AND SPONGE

These methods have few side effects but are much less likely to be
used by teenagers. Typical-­use failure rates exceed 14%. The sponge
has limited OTC availability in the United States, and the cervical cap
and diaphragm require a visit with a healthcare provider for fitting.
The cervical cap and sponge have lower failure rates in nulliparous
women, whereas the diaphragm has similar rates among nulliparous
and parous women. The sponge is used with water, whereas the cervical cap and diaphragm are used with spermicide before being placed
over the cervix. Adolescents may feel less comfortable and be less likely
to use these methods because of the messiness of the jelly or the need
for insertion and removal interrupting the spontaneity of sex (to be
inserted before sex and left in for several hours afterward). Spermicide
must be reapplied before every act of intercourse. Adolescents may also
be less comfortable touching their genitals.

Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
The use of condoms is the only contraceptive method that protects
against pregnancy and STIs, including HIV. Condoms, also referred
to as barrier contraception, prevent sperm from being deposited in the
vagina. The use of condoms in conjunction with hormonal contraception (or Cu IUD) is always recommended to reduce the risk of pregnancy and protect against STIs. This is sometimes referred to as dual
protection. Although correct and consistent condom use with every act
of sexual intercourse theoretically protects against pregnancy and STIs,
providers should encourage adolescents to use condoms for STI/HIV
protection along with a more effective method for pregnancy protection.
No major medical side effects are associated with condom use, and
condoms are available for use by males and females. Nonlatex condoms
are available for those with a latex allergy, and these include lambskin
and synthetic polyurethane condoms. Lambskin condoms do not protect against HIV and other viral infections, although they do work to

160.9 Other Contraceptive Methods
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
The only OTC spermicide available in the United States is Nonoxynol­9 (N-­9). It is available as a foam, film, gel, cream, suppository, and
tablet. It must be placed in the vagina no more than 1 hour before
intercourse and again before each act of intercourse/ejaculation. Side
effects, although rare, include local irritation or contact vaginitis. There
have been concerns about the vaginal and cervical mucosal damage
observed with N-­9 and its impact on HIV transmission. Results thus
far have been inconclusive. There were some studies that suggested
that N-­9 is gonococcicidal and spirocheticidal, but this has not been
substantiated in randomized clinical trials. Spermicides should be used
in combination with barrier methods because their typical-­use failure
rate alone is 21%

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1228 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Phexxi is a prescription vaginal gel that is FDA approved. It is nonhormonal and user controlled. It can be used alone or in conjunction
with other methods, although it is not recommended for use with the
intravaginal ring. It is prepackaged in a single-­dose applicator and must
be inserted intravaginally up to 1 hour before vaginal intercourse. It
works to maintain vaginal pH in an acidic range (∼3.5 to 4.5) despite
the presence of alkaline semen/sperm, which limits motility and incapacitates sperm. When compared with other OTC spermicidal gels,
Phexxi has a higher viscosity, which minimizes vaginal leakage of the
product and is thought to further affect sperm motility and provide
an additional barrier to cervical penetration. Data also suggest Phexxi
may have microbicidal effects in that by maintaining an acidic vaginal pH, Phexxi may enhance the vagina’s natural microbicidal mechanisms. This effect seems more consistent and reliable than what has
been found with the use of N-­9. As with N-­9, the most commonly
reported side effect was vaginal discomfort and irritation. There has
been no evidence that it affects HIV transmission. It should not be used
in women with recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs) or any urinary
tract abnormalities.

15-­to 19-­year-­old females consistently used contraceptive methods at
last intercourse.
The improvement in U.S. female teen birthrates is attributed to
three factors: more teens are delaying the onset of sexual intercourse,
are using some form of contraception when they begin to have sexual
intercourse, and are using long-­lasting contraceptive agents such as
injections, implants, and intrauterine devices (IUDs).
Most pregnancies among U.S. adolescents are unintended (unwanted
or mistimed); 88% of births to teenagers 15-­17 years old were the result
of unintended pregnancies. Birthrate statistics underestimate actual
adolescent pregnancy rates because the birthrate numerator includes
the number of actual births per 1,000 individuals in that age-­group, but
the pregnancy rate includes actual births, abortions, and best estimates
of fetal loss per 1,000 adolescents in that age-­group.
The reported abortion rate among adolescents in 2019 for those <15
years of age was 0.4 per 1,000 females (of the same age-­group), and for
those 15-­19 years, it was 6.0 per 1,000; this compares to the most common age for having an abortion (20-­29) of 18-­19 per 1,000 females. It
is unknown how many abortions go unreported (see Chapter 161.1).

WITHDRAWAL

ETIOLOGY

The pregnancy risk with use of withdrawal as a contraceptive method
is probably underestimated in adolescents, and a high typical-­use failure rate of 20% should be specifically addressed with all adolescents,
given that up to 60% of teens have reported using withdrawal for
contraception.

FERTILITY AWARENESS–BASED METHODS

Fertility awareness methods require that one be aware of the fertile
days of their menstrual cycle and either avoid intercourse during that
time or use barrier contraception. Methods typically involve calculating the length of one’s menstrual cycle, observing changes in body temperature and/or cervical secretions. Fertility awareness methods are
based on regular ovulatory cycles, which are less common in teens, and
therefore fertility awareness methods may be difficult for a teenager to
use effectively. Methods include the Standard Days method, basal body
temperature method, Billings method, and lactational amenorrhea. Be
aware that the lactational amenorrhea method may be a highly effective, temporary contraceptive method if the following criteria are met:
(1) no return of menses, (2) the infant is <6 months old, and (3) the
woman is exclusively breastfeeding. There is an FDA-­approved mobile
application—Natural Cycles—that may be used to best predict fertility
days to plan for abstinence or barrier contraceptive use. Other apps do
exist, but they are not FDA approved.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 161

Adolescent Pregnancy
Cora Collette Breuner
EPIDEMIOLOGY

There has been a trend of decreasing teen births and pregnancies since
1991 (Fig. 161.1). Teen birthrates in the United States are at a historic
low secondary to increased use of contraception at first intercourse,
use of dual methods of condoms and hormonal contraception among
sexually active teenagers, and access to abortion (see Chapter 161.1).
Despite these data, the United States continues to lead other industrialized countries in having high rates of adolescent pregnancy, with
>700,000 pregnancies per year. Nonetheless, the National Survey of
Family Growth (NSFG) 2006–2010 revealed that less than one third of

In industrialized countries with policies supporting access to protection against pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections (STIs),
older adolescents are more likely to use hormonal contraceptives and
condoms, resulting in a lowered risk of unplanned pregnancy. Younger
teenagers are likely to be less deliberate and logical about their sexual
decisions, and their sexual activity is likely to be sporadic or even coercive, contributing to inconsistent contraceptive use and a greater risk
of unplanned pregnancy. Better personal hopes for employment and
higher educational goals are associated with lowered probability of
childbearing in most groups. In nonindustrialized countries, laws permitting marriage of young and mid-­teens, poverty, and limited female
education are associated with increased adolescent pregnancy rates.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Adolescents may experience the traditional symptoms of pregnancy:
morning sickness (vomiting, nausea that may also occur any time of
the day), swollen tender breasts, weight gain, and amenorrhea. Often
the presentation is less classic; headache, fatigue, abdominal pain,
dizziness, and scanty or irregular menses are common presenting
complaints.
In the pediatric office, some teens are reluctant to divulge concerns
of pregnancy. Denial of sexual activity and menstrual irregularity
should not preclude the diagnosis in face of other clinical or historical information. An unanticipated request for a complete checkup or a
visit for contraception may uncover a suspected pregnancy. Pregnancy
is still the most common diagnosis when adolescents present with secondary amenorrhea.

DIAGNOSIS

Table 161.1 provides classic symptoms, laboratory tests, and physical
changes in the diagnosis of pregnancy.
On physical examination, the findings of an enlarged uterus, cervical
cyanosis (Chadwick sign), a soft uterus (Hegar sign), or a soft cervix
(Goodell sign) are highly suggestive of an intrauterine pregnancy. A
confirmatory pregnancy test is always recommended, either qualitative or quantitative. Modern qualitative urinary detection methods are
efficient at detecting pregnancy, whether performed at home or in the
office. These tests are based on detection of the beta subunit of human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Although claims for nonprescription
home pregnancy tests may indicate 98% detection on the day of the
first missed menstrual period, sensitivity and accuracy vary considerably. Office or point-­of-­care tests have increased standardization and
generally have increased sensitivity, with the possibility of detecting a
pregnancy within 3-­4 days after implantation. However, in any menstrual cycle, ovulation may be delayed, and in any pregnancy, the day
of implantation may vary considerably, as may rate of production of
hCG. This variability, along with variation of urinary concentration,
may affect test sensitivity. Consequently, each negative test should be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 161 u Adolescent Pregnancy

Rate per 1,000 females

100

80

18–19 years

60
15–19 years
40
15–17 years
20

0
1991

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020
2021

Fig. 161.1 Birth rates for teenagers by age of mother: United States,

final 1991–2020 and provisional 2021. Source: National Center for
Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, Natality. (From Hamilton BE, Martin JA, Osterman JA, Division of Vital Statistics, National
Center for Health Statistics. Births: provisional data for 2021. Nat Vital
Stats Rapid Release. 2022;20, Fig. 2.)

Table 161.1  Diagnosis of Pregnancy Dated from First Day
of Last Menstrual Cycle
CLASSIC SYMPTOMS
Missed menses, breast tenderness, nipple sensitivity, nausea,
vomiting, fatigue, abdominal and back pain, weight gain, urinary
frequency.
Teens may present with unrelated symptoms that enable them to
visit the doctor and maintain confidentiality.
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
Tests for human chorionic gonadotropin in urine or blood may be
positive 7-­10 days after fertilization, depending on sensitivity.
Irregular menses make ovulation/fertilization difficult to predict.
Home pregnancy tests have a high error rate.
PHYSICAL CHANGES
2-­3 wk after implantation: cervical softening and cyanosis.
8 wk: uterus size of orange.
12 wk: uterus size of grapefruit and palpable suprapubically.
20 wk: uterus at umbilicus.
If physical findings are not consistent with dates, ultrasound will
confirm.

repeated in 1-­4 weeks if there is a heightened suspicion of pregnancy. The
most sensitive pregnancy detection test is a serum quantitative βhCG
radioimmunoassay, with reliable results within 7 days after fertilization. This more expensive test is used primarily during evaluations for
ectopic pregnancy, to detect retained placenta after pregnancy termination, or in the management of a molar pregnancy. It is used when
serial measurements are necessary in clinical management.
Although not used for primary diagnosis of pregnancy, pelvic or
vaginal ultrasound can be helpful in detecting and dating a pregnancy.
Pelvic ultrasound will detect a gestational sac at about 5-­6 weeks (dated
from last menstrual period) and vaginal ultrasound at 4.5-­5 weeks.
This tool may also be used to distinguish diagnostically between intrauterine and ectopic pregnancies.

PREGNANCY COUNSELING AND INITIAL
MANAGEMENT

Once the diagnosis of pregnancy is made, it is important to begin
addressing the psychosocial and the medical aspects of the pregnancy.

1229

The patient’s response to the pregnancy should be assessed and her
emotional issues addressed. It should not be assumed that the pregnancy was unintended. Discussion of the patient’s options should be
initiated. These options include (1) releasing the child to an adoptive
family, (2) electively terminating the pregnancy, and (3) raising the
child herself with the help of family, father of the baby, friends, and/
or other social resources. Options should be presented in a supportive,
informative, nonjudgmental fashion; for some young women, they may
need to be discussed over several visits. Physicians who are uncomfortable in presenting options to their young patients should refer their
patients to a provider who can provide this service expeditiously. Pregnancy terminations implemented early in the pregnancy are generally
less risky and less expensive than those initiated later. These include
the prescription use of mifepristone and misoprostol within 10 weeks
(the World Health Organization [WHO] recommends 12 weeks) of the
pregnancy (see Chapter 161.1).
Other issues that may need discussion are how to inform and involve
the patient’s parents and the father of the infant; implementing strategies for ensuring continuation of the young mother’s education; discontinuation of tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drug use; discontinuance
and avoidance of any medications that may be considered teratogenic;
starting folic acid, calcium, and iron supplements; proper nutrition;
and testing for STIs. Especially in younger adolescents, the possibility
of coercive sex (see Chapter 162) must be considered and appropriate social work/legal referrals made if abuse has occurred, although
most pregnancies are not a result of coercive sex. Patients who elect to
continue their pregnancy should be referred as soon as possible to an
adolescent-­friendly obstetric provider.
Risk factors for teen pregnancy include growing up in poverty, having parents with low levels of education, growing up in a single-­parent
family, fewer opportunities in their community for positive youth
involvement, neighborhood physical disorder, foster care (such teens
are more than twice as likely to become pregnant than those not in
foster care), and having poor performance in school (see “Psychosocial
Outcomes/Risks for Mother and Child” later).

The Importance of Prevention

Teen pregnancy and childbearing bring substantial social and economic costs through immediate and long-­term impacts on teen parents
and their children. In 2010, teen pregnancy and childbirth accounted
for at least $9.4 billion in costs for increased healthcare and foster care,
increased incarceration rates among children of teen parents, and
lost tax revenue because of lower educational attainment and income
among teen mothers.

ADOLESCENT FATHERS

Those who become fathers as adolescents also have poorer educational
achievement than their age-­matched peers. They are more likely than
other peers to have been involved with illegal activities and with the
use of illegal substances. Adult men who father the children of teen
mothers are poorer and educationally less advanced than their age-­
matched peers and tend to be 2-­3 years older than the mother, but any
combination of age differences may exist. Younger teen mothers are
more likely to have a greater age difference between themselves and the
father of their child, raising the issue of coercive sex or statutory rape
(see Chapter 162).
Male partners have a significant influence on the young woman’s
decision/desire to become pregnant and to parent her child. Sensitively
and appropriately including the male partner in discussions of family planning, contraception, and pregnancy options may be a useful
strategy in improving outcomes for all. This can only be successful if
the young female patient is willing to have her partner involved in such
discussions.

MEDICAL COMPLICATIONS OF MOTHERS AND
BABIES

Although pregnant teens are at higher-­than-­average risk for some
complications of pregnancy, most teenagers have pregnancies that are
without major medical complications, delivering healthy infants. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1230 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
miscarriage/stillbirth risk for adolescents is estimated at 15–20%. In
the United States, elective pregnancy termination rates peaked from
1985 to 1988 at 41–46%, decreasing since then to approximately 30%
in 2008. Teen mothers have low rates of age-­related chronic disease
(diabetes or hypertension) that might affect the outcomes of a pregnancy. They also have lower rates of twin pregnancies than older
women. They tolerate childbirth well with few operative interventions.
However, compared with 20-­to 39-­year-­old mothers, teens have higher
incidences of low birthweight infants, preterm infants, neonatal deaths,
passage of moderate to heavy fetal meconium during parturition, and
infant deaths within 1 year after birth. The highest rates of poor outcomes occur in the youngest and most economically disadvantaged
mothers. Gastroschisis, although rare, has a much higher incidence
in infants of teen mothers, for reasons that are unclear. Teen mothers
also have higher rates of anemia, pregnancy-­associated hypertension,
and eclampsia, with the youngest teens having rates of pregnancy-­
associated hypertension higher than the rates of women in their 20s
and 30s. The youngest teens also have a higher incidence of poor weight
gain (<16 lb) during their pregnancy. This correlates with a decrease in
the birthweights of their infants. Poor maternal weight gain also has
correlated strongly with teens’ late entrance into prenatal care and with
inadequate use of prenatal care. Sexually active teens have higher rates
of STIs than older sexually active women.
Globally, many young women who become pregnant have been
exposed to violence or abuse in some form during their lives. There is
some evidence that teenage women have the highest rates of violence
during pregnancy of any group. Violence has been associated with
injuries and death as well as preterm births, low birthweight, bleeding, substance abuse, and late entrance into prenatal care. An analysis
of the Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System indicates that in the
United States 1991–1999, homicide was the second leading cause of
injury-­related deaths in pregnant and postpartum women. Women age
19 years and younger had the highest pregnancy-­related homicide rate
(see Chapter 156).
Ectopic pregnancy occurs in 1–2% of conceptions and is more common in women with a previous history of an ectopic pregnancy, pelvic
inflammatory disease, prior appendicitis, infertility, in utero exposure
to diethylstilbestrol, and possibly an IUD. Most ectopic pregnancies are
in the fallopian tube (tubal pregnancy). Manifestations include vaginal
spotting after a missed menstrual period that may progress to more
intense vaginal bleeding (suggestive of spontaneous abortion); vaginal
bleeding is absent in 10–20%. Abdominal pain is associated with distention of the fallopian tube; tubal rupture results in more intense pain,
hemorrhagic shock, and peritonitis. Some women have nonspecific
abdominal complaints and are misdiagnosed with gastroenteritis. Cervical motion and adnexal tenderness (and adnexal mass) may be present. Transvaginal sonography (not transabdominal) is the diagnostic
test of choice to detect an ectopic pregnancy and reveals an adnexal
mass and no uterine pregnancy. Nonetheless, some women will have
pregnancy of unknown location by transvaginal sonography; approximately 20% of these will have an ectopic pregnancy. Measurement of
sensitive quantitative serum βhCG levels together with transvaginal
sonography has value in diagnosing an ectopic pregnancy. If the initial βhCG is above the discriminatory zone (level at which one expects
an intrauterine pregnancy) but on transvaginal sonography there is
no intrauterine pregnancy, there may be an ectopic pregnancy or an
abnormal uterine pregnancy. In addition, if the βhCG is below the
discriminatory level (usually <3,000 mIU/mL) with no definitive diagnosis by sonography, serial βhCG testing should be performed every
48 hours. In a normal uterine pregnancy, βhCG levels should increase
approximately 50% every 48 hours; declining levels may suggest a miscarriage or an ectopic pregnancy. Some would perform a dilation and
curettage and check for products of conception or follow serial βhCG
levels. If there are no products of conception or if βhCG levels plateau
or increase, an ectopic pregnancy is present. Treatment of unstable or
advanced patients is usually by laparoscopic surgery or by laparotomy.
Because of early detection, many patients remain stable (unruptured).
Stable patients with an unruptured ectopic pregnancy may be treated
with single-­dose, or more often, multidose methotrexate to induce

abortion. Contraindications to methotrexate in a stable patient include
size of the ectopic mass (>3.5 cm) and embryonic cardiac motion.
Prematurity and low birthweight increase the perinatal morbidity and mortality for infants of teen mothers. These infants also have
higher-­than-­average rates of sudden infant death syndrome (see Chapter 423), possibly because of less use of the supine sleep position or
cosleeping, and are at higher risk of both intentional and unintentional
injury (see Chapter 17). One study showed that the risk of homicide is
9-­10 times higher if a child born to a teen mother is not the mother’s
firstborn compared with the risk to a firstborn of a woman age 25 years
or older. The perpetrator is often the father, stepfather, or boyfriend of
the mother.
After childbirth, depressive symptoms may occur in as many as 50%
of teen mothers. Depression seems to be greater with additional social
stressors and with decreased social supports. Support from the infant’s
father and the teen’s mother seems to be especially important in preventing depression. Pediatricians who care for parenting teens should
be sensitive to the possibility of depression, as well as to inflicted injury
to mother or child; appropriate diagnosis, treatment, and referral to
mental health or social agencies should be offered and facilitated.

PSYCHOSOCIAL OUTCOMES/RISKS FOR MOTHER
AND CHILD
Educational Issues

Pregnancy and birth are significant contributors to high school dropout rates among girls. Only about 50% of teen mothers receive a high
school diploma by age 22, whereas approximately 90% of women who
do not give birth during adolescence graduate from high school. Mothers who have given birth as teens generally remain 2 years behind their
age-­matched peers in formal educational attainment at least through
their third decade. Maternal lack of education limits the income of
many of these young families (see Chapter 1).
The children of teenage mothers are more likely to have lower school
achievement and to drop out of high school, have more health problems, and face unemployment as a young adult.

Substance Use

See also Chapter 157.
Teenagers who abuse drugs, alcohol, and tobacco have higher pregnancy rates than their peers. Most substance-­abusing mothers appear
to decrease or stop their substance use while pregnant. Use begins to
increase again about 6 months postpartum, complicating the parenting
process and the mother’s return to school.

Repeat Pregnancy

In the United States, approximately 20% of all births to adolescent
mothers (age 15-­19) are second order or higher. Prenatal care is begun
even later with a second pregnancy, and the second infant is at higher
risk of poor outcome than the first birth. Mothers at risk of early repeat
pregnancy (<2 years) include those who do not initiate long-­acting
contraceptives after the index birth, those who do not return to school
within 6 months of the index birth, those with mood disorders, those
receiving major childcare assistance from the adolescent’s mother,
those who are married or living with the infant’s father, those having peers who were adolescent parents, and those who are no longer
involved with the baby’s father and who meet a new boyfriend who
wants to have a child. To reduce repeat pregnancy rates in these teens,
programs must be tailored for this population, preferably offering
comprehensive healthcare for both the young mother and her child.
Healthcare providers should remember to provide positive reinforcement for teen parenting successes (i.e., compliment teen parents when
they are doing a good job).

Children Born to Teen Mothers

Many children born to teen mothers have behavioral problems that
may be seen as early as the preschool period. Many drop out of school
early (33%), become adolescent parents (25%), or, if male, are incarcerated (16%). Explanations for these poor outcomes include poverty,
parental learning difficulties, negative parenting styles of teen parents,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 161 u Adolescent Pregnancy
maternal depression, parental immaturity, poor parental modeling,
social stress, exposure to surrounding violence, and conflicts with
grandparents, especially grandmothers. Continued positive paternal
involvement throughout the child’s life may be somewhat protective
against negative outcomes. Many of these poor outcomes appear to be
attributable to the socioeconomic/demographic situation in which the
teen pregnancy has occurred, not solely to maternal age. Even when
socioeconomic status and demographics are controlled, infants of teen
mothers have lower achievement scores, lower high school graduation
rates, increased risk of teen births themselves, and, at least in Illinois
(where records include age of birth mother), a higher probability of
abuse and neglect.
Comprehensive programs focused on supporting adolescent mothers and infants using life skills training, medical care, and psychosocial
support demonstrate higher employment rates, higher income, and less
welfare dependency in participating adolescents.

PREVENTION OF TEEN PREGNANCIES

Adolescent pregnancy is a multifaceted problem that requires multifactorial solutions. The provision of contraception and education
about fertility risk from the primary care physician is important but
insufficient to address the problem fully. Family and community
involvement are essential elements for teen pregnancy prevention.
Strategies for primary prevention (preventing first birth) are different from the strategies needed for secondary prevention (preventing second or more births). Over the past 30 years, many models of
teen pregnancy prevention programs have been implemented and
evaluated. Table 161.2 lists the common components of successful
evidence-­based programs.
Abstinence-­only sexual education aims to teach adolescents to wait
until marriage to initiate sexual activity but, unfortunately, does not
mention contraception. Abstinence education is sometimes coupled
with “virginity pledges” in which teenagers pledge to remain abstinent
until they marry. Other educational programs emphasize HIV and
STI prevention and in the process prevent pregnancy, whereas others
include both abstinence and contraception in their curricula. Sex education and teaching about contraception do not lead to an increase in
sexual activity. Teenagers who participate in programs with comprehensive sex education components generally have lower rates of pregnancy than those exposed solely to abstinence-­only programs or no sex
education at all.
In many U.S. communities, programs that engage youth in community service and that combine sex education and youth development
are also successful in deterring pregnancy. Programs vary in their sites
of service from schools to social agencies, health clinics, youth organizations, and churches. Programs must be tailored to the cultural background, ethnicity, age-­group, and gender of the group being targeted
for the prevention services.

Table 161.2  Common Components of Most Successful
Evidence-­Based Programs to Prevent Teen
Pregnancy
• Information is provided about the benefits of abstinence.
• Information is provided about contraception for those who are
already sexually active.
• Information is provided about the signs and symptoms of STIs
and how to prevent STIs.
• Interactive sessions on peer pressure are presented.
• Teenagers are taught communication skills.
• Programs are tailored to meet the needs of specific groups of
young people (e.g., young men or young women, cultural groups,
younger or older teens).
STI, Sexually transmitted infection.
Adapted from Suellentrop K. What Works 2011–2012: Curriculum-­Based Programs That
Help Prevent Teen Pregnancy. Washington, DC: National Campaign to Prevent Teen
and Unplanned Pregnancy, http://www.c-­hubonline.org/sites/default/files/resources/m
ain/What_Works_0.pdf.

1231

Secondary prevention programs are fewer in number. In the United
States, some communities have tried to “pay” young mothers not to
become pregnant again, but these efforts have not always been fruitful.
Home visiting by nurses has been successful in some areas, and many
communities have developed “Teen Tot” clinics that provide a “one-­
stop shopping model” for healthcare for both the teen mother and the
baby in the same site at the same time. Both programs have reported
some successes.
In the practice setting, the identification of the sexually active adolescent through a confidential clinical interview is a first step in pregnancy prevention. The primary care physician should provide the
teenager with factual information in a nonjudgmental manner and
then guide the teenager in the decision-­making process of choosing
a contraceptive (see Chapter 160). The practice setting is an ideal setting to support the teenager who chooses to remain abstinent. When
a teenager does become pregnant and requires prenatal care services,
healthcare providers should remember that the pregnant teenager is
an adolescent who has become pregnant, not a pregnant woman who
happens to be an adolescent.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

161.1 Abortion
Alison S. Kliegman and Robert M. Kliegman
Abortion is a safe, common, and essential reproductive healthcare
evidence–based intervention. Worldwide ∼30% of all pregnancies
and ∼60% of all unintended pregnancies are voluntarily terminated.
In the past by age 45 ∼25% of U.S. pregnant persons had an abortion. The WHO defines abortion as the termination of pregnancy
before 20 weeks’ gestation. Abortions can be voluntary or spontaneous (miscarriages). Access to reproductive care, including abortion care, is considered by all health organizations as a basic human
right. The American Academy of Pediatrics supports a young person’s right of “access to comprehensive, evidence-­based reproductive healthcare services, including abortion.” Abortion should be
available to any person requesting it without a specific indication.
The most common indication is unintended (unplanned) pregnancy, which includes not being able to afford a child, poorly timed
pregnancy, and not having a suitable partner; additional indications
include being subjected to coercive sexual encounters, as well as
medical conditions that place the pregnant person at risk and certain fatal fetal conditions.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Most abortions occur in patients between 20 and 30 years of age (Table
161.3). In addition, the majority of abortions occur in the first trimester (Fig. 161.2). The highest ratio of abortion (number of abortions per
1,000 live births) is noted in persons <15 years (Fig. 161.3). Among
15-­to 19-­year-­olds, the United States has one of the highest rates of
adolescent pregnancy but among one of the lowest rates of adolescent
pregnancies ending in abortion when compared to other developed
countries (Fig. 161.4). Seventy-­five percent of adolescent pregnancies
in the United States are unplanned, while ∼30% end with an abortion
(among those 15-­17 years).

Abortion Care

The WHO 2022 report recommends that:
• Abortions must be decriminalized
• Be made available at request
• Be made available by telemedicine
• Be made available for self-­management, not just in clinic
• Have a wide range of eligible providers
• Provide an enabling environment (Fig. 161.5)
The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine
provides an outline for continuum of abortion care; preabortion, pregnancy termination, and post-­abortion care (Fig. 161.6).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1232 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
1000

Table 161.3  Characteristics of Persons Who Had an
Abortion in an Outpatient Setting in 2014,
by Percent

600

PERCENT

90

Cumulative
% abortions

80

87

82

97

96

100

74

70

65

60
50

50
40

DEN

0
≥4

9
–3
35

30

–3

4

9
–2
SWE

FRA

60

SWI
SIN
NET
SVN

50

NOR
FIN
SPAICE
EST
HUN ENG

40

BEL

SCO NZ

ISR
POR

30

USA

20
SVK

10
0

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Pregnancies per 1,000 females 15–19 years old

Fig. 161.4 Percentage of teen pregnancies ending in abortion is in-

versely correlated with teen pregnancy rate. BEL, Belgium; DEN, Denmark; ENG, England and Wales; EST, Estonia; FIN, Finland; FRA, France;
HUN, Hungary; ICE, Iceland; ISR, Israel; NET, The Netherlands; NOR,
Norway; NZ, New Zealand; POR, Portugal; SCO, Scotland; SIN, Singapore; SPA, Spain; SVK, Slovakia; SVN, Slovenia; SWE, Sweden; SWI,
Switzerland; USA, United States. (From Sedgh G, Finer LB, Bankole A,
et al. Adolescent pregnancy, birth, and abortion rates across countries:
levels and recent trends. J Adolesc Med. 2010;56:223–230, Fig. 1.)

32

30
20
10

4

70

95

93

90

25

gal abortion in selected states of the United States in 2001. Abortion ratio refers to number of abortions per 1,000 live births. (From Strauss LT,
Herndon J, Chang J, et al. Abortion surveillance–United States, 2001.
MMWR Surveill Summ. 2004;53:1–32.)

Note: Percentages may not sum to 100 because of rounding.
Sources: *Jones RK, Jerman J. Characteristics and circumstances of U.S.
women who obtain very early and second trimester abortions. PLoS One.
2017b;12:e0169969 (n = 8,098); †Jerman J, Jones RK, Onda T. Characteristics of
U.S. abortion patients in 2014 and changes since 2008. 2016. [October 17, 2016].
https://www​.guttmacher​.org/sites/default​/files/report_pdf/characteristics-­us-­
abortion-­patients-­2014​.pdf (n = 8,380).
Modified from National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health
and Medicine Division; Board on Health Care Services; Board on Population Health
and Public Health Practice; Committee on Reproductive Health Services. Assessing the
Safety and Quality of Abortion Care in the U.S. Washington, DC: National Academies
Press; 2018: Table 1-­2.

% abortions

–2

Age group (yrs)

Fig. 161.3 Abortion ratio by age-­group of persons who obtained a le-

Family Income as a Percentage of Federal Poverty Level†
<100
49.3
100-­199
25.7
≥200
25.0

100

20

12.2
29.0
39.2
19.7

19

Education*
Not a high school graduate
High school graduate or GED
Some college or associate’s degree
College graduate

5–

29.2
26.0
11.7
33.1

0

5

Prior Pregnancies*
No prior pregnancies
Prior birth only
Prior abortion only
Prior birth and abortion

200

<1

3.6
8.2
33.6
26.3
16.0
12.2

400

<1

Age*
<15-­17
18-­19
20-­24
25-­29
30-­34
35+

Percent of teen pregnancies ending in abortion

CHARACTERISTIC

800

10

14

4 4

18

18

14
10

7

5

4

3

2

1

1

3

0
4

5

6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15
Number of weeks’ gestation at time of abortion

16 17+

Fig. 161.2 Percentage and cumulative percentage of outpatient
abortions by weeks’ gestation, 2014–2015. (From Jones RK, Jerman J.
Characteristics and circumstances of US women who obtain very early
and second trimester abortions. PLoS One 2017; 12(1):e0169969.)

Methods

Abortion methods vary depending on gestational age, location (in
clinic vs self-­managed), and procedure (medical vs surgical). Medically managed abortion (“abortion pill”) is FDA approved up to 10
weeks, although the WHO suggests up to 12 weeks and has also been
used “off label” at later gestational ages. It consists of mifepristone

(a potent progesterone antagonist) 200 mg PO × one dose, followed
within 24-­48 hours by misoprostol 800 μg (a prostaglandin to induce
uterine contractions) by buccal, sublingual, or vaginal routes. Medical abortion represents ∼50% of abortions in the United States
(Fig. 161.7). This treatment is available in clinic but also via telehealth, where a prescriber then mails the medication to be taken at
home (self-­managed medical abortion). This latter mail order availability is FDA-­approved. Self-­managed medical abortion is safe and
∼96% effective; complications are rare (∼1%) and include hemorrhage or infection; no deaths have been reported from self-­managed
medical abortion. Contraindications include porphyria, a bleeding
disorder, taking anticoagulants, adrenal insufficiency, long-­term
systemic steroid use, ectopic pregnancy, and the presence of an IUD.
Acute side effects during a self-­managed abortion are to be expected
and include nausea and vomiting, headaches, diarrhea, and flulike
symptoms and, once the abortion starts, cramping and bleeding.
Excessive bleeding (two or more pads per hour for >2 hours), fever
(>100°F), or severe abdominal pain requires medical attention. After

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 161 u Adolescent Pregnancy

in health systems
n with
atio
r
g
e
Int

Co
m

F

Pre-ab
ort
ion

Priming
, Pa
in
Ant man
ibi
oti age
cs
m

Context-s
peci
fic
ser
vic
e-d
eli
Home
ve
ry
Ph
arm
ac
Self

Fi

services
ther
to o
ks
Lin
cility
el fa
lev
ergh
Hi

Po

kers
wor

Respect for
human rights

Abortion

lth
ea
rh
he

WHO

e

sir
ed
)

M
a

rt
bo
-a
st

WHERE

a
surgical me
rm
al and
tho
edic
fo
ds
In nt, M

,
tion
ep lications
rac p
nt com
Co ing
g
na
ion

HOW

s
entres
Prim
each c
ary
outr
y
t
i
ca
un
re
fa
mm
ci
o
lit
C
o
r
k
w
e
h
r
s
alt
e
h
d
e
s
a
-b
Ot
ty
ili
ounselling (wher
ed
n, c
ac
tio
e
y

y

mo
dit
ie

es
nc
na

es
ch
oa
r
p
ap

1233

WHAT

Ena

Values & Preferences

bling environment

Supportive
framework of
law and policy

Supportive
health systems

Availability and
accessibility
of information

Fig. 161.5 Conceptual framework of the WHO abortion care guidelines. (From World Health Organization. Abortion Care Guideline. Geneva:
World Health Organization; 2022. License: CC BY-­NC-­SA 3.0 IGO. Fig.1 https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240039483.)

the abortion, do not use tampons for ∼5 days and get a pregnancy test
∼3 weeks later to ensure a complete abortion. After that, a contraceptive should be started in sexually active individuals (may not be indicated in cases of rape or incest). Medical abortion has an exceptional
safety record; long-­term studies demonstrate no adverse effect on fertility, premature birth, breast cancer, or mental health issues.
The medications can be available by online consultation from Aid
Access (aidaccess.org); pills will be mailed directly from Aid Access to
persons in all states permitting self-­managed abortion. “Shield laws” protect telemedicine providers serving patients in states where abortion is
illegal.
Surgical methods for abortion require in-­clinic presence and a skilled
provider. These include suction curettage (aspiration method) used
between ∼6 and 16 weeks’ gestation, dilation, and evacuation (∼12-­
24 weeks); induction of labor; and, if necessary, rarely a hysterotomy
(C-­section) at >24 weeks. Anesthesia (local or general) is needed for these
procedures.
Restricting access to or banning legal abortions will not reduce the
total number of abortions but increases the risk of criminalization
and potentially the number of unsafe procedures. On a global basis,
unsafe abortions represent ∼45% of all abortions. Unsafe abortion
increases the risk of incomplete abortion (retained products of conception), hemorrhage, infection, uterine perforation, other organ
injury, and infertility. Restricting access to abortion with resultant
pregnancy will have adverse economic and educational consequences for the pregnant adolescent (see Chapter 161). In addition,
the United States has one of the highest maternal mortality rates

(23.8 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2020) of developed countries.
The risk of death from pregnancy is much higher than from any
form of legal abortion.

Challenges and Barriers

There are multiple logistic and legal challenges to obtaining an abortion. Some are generalizable to all ages, whereas others are specific to
adolescent patients.
Some states have a complete ban against abortions, necessitating travel
to another state or country. In other states, there is a limit to gestational age
(usually first trimester). Many are limiting abortion to 6 weeks or when
fetal heart beats are detected. The majority of states require a physician to
perform an abortion. Some states restrict the use of public funding, and
others restrict private insurance use for abortions. In one study, ∼45% of
fees were paid by the pregnant person; in states that ban Medicaid funding for abortion, the patient pays the full cost. States vary in the requirement for preabortion “counseling” and a waiting period. If “counseling”
is needed, it should be from an abortion provider, not a state mandated
program, which may be biased against abortion.
The criminalization of abortion (the pregnant person, the provider,
others involved) has created a climate of enhanced surveillance and
added barriers. Laws have been proposed to require abortion providers to register all patients requesting an abortion. These reporting mandates will compromise patient-­provider confidentiality and
possibly violate Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) regulations. Nonetheless HIPAA may not be applicable if
legal action is filed against a patient and/or provider. Other laws will

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1234 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Preabortion

Pregnancy termination

• Telehealth
• Physical exam/laboratory tests
• Informed consent
• Patient counseling
• Contraceptive counseling

• Medication
• Aspiration
• Dilation and evacuation
• Induction

Postabortion
• Follow-up care
• Contraceptive services
(referral or provision)

Fig. 161.6 Continuum of abortion care. (Modified from National

Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health and Medicine
Division; Board on Health Care Services; Board on Population Health
and Public Health Practice; Committee on Reproductive Health
Services. Assessing the Safety and Quality of Abortion Care in the U.S.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2018: Fig.1-­1.)

(http://www.aidaccess.org) is an online international abortion consult
service that will make mifepristone/misoprostol available by mail
(including minors). Another site (http://www.ineedana.com) helps
locate the nearest abortion provider, and http://www.elevatedaccess.org
helps arrange flights to legal abortion sites.
Other resources include Women on Web http://www.
womenonweb.org/en/ and Planned Parenthood as a patient navigator
or provider of abortions.
To get help with funding: National Network of Abortion Funds
https://abortionfunds.org/ or https://prochoice.org/
Locating Plan C pills: https://www.plancpills.org/?gclid=CjwKCAjw
_b6WBhAQEiwAp4HyIKGkcL2gncj28MXzfN1eONGC4a3p_I9FLRx
f_4I_v8NZ5HqDD04JwxoC6LQQAvD_BwE
Help with a self-­managed abortion: https://www.mahotline.org/
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Medication abortion
60%

54%*
39%

40

31%

Chapter 162

24%
20

14%

17%

Adolescent Sexual Assault

6%
0%
0
2000

2001

2005

2008

2011

2014

2017

2020

Fig. 161.7 As of 2020, medication abortions account for the majority
of all U.S. abortions. *Based on preliminary data. (From Guttmacher
Institute. Medication abortion now accounts for more than half of all US
abortions, 2022. https://www.guttmacher.org/print/article/2022/02/me
dication-­abortion-­now-­accounts-­more-­half-­all-­us-­abortions.)

permit private citizens to sue pregnant persons having an abortion
or those who help (even those transporting the pregnant person to
another state). With these legal obstacles in place, patients seeking
an abortion must be vigilant in keeping abortion-­seeking behaviors
private and unavailable to litigious prosecution. This should include
internet browsing and searches, text messages, period tracking apps,
payments, and travel plans, all of which may be used as evidence.
Although a self-­managed medically induced abortion is clinically
indistinguishable from a spontaneous miscarriage, a prosecutor
may use electronic information as evidence to identify an induced
abortion.
The concept of fetal personhood and laws defining this as starting at
conception add another legal concern. Fetal personhood proponents
suggest that the unborn fetus has rights similar to a child after birth
and that any action thought to harm the fetus will be considered illegal. Pregnant persons can thus be detained or arrested for actions perceived as harmful to the fetus (beginning in the first trimester). Most
of the cases have been related to a pregnant person’s use of drugs; such
patients have been accused of child abuse or even distributing drugs to
a minor. In addition to the effects that the concept of fetal personhood
will have on abortions, it may have implications for persons with an
IUD, those using emergency contraception, embryos created for IVF,
and those experiencing an ectopic pregnancy.
In addition to challenges experienced by all persons seeking an abortion, adolescents who are minors have age-­specific barriers. Minors may
not be able to travel to locations providing abortion (finances, driver’s
license, purchase airline ticket) and in most states, they are required
to have some form of parental (grandparent or other adult relative in
some states) involvement by notification or actual consent (PNA). PNA
can be avoided by using a judicial bypass after appealing to a judge. In
this case, the judge will determine if the adolescent requesting an abortion is “mature and informed.” States with legal access to abortion may
eliminate PNA altogether (e.g., Illinois).
Various organizations have facilitated access to self-­managed abortions or to provide referrals to the nearest abortion provider. Aid Access

Allison M. Jackson, Adrianne R. Artis, and
Norrell K. Atkinson
Rape is an act of violence, not an act of sex. Rape is historically defined
as coercive sexual intercourse involving physical force or psychologic
manipulation of a female or a male. Recognizing that sexual intercourse is not a requirement for the definition, the U.S. Department of
Justice (DOJ) defines rape as “the penetration, no matter how slight,
of the vagina or anus with any body part or object, or oral penetration
by a sex organ of another person, without the consent of the victim.”
Though definitions may vary by state, sexual assault is a more inclusive
term that according to the U.S. DOJ “means any nonconsensual sexual
act proscribed by Federal, tribal, or State law, including when the victim lacks capacity to consent.”

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Exact figures on the incidence of rape are unavailable because sexual
assault is underreported. In the 2019 National Crime Victimization
Survey, only 0.56 per 1,000 persons over 12 years of age reported sexual assault to police. According to the National Intimate Partner and
Sexual Violence Survey of 2015 (NISVS 2015), over 43% women and
nearly 25% of men experienced some form of sexual violence in their
lifetime. Females exceed males as reported rape victims, but male rape
may be more underreported than female rape.
Adolescence is a high-­risk age-­group for sexual assault, with 43.2%
of females and 51.3% of males experiencing their first sexual assault
before the age of 18 years, and 81.3% of females and 70.8% males experiencing their first sexual assault before the age of 25 years (NISVS 2015).
Between 1995 and 2013 the rate of rape and sexual assault was highest
for adolescent females between ages 18 and 24 years. The National Survey of Children’s Exposure to Violence (NatSCEV 2014) revealed that
12.9% of 14-­to 17-­year-­olds experienced any sexual victimization in
the past year, 21.7% had experienced any sexual victimization in their
lifetime, 4.2% experienced sexual assault in the past year, and 10.2% in
their lifetime. This survey also demonstrated how other experiences
with violence compound the risk for sexual victimization. Youth with
a history of maltreatment by a caregiver were four times more likely to
experience sexual victimization and more than four times more likely
to experience sexual victimization if they were a witness to violence.
Among older adolescents age 18-­24 years, the rate of rape and sexual

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1234 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Preabortion

Pregnancy termination

• Telehealth
• Physical exam/laboratory tests
• Informed consent
• Patient counseling
• Contraceptive counseling

• Medication
• Aspiration
• Dilation and evacuation
• Induction

Postabortion
• Follow-up care
• Contraceptive services
(referral or provision)

Fig. 161.6 Continuum of abortion care. (Modified from National

Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health and Medicine
Division; Board on Health Care Services; Board on Population Health
and Public Health Practice; Committee on Reproductive Health
Services. Assessing the Safety and Quality of Abortion Care in the U.S.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2018: Fig.1-­1.)

(http://www.aidaccess.org) is an online international abortion consult
service that will make mifepristone/misoprostol available by mail
(including minors). Another site (http://www.ineedana.com) helps
locate the nearest abortion provider, and http://www.elevatedaccess.org
helps arrange flights to legal abortion sites.
Other resources include Women on Web http://www.
womenonweb.org/en/ and Planned Parenthood as a patient navigator
or provider of abortions.
To get help with funding: National Network of Abortion Funds
https://abortionfunds.org/ or https://prochoice.org/
Locating Plan C pills: https://www.plancpills.org/?gclid=CjwKCAjw
_b6WBhAQEiwAp4HyIKGkcL2gncj28MXzfN1eONGC4a3p_I9FLRx
f_4I_v8NZ5HqDD04JwxoC6LQQAvD_BwE
Help with a self-­managed abortion: https://www.mahotline.org/
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Medication abortion
60%

54%*
39%

40

31%

Chapter 162

24%
20

14%

17%

Adolescent Sexual Assault

6%
0%
0
2000

2001

2005

2008

2011

2014

2017

2020

Fig. 161.7 As of 2020, medication abortions account for the majority
of all U.S. abortions. *Based on preliminary data. (From Guttmacher
Institute. Medication abortion now accounts for more than half of all US
abortions, 2022. https://www.guttmacher.org/print/article/2022/02/me
dication-­abortion-­now-­accounts-­more-­half-­all-­us-­abortions.)

permit private citizens to sue pregnant persons having an abortion
or those who help (even those transporting the pregnant person to
another state). With these legal obstacles in place, patients seeking
an abortion must be vigilant in keeping abortion-­seeking behaviors
private and unavailable to litigious prosecution. This should include
internet browsing and searches, text messages, period tracking apps,
payments, and travel plans, all of which may be used as evidence.
Although a self-­managed medically induced abortion is clinically
indistinguishable from a spontaneous miscarriage, a prosecutor
may use electronic information as evidence to identify an induced
abortion.
The concept of fetal personhood and laws defining this as starting at
conception add another legal concern. Fetal personhood proponents
suggest that the unborn fetus has rights similar to a child after birth
and that any action thought to harm the fetus will be considered illegal. Pregnant persons can thus be detained or arrested for actions perceived as harmful to the fetus (beginning in the first trimester). Most
of the cases have been related to a pregnant person’s use of drugs; such
patients have been accused of child abuse or even distributing drugs to
a minor. In addition to the effects that the concept of fetal personhood
will have on abortions, it may have implications for persons with an
IUD, those using emergency contraception, embryos created for IVF,
and those experiencing an ectopic pregnancy.
In addition to challenges experienced by all persons seeking an abortion, adolescents who are minors have age-­specific barriers. Minors may
not be able to travel to locations providing abortion (finances, driver’s
license, purchase airline ticket) and in most states, they are required
to have some form of parental (grandparent or other adult relative in
some states) involvement by notification or actual consent (PNA). PNA
can be avoided by using a judicial bypass after appealing to a judge. In
this case, the judge will determine if the adolescent requesting an abortion is “mature and informed.” States with legal access to abortion may
eliminate PNA altogether (e.g., Illinois).
Various organizations have facilitated access to self-­managed abortions or to provide referrals to the nearest abortion provider. Aid Access

Allison M. Jackson, Adrianne R. Artis, and
Norrell K. Atkinson
Rape is an act of violence, not an act of sex. Rape is historically defined
as coercive sexual intercourse involving physical force or psychologic
manipulation of a female or a male. Recognizing that sexual intercourse is not a requirement for the definition, the U.S. Department of
Justice (DOJ) defines rape as “the penetration, no matter how slight,
of the vagina or anus with any body part or object, or oral penetration
by a sex organ of another person, without the consent of the victim.”
Though definitions may vary by state, sexual assault is a more inclusive
term that according to the U.S. DOJ “means any nonconsensual sexual
act proscribed by Federal, tribal, or State law, including when the victim lacks capacity to consent.”

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Exact figures on the incidence of rape are unavailable because sexual
assault is underreported. In the 2019 National Crime Victimization
Survey, only 0.56 per 1,000 persons over 12 years of age reported sexual assault to police. According to the National Intimate Partner and
Sexual Violence Survey of 2015 (NISVS 2015), over 43% women and
nearly 25% of men experienced some form of sexual violence in their
lifetime. Females exceed males as reported rape victims, but male rape
may be more underreported than female rape.
Adolescence is a high-­risk age-­group for sexual assault, with 43.2%
of females and 51.3% of males experiencing their first sexual assault
before the age of 18 years, and 81.3% of females and 70.8% males experiencing their first sexual assault before the age of 25 years (NISVS 2015).
Between 1995 and 2013 the rate of rape and sexual assault was highest
for adolescent females between ages 18 and 24 years. The National Survey of Children’s Exposure to Violence (NatSCEV 2014) revealed that
12.9% of 14-­to 17-­year-­olds experienced any sexual victimization in
the past year, 21.7% had experienced any sexual victimization in their
lifetime, 4.2% experienced sexual assault in the past year, and 10.2% in
their lifetime. This survey also demonstrated how other experiences
with violence compound the risk for sexual victimization. Youth with
a history of maltreatment by a caregiver were four times more likely to
experience sexual victimization and more than four times more likely
to experience sexual victimization if they were a witness to violence.
Among older adolescents age 18-­24 years, the rate of rape and sexual

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 162 u Adolescent Sexual Assault 1235
assault was 1.2 times higher for those not enrolled in college than those
in college. Further, several studies of youth in the juvenile justice system demonstrate a particularly high prevalence of prior sexual victimization of young females in that setting. Rape occurs worldwide and
is especially prevalent in war and armed conflicts. The World Health
Organization estimates that rape and domestic violence are responsible for 5–16% of healthy years of life lost by females of reproductive
age.
Female adolescents and young adults have the highest rates of rape
compared to any other age-­group. The normal developmental growth
tasks of adolescence may contribute to this vulnerability in the following ways: (1) the emergence of independence from parents and the
establishment of relationships outside the family may expose adolescents to environments with which they are unfamiliar and situations
that they are unprepared to handle; (2) dating and becoming comfortable with one’s sexuality may result in activities that are unwanted, but
the adolescent is too inexperienced to avoid the unwanted actions;
and (3) young adolescents may be naïve and more trusting than they
should be (see Chapter 150). Many teens are technologically competent, which gives sexual perpetrators access to unsuspecting vulnerable populations who were previously beyond their reach. Social media
and online dating sites represent a major risk for adolescents, as they
facilitate correspondence with individuals unknown to them or protective family members, while simultaneously providing a false sense of
security because of remote electronic communications. A determined
perpetrator can obtain specific information to identify the adolescent
and arrange for a meeting that is primed for sexual victimization.
Some adolescents are at higher risk of being victims of rape than
others (Table 162.1).

TERMINOLOGY

Sexual violence is a term that broadly encompasses criminal acts
including sexual assault, rape and sexual abuse, and which disproportionately affects adolescents and young adults. Because of the prevalence of sexual violence in the adolescent population, it is important
for healthcare providers to have a general understanding of the types
of sexual violence that may affect children and adolescents. Providers
should also be aware that every state carries their own legal definition
of these crimes. These definitions dictate if or how a crime is prosecuted, which could affect survivors who have disclosed sexual violence.
Delayed disclosures of sexual violence are common. The circumstances and relationship of the assailant to the survivor can often affect
if, when, and how a child or youth discloses an assault. Sexual violence
is typically perpetrated by someone who knows their victim; less frequently the assailant is a stranger. The gender of the survivor may also
affect the disclosure process. Males are less likely to disclose sexual violence compared with females. Individuals who are transgender, gender
nonconforming, nonbinary, or other noncisgender identities are less
likely to disclose sexual assault than those who identify as cisgender.

Table 162.1  Adolescents at High Risk of Rape
Victimization
MALE, FEMALE, NONBINARY ADOLESCENTS
Drug and alcohol users
Runaways
Those with intellectual disability or developmental delay
Street youths
Transgender youth
Youths with a history of sexual abuse
PRIMARILY FEMALES
Survivors of prior sexual assault
Newcomers to a town or college
PRIMARILY MALES
Those in institutionalized settings (detention centers, prison)
Gay males

In any scenario where rape is facilitated by threats, coercion, physical
force, or illicit and/or legal substances, the disclosure process for a survivor of sexual assault can be impacted.

TYPES OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE

Sexual assault is defined as sexual contact or behavior that occurs
without explicit consent of the victim. It can include things such as
attempted rape, rape, fondling, or forcing a person to perform sexual
acts. It is important to remember that force is not always physical, but
it can also be intimidation or coercive control of the person. Force may
also include threatening to hurt the person or those close to them.
Rape is a form of sexual assault involving penetration. Not all sexual assaults are rape. Rape can further be defined as stranger rape vs
acquaintance rape. Intimate partner sexual violence is a form of
acquaintance rape. An intimate partner is defined as a person with
which the survivor has had a close personal or sexual relationship; thus
this form of sexual violence can be prevalent among adolescents. Intimate partner sexual violence can often start with controlling or emotionally abusive behaviors, which then escalate to assault.
Rape can frequently involve illicit and/or legal substances to facilitate the assault. Drug-­facilitated rape involves perpetrators administering substances such as γ-­hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), flunitrazepam
(Rohypnol), and ketamine hydrochloride to their victim. More commonly, substances such as alcohol, tetrahydrocannabinoids (THC),
benzodiazepines, stimulants, barbiturates, opioids, or other drugs are
used during the course of an assault. Detection of these drugs requires
a high index of suspicion, and a medical evaluation within 8-­12 hours
is necessary for prompt detection of these substances, Specific testing
is used that is more sensitive than routine toxicology screens, which are
often insufficient.
Sexual abuse is a type of child abuse (see Chapter 17). The American Academy of Pediatrics defines child sexual abuse as a child or adolescent who engages in sexual activities that they cannot comprehend,
for which they are developmentally unprepared and unable to give
informed consent, and/or when there is a violation of the legal or social
taboos of society. It includes many things ranging from oral, genital,
or anal contact and fondling by or of the child, to noncontact abuses,
such as exhibitionism, voyeurism, or various forms of child exploitations such as pornography.
The commercial sexual exploitation of children (CSEC), also
known as sex trafficking, is a more complex form of sexual violence
and is considered a form of child abuse (see Chapter 16). Sex trafficking is federally defined as the recruiting, harboring, transporting, providing, obtaining, patronizing, or soliciting of an individual through
the means of force, fraud, or coercion for commercial sex. Although a
pimp often personally recruits victims, they may use others to recruit.
These youth may experience physical and sexual assault by the pimp
as well as the “johns.” Many of these youth have a history of child maltreatment, increasing their vulnerability to this form of abuse. Fear of
the consequences of disclosure and the survival skills acquired often
yield a very guarded presentation in the healthcare setting.
Survivors of sexual violence often experience long-­term symptoms
related to the trauma they have sustained. Untreated trauma can negatively affect the physical and emotional health of an adolescent into
adulthood. Engagement in trauma-­focused therapy, combined with a
supportive environment for the adolescent to grow, can help to mitigate the effects of the trauma that they have sustained. Providers should
be knowledgeable of trauma-­focused therapists in their community
where adolescent survivors of sexual violence can receive care.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The adolescent’s acute presentation after a rape may vary considerably,
from histrionics to near-­mute withdrawal. Even if they do not appear
afraid, most victims are extremely fearful and very anxious about the
incident, the rape report, the examination, and the entire process,
including potential repercussions. Because adolescents are between the
developmental lines of childhood and adulthood, their responses to
rape may have elements of both child and adult behaviors. Many teens,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1236 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
particularly young adolescents, may experience some level of cognitive
disorganization.
Adolescents may be reluctant to report rape for a variety of
reasons, including self-­blame, fear, embarrassment, or in the circumstances of drug-­facilitated rape, uncertainty of event details.
Adolescent victims, unlike child victims who elicit sympathy and
support, often face intense scrutiny regarding their credibility and
inappropriately misplaced societal blame for the assault. This view
is baseless and should not be used during an evaluation of any teenage victim of sexual violence. When adolescents do not report a
rape, they may present at a future date with concerns for pregnancy;
symptoms of or concerns for a sexually transmitted infection (STI);
and symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (see Chapter 38),
such as sleep disturbances, nightmares, mood swings, and flashbacks. Other teens may present with psychosomatic complaints or
difficulties with schoolwork. All adolescents should be screened for
possible sexual victimization at health examination visits.

INTERVIEW AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

The purpose of the adolescent medical evaluation after a sexual
assault is to provide medical care for the teen and to collect and
document evidence of the assault when applicable. Although many
teens delay seeking medical care, others present to a medical facility within 72 hours (or up to 96 hours depending on the protocol
used) of the rape, at which time forensic evidence collection should
be offered to the patient. Whether presenting acutely or more
remotely, a comprehensive physical exam is recommended to the
extent that the patient allows. Experienced clinicians with training
and knowledge of forensic evidence collection and medical-­legal
procedures should complete the rape evaluation or supervise the
evaluation when possible.
The clinician’s responsibilities are to provide support, obtain
the history in a nonjudgmental and noncoercive manner, conduct
a complete examination without retraumatizing the victim, and
collect forensic evidence. The clinician must complete laboratory
testing, administer prophylaxis treatment for STIs and emergency
contraception, arrange for counseling services, and file a report to
appropriate authorities in accordance with the law. In some jurisdictions, healthcare professionals are required to report all sexual
assaults of minors regardless of the relationship of the victim to the
perpetrator. Although healthcare professionals are legally mandated
to report sexual abuse, when the perpetrator is an acquaintance or
stranger, some jurisdictions leave the decision of reporting up to
the victim, requiring the victim to report the sexual assault. It is not
the clinician’s responsibility to decide whether a sexual assault has
occurred; the legal system will make that determination. Furthermore, absence of injury does not exclude the possibility that sexual
assault occurred.
Ideally, a clinician trained in forensic interviewing should obtain
the history. In all cases, the history should be obtained by asking
only open-­ended questions to obtain information about (1) what
happened, (2) where it happened, (3) when it happened, and (4)
who did it. After obtaining a concise history, including details of
the type of physical contact that occurred between the victim and
the assailant, the clinician should conduct a thorough and complete physical examination and document all injuries (nongenital
and genital). Clinicians should provide sensitive, nonjudgmental
support during the entire evaluation, as the adolescent victim has
experienced a major trauma and is susceptible to retraumatization
during this process. Each component of the evaluation should be
explained in detail to the victim, allowing the adolescent as much
control as possible, including refusal to complete any part or all of
the forensic evidence collection process. For sensitive examinations like these, a chaperone should be offered. Additionally, it is
often useful to permit a trusted supportive person, such as a family

member, friend, or rape crisis advocate, to be present during the
evaluation if that is the adolescent’s wish.
The examining clinician should be familiar with forensic evidence
collection and the physical evidence recovery kit (PERK) before initiating the examination. In the United States, each state’s PERK is different, but most include some or all of the following components:
swabs of suspected semen deposits, swabs of bite mark impressions to
collect genetic markers (DNA, ABO group); swabs of any penetrated
orifice or body surface where saliva may be present; and documentation of acute cutaneous injuries using body diagram charts and
photographs with visible standard measurements. Areas of restraint
should be carefully inspected for injuries; these areas include the
extremities and neck. Inspection of the skin may also reveal suction
injuries or bite impressions. Inspection of the mouth, with particular
attention to the oral frenula and palate, may reveal mucosal injury.
Although use of alternative light sources, such as the Wood lamp or
blue light, enhance detection of semen and saliva, other common
substances such as urine and lotion also fluoresce with alternative
light sources. Swabs of sites that fluoresce under such light should be
obtained for further forensic analysis.
The genital examination of a female rape victim should be
undertaken with the patient in the lithotomy position. The prone
knee-­chest position may be used as an exam-­clarifying technique,
specifically to evaluate the posterior rim of the hymen and perianal
area. The genital exam of a male rape victim should be undertaken
with the patient in the supine position. The clinician’s exam should
include careful inspection of the entire pelvic, genital, and perianal areas. The clinician should document any acute injuries such
as edema, erythema, petechiae, bruising, hemorrhage, or tearing.
Aqueous solution of toluidine blue (1%), which adheres to nucleated cells, may be used during the acute examination to improve
visualization of microtrauma in the perianal area. Any disruption to
the superficial epidermis will allow for dye uptake and thus cannot
differentiate between disruption of the skin from trauma, irritation,
or infection. Additionally, a colposcope may be used to provide
magnification and photo documentation of injuries.

LABORATORY DATA

When adolescents present for medical care within 72-­120 hours of
a sexual assault, a forensic evidence collection kit should be offered
to the patient. The time frames of eligibility for forensic evidence
collection vary according to jurisdiction, so it is important to know
the criteria of the jurisdiction investigating the assault. Regardless
of an adolescent’s decision to have evidence collection completed,
medical care, including physical examination, laboratory testing
(Table 162.2), and prophylactic therapies, should be offered to the
patient. Follow-­up evaluations should be scheduled to repeat these
laboratory studies.

TREATMENT

Treatment includes prophylactic antimicrobials for STIs (see
Chapter 163) and emergency contraception (see Chapter 160.6).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports
that trichomoniasis, bacterial vaginosis, gonorrhea, and chlamydia
are the most frequently diagnosed infections among women who
have been sexually assaulted. Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended for adolescent rape victims because of the risk of acquiring
an STI and the risk of pelvic inflammatory disease (Table 162.3).
HIV postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) must be considered and an
infectious disease specialist consulted if higher transmission risk
factors are identified (e.g., knowing that the perpetrator is HIV-­
positive, significant mucosal injury of the victim) to prescribe a
triple-­antiretroviral regimen (Fig. 162.1). Hepatitis B infection can
be prevented with immunoglobulin and/or vaccination depending
on the victim’s immunization status and the perpetrators status;
thus similar considerations should be made for possible exposure

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 162 u Adolescent Sexual Assault 1237
Table 162.2  Laboratory Evaluation of Sexual Assault
Within 8-­12 hr (if Indicated by History)
Urine and blood for date rape drugs (GHB, Rohypnol, and
ketamine)
Within 24 hr (if Indicated by History)
Blood for comprehensive toxicology screen (for other classes of
drugs)
Within 72 hr (or up to 96 hr Depending on Protocol Used)
Forensic evidence kit
Pregnancy test
Hepatitis B screen (hepatitis B surface antigen, surface antibody,
and core antibody)
Syphilis (rapid plasma reagin [RPR] or Venereal Disease Research
Laboratory [VDRL])
HIV (HIV 1/2 Ag/Ab immunoassay, point-­of-­care testing can be
useful in persons unlikely to follow up with a provider)
Bacterial vaginosis (BV) and candidiasis: point-­of-­care testing and/
or wet mount of vaginal secretions with measurement of pH and
KOH application for whiff test
Trichomonas vaginalis: nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs)
by urine or vaginal specimen or point-­of-­care testing (i.e., DNA
probes) from vaginal specimen
Chlamydia and Neisseria gonorrhoeae: NAATs at sites of
penetration or attempted penetration:

Table 162.3  Postexposure Prophylaxis (PEP) for Acute
Sexual Assault Victims
ROUTINE
Recommended
regimen for STI
prophylaxis

• Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM once in a single
dose*
PLUS
• Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for
7 days (azithromycin 1 g orally in a single
dose should be considered in persons at
high risk for noncompliance)
PLUS (for females)
• Metronidazole 500 mg orally twice a day
for 7 days (2 g orally in a single dose
should be considered in persons at high
risk for noncompliance)

Pregnancy prophylaxis

Levonorgestrel (Plan B) 1.5 mg orally in a
single dose
**Ulipristal acetate (Ella) 30 mg is effective
for up to 120 hr

HPV

Assess HPV vaccination history; vaccine
should be provided at initial evaluation if
unimmunized or partially immunized
• If unimmunized and >15 yr at the time of
the initial exam, give first dose and, two
follow-­up doses at 1-­2 mo and 6 mo
• If <15 yr, a single follow-­up dose at 6-­12 mo
• If partially immunized, a follow-­up dose
if >5 mo since the first dose or >12 wk
since the second dose

• N. gonorrhoeae: oropharynx (*), rectum (*), urine (**)
• Chlamydia: rectum (*), urine (**)
*Men who have sex with men (MSM) should be offered screening of gonorrhea and
chlamydia if they report receptive oral or anal sex during the preceding year even if
there was not contact at these sites during the assault.
**NAAT can be obtained on a dirty urine sample as an alternative to a genital swab.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases:
treatment guidelines 2015, MMWR Recomm Rep. 2015;64(RR-­3):1–140; and Updated
guidelines for antiretroviral postexposure prophylaxis after sexual, injection drug use,
or other nonoccupational exposure to HIV—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep. 2016;65:458.

to the hepatitis B virus in vaccinated/unvaccinated individuals.
Human papilloma virus (HPV) vaccination is also recommended
because persons who have been sexually assaulted are also at risk
for infection, and the efficacy of the HPV vaccine is high. Clinicians should review the importance for the patient’s compliance
with medical treatment, psychologic treatment, and follow-­up care.
Counseling should be provided about the symptoms of STIs and the
need for urgent follow-­up if symptoms develop. Abstinence from
sexual intercourse should be recommended until the completion of
the STI prophylactic course.
At the time of presentation, the clinician should address the
need for follow-­up care, including psychologic counseling. Adolescent victims are at increased risk of posttraumatic stress disorder,
depression, self-­abusive behaviors, suicidal ideation, delinquency,
substance abuse, eating disorders, and sexual revictimization. It is
important for the adolescent victim and parents to understand the
value of timely counseling services to decrease these potential long-­
term sequelae. Counseling services should be arranged during the
initial evaluation, with follow-­up arranged with the primary care
physician to improve compliance.

FOLLOW-­UP

Follow-­up evaluation should be arranged within 1 week of the initial
evaluation with a child abuse pediatrician or a Child Advocacy Center to
provide an opportunity for prompt review of STI test results, to monitor
for medication adherence and possible side effects, to ensure healing and
documentation of injuries, and to evaluate for the resolution of symptoms
initially present, the development of new physical symptoms, or emerging mental health concerns. If no STI prophylaxis was given, follow-­up

AS INDICATED
HIV†

Hepatitis B

Preferred regimen
• Tenofovir 300 mg and fixed-­dose
combination emtricitabine 200 mg
(Truvada) once daily
PLUS
• Raltegravir 400 mg orally twice a day
OR
• Dolutegravir 50 mg orally once a day
All persons with a potential exposure within
72 hours should be offered PEP, which
includes a 28-­day course of a three-­drug
antiretroviral regimen.
Alternative regimens available. Specific
indications for vaccine, immunoglobulin,
and/or booster depend on assailant’s
status

*If ≥150 kg, give 1 g of ceftriaxone IM once.
**Provided for patients with negative urine pregnancy screen. In addition, an antiemetic
(Compazine, Zofran) can be prescribed for patients receiving emergency contraception.
†HIV PEP is provided for patients with penetration and when the assailant is known to
be HIV-­positive or at high risk because of a history of incarceration, intravenous drug
use, or multiple sexual partners. If provided, laboratory studies must be drawn before
administration of medication (HIV, CBC, LFTs, BUN/Cr, amylase, lipase), and follow-­up
must be arranged.
Data from Workowski, KA, Bachmann, LH, Chan, PA Sexually Transmitted Infections
Treatment Guidelines, 2021. MMWR Recomm Rep 2021;70:128-­135.

testing for gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomonas can be repeated in
1-­2 weeks after the assault. If prophylaxis was provided, follow-­up testing is not needed unless symptoms develop. If infection in the assailant
cannot be ruled out, serologic testing for syphilis can be repeated in 4-­6
weeks and 3 months, and for HIV in 6 weeks and 3 months.

PREVENTION

Primary prevention may be accomplished through education of preadolescents and adolescents on the issues of consent, rape, healthy

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1238 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Substantial
exposure risk

≤72 hours
since exposure

Negligible
exposure risk

>72 hours
since exposure

Source patient
known to be
HIV-positive

Source patient
of unknown
HIV status

PEP
recommended

Case-by-case
determination

PEP not
recommended

Substantial risk for HIV acquisition

Negligible risk for HIV acquisition

Exposure of
vagina, rectum, eye, mouth,
or other mucous membrane,
nonintact skin, or percutaneous contact

Exposure of
vagina, rectum, eye, mouth,
or other mucous membrane,
intact or nonintact skin, or
percutaneous contact

With
blood, semen, vaginal secretions, rectal
secretions, breast milk, or any body fluid
that is visibly contaminated with blood
When
the source is known to be HIV-positive

With
urine, nasal secretions, saliva, sweat,
or tears if not visibly contaminated
with blood
Regardless
of the known or suspected HIV status
of the source

Fig. 162.1 Algorithm to evaluate the need for nonoccupational HIV postexposure prophylaxis among adult and adolescent survivors of sex-

ual assault. (From Workowski, KA, Bachmann, LH, Chan, PA. Sexually transmitted infections treatment guidelines, 2021. MMWR Recomm Rep.
2021;70:128–135; adapted from Announcement: updated guidelines for antiretroviral postexposure prophylaxis after sexual, injection-­drug use, or
other nonoccupational exposure to HIV—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:458.)

relationships, internet dangers, and drug-­and alcohol-­
facilitated
rape. Prevention messages should be targeted at males, females, and
nonbinary youth at high schools and colleges. Particular emphasis on
prevention efforts during college orientation is highly recommended.
High-­risk situations that may increase the likelihood of a sexual
assault should be discouraged, such as the use of drugs or alcohol,
drinking from a container that has been left unattended, and accepting drinks from strangers. Secondary prevention includes informing
adolescents of the benefits of timely medical evaluations when rape
has occurred. Individual clinicians should ask adolescents about past
experiences of forced and unwanted sexual behaviors and offer help

in dealing with those experiences. The importance of prevention cannot be overstated because adolescents are disproportionately affected
by sexual assault, and they are particularly vulnerable to long-­term
consequences.
Counseling services for family members of the victim may improve
their ability to provide appropriate support to the adolescent victim.
Caution parents not to use the assault as a validation of their parental
guidance, as it will only serve to place blame inappropriately on the
adolescent victim.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections

Chapter 163

Sexually Transmitted
Infections
Tamera Coyne-­Beasley, Nefertiti H. Durant,
and Samantha V. Hill
Age-­specific rates of many sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are
highest among sexually experienced adolescents and young adults,
after controlling for sexual activity. Although some STI pathogens
present as STI syndromes with a specific constellation of symptoms,
most are asymptomatic and only detected by a laboratory test. The
approach to prevention and control of these infections lies in education, screening, and early diagnosis and treatment.

ETIOLOGY

Any adolescent who has had oral, vaginal, or anal sexual intercourse is
behaviorally vulnerable to acquiring an STI. Not all adolescents are at
equal risk; physical, behavioral, and social factors contribute to an adolescent’s risk. Adolescents who initiate sex at a younger age; youth residing in detention facilities; youth attending STI clinics; youth involved
in commercial sex exploitation or survival sex and exchange sex for
drugs, money, food, or housing; young males having sex with males
(YMSM); adolescent women and young adult women having sex with
older men; transgender youth; youth with disabilities; and youth who
are injection drug users are at higher risk for STIs. Risky behaviors,
such as sex with multiple concurrent partners or multiple sequential
partners of limited duration, failure to use barrier protection consistently and correctly, and increased biologic susceptibility to infection
also contribute to risk (Table 163.1). Although all 50 states and the
District of Columbia explicitly allow minors to consent for their own
Table 163.1  Circumstances Contributing to Adolescents’
Susceptibility to Sexually Transmitted
Infections
PHYSICAL
Younger age at puberty
Cervical ectopy
Smaller introitus leading to traumatic sex
Asymptomatic nature of sexually transmitted infection
Uncircumcised penis
BEHAVIOR INFLUENCED BY DEVELOPMENTAL STAGES
Early adolescence: Lack ability to think abstractly
Middle adolescence: Believe in uniqueness and lack of vulnerability
SOCIAL FACTORS
Poverty
Limited access to “adolescent-­friendly” healthcare services
Adolescent health-­seeking behaviors (forgoing care because of
confidentiality concerns or denial of health problem)
Sexual abuse, trafficking, and violence
Lower levels of condom use
Mental health issues and substance use/abuse
Decreased access to confidential medical care leading complexity in
seeking care
Homelessness
Young adolescent females with older partners
Young men having sex with men
Data from Wangu, G Burstein. Adolescent sexuality: updates to the Sexually Transmitted
Infection Guidelines. Ped Clin North Am. 2017;64:389–341; and Spear LP. Adolescent
neurodevelopment. J Adolesc Health. 2013;52:S7–S13.

1239

sexual health services (at varying ages), many adolescents encounter
multiple obstacles to accessing this care, including poverty, insurance
coverage, and fears of lack of confidentiality (see Table 163.1). Adolescents who are survivors of sexual assault need reassurance, protection,
and appropriate intervention when these circumstances are uncovered
(see Chapter 162).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

STI prevalence varies by age, gender, race, and ethnicity. In the United
States, although adolescents and young adults ages 15-­24 represent
25% of the sexually experienced population, this age-­group accounts
for almost 50% of all incident STIs each year.
Chlamydia is the most frequently reported infectious disease in the
United States and is the second most common STI in U.S. adolescents
and young adults after human papillomavirus (HPV). In 2019, young
adult females ages 20-­24 (3,797.8 cases per 100,000 females) followed by
females ages 15-­19 (2,697.0 cases per 100,000 females) had the highest
rates of chlamydia in the United States (Fig. 163.1). Notably age-­specific
rates of reported cases of chlamydia among males, although substantially
lower than rates among females, were still highest in young adult males
20-­24 years (1,680.0 cases per 100,000 males). Chlamydia remains common among all races and ethnic groups. In 2021, a total of 1,644,416
cases of Chlamydia trachomatis infection were reported to the CDC,
making it the most common notifiable sexually transmitted infection
in the United States for that year. This case count corresponds to a rate
of 495.5 cases per 100,000 population, an increase of 3.9% compared
with the rate in 2020. During 2020 to 2021, rates of reported chlamydia
increased among both males and females, in all regions of the United
States, among most age groups, and among all race/Hispanic ethnicity
groups. Rates of reported chlamydia are highest among adolescents and
young adults. In 2021, almost two-thirds (58%) of all reported chlamydia
cases were among persons aged 15–24 years.
Reported rates of other bacterial STIs are also high among adolescents and young adults. In 2021, gonorrhea rates among adolescents
were 360.1/100,000 for males ages 15-­19 compared to 587.8/100,000
for young women ages 15-­19. Gonorrhea rates for young adult males
ages 20-­24 years old (844.2/100,000) were significantly higher than
rates for males at any other age/sex group and slightly lower than for
young women ages 20-­24 (873.2/100,000).
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is a clinical syndrome that
results from the ascension of microorganisms from the cervix and
vagina to the upper genital tract. PID is a serious complication of chlamydia and gonorrhea, two of the most common reportable infectious
diseases and STIs in the United States. PID rates are highest among
females ages 15-­24 compared with older women.
Syphilis rates have increased at an alarming rate, especially among
males, since 2000. In 2021, young adult males age 20-24 had the third
highest rate of primary and secondary syphilis at 51.2 per 100,000. Rates
among adolescent males ages 15-19 were lower at 12.0 per 100,000.
Age group
(Years)
0
0

Male rate*
3,900

Female rate*
3,900

11.7 10–14 83.1
15–19
20–24
1,680.0
25–29
1,087.4
30–34
658.0
767.9
35–39
385.2
388.7
40–44
231.7
167.2
114.9 45–54 73.7
46.9 55–64 20.1
7.9 65+ 2.5

2,697.0

823.0

357.4

Total

3,797.5
1,672.1

628.8

Fig. 163.1 Chlamydia: Rates of reported cases by age group and sex,
United States, 2021. (Data from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention: www.cdc.gov/std/statistics/2021/data.zip.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1240 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Age group
(Years)
0
0

Male rate*
70

12.0
51.2
68.1
67.7
51.3
37.1
24.8
14.8
25.2

Female rate*
70

0.0 10–14 0.2
7.5
15–19
19.5
20–24
22.3
25–29
18.9
30–34
16.7
35–39
12.2
40–44
5.8
45–54
55–64 1.7
65+ 0.2
3.1
Total

7.3

Fig. 163.2 Primary and secondary syphilis—Rates of reported cases by

age group and sex, United States, 2021. (Data from the Centers for Disease
and Control and Prevention: www.cdc.gov/std/statistics/2021/data.zip.)

Rates of female primary and secondary syphilis are much lower than
male rates (7.5/100,000 among 15-19 year olds; 19.5/100,000 among
20-24 year olds).
Adolescents also carry a large burden of viral STIs. U.S. youth are at
persistent risk for HIV infection. However, according to the 2021 Youth
Risk Behavior Survey, only 6% of high school students have ever been
tested for HIV. Adolescents (persons aged 13–19 years) and young
adults (persons aged 20–24 years) accounted for 21% of the 36,801
diagnoses of HIV infection in 2019 in the United States and 6 dependent areas. They are the least likely of any age group to be aware of
their HIV infection, retained in care, or have a suppressed viral load.
From 2015 through 2019 in the United States and 6 dependent areas,
the number of diagnoses of HIV infection among adolescents and
young adults for males, females, and transgender MTF decreased. In
2019, diagnoses of HIV infection among adolescent and young adult
males (85%) and females (12%) accounted for approximately 97%
of HIV diagnoses. Transgender MTF adolescents and young adults
accounted for 3% of annual diagnoses. From 2015 through 2019 in
the United States, the rate of diagnosis of HIV infection for Asian,
Black/African American, and multiracial adolescents decreased. The
rates of diagnosis of HIV infection for Hispanic/Latino and White
adolescents remained stable. In 2019, the highest rate was 23.5 for
Black/African American adolescents, followed by 6.3 for Hispanic/
Latino, and 4.2 for multiracial adolescents. Racial and ethnic disparities persist.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most frequently acquired
STI in the United States. According to the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), prevalence of HPV vaccine types 6, 11, 16, and 18 (4vHPV) declined between the prevaccine (2003–2006) and vaccine (2009–2012) eras: from 11.5% to
4.3% among females ages 14-­19 and from 18.5% to 12.1% among
females ages 20-­24. Within 6 years of introduction of the HPV vaccine, there was a 64% decrease in 4vHPV-­type prevalence among
female youth ages 14-­19 and a 34% decrease among young adult
women ages 20-­24. Efforts are ongoing to improve vaccination
among all youth.
Herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-­2) is the most prevalent viral
STI (see Chapter 299). According to NHANES data, prevalence of both
HSV-­1 and HSV-­2 decreased from 1999–2000 to 2015–2016 (from 59.4%
to 48.1% and from 18.0% to 12.1%, respectively). According to Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) data, seroprevalence for
HSV-­2 for adolescents ages 14-­19 was low, at 0.8. It is important to note
that among young adults ages 20-­29, HSV-­2 prevalence is higher, at 7.6%.
Prevalence of HSV-­1 among 14-­to 19-­year-­olds was 27% compared to
41% among those ages 20-­29. There are notable ethnic, racial, and gender
disparities in HSV prevalence. Prevalence of HSV-­1 was highest among
Mexican American persons and lowest among non-­Hispanic White
persons. HSV-­2 prevalence was highest among Hispanic Black persons

Fig. 163.3 Cervical ectopy. (From Seattle STD/HIV Prevention Training Center, University of Washington, Claire E. Stevens.)

and lowest among non-­Hispanic Asian persons. Both HSV-­1 and HSV-­2
were higher among females than males.

PATHOGENESIS

During puberty, increasing levels of estrogen cause the vaginal epithelium
to thicken and cornify and the cellular glycogen content to rise, with the
latter causing the vaginal pH to fall. These changes increase the resistance
of the vaginal epithelium to penetration by certain organisms (including
Neisseria gonorrhoeae) and increase the susceptibility to others (Candida
albicans and Trichomonas; see Chapter 330). The transformation of the
vaginal cells leaves columnar cells on the ectocervix, forming a border of
the two cell types on the ectocervix known as the squamocolumnar junction. The appearance is referred to as ectopy (Fig. 163.3). With maturation,
this tissue involutes. Before involution, it represents a unique vulnerability
to infection for adolescent females. The association of early sexual debut
and younger gynecologic age with increased risk of STIs supports this
explanation of the pathogenesis of infection in young adolescents.

SCREENING

Early detection and treatment are primary STI control strategies. Some of
the most common STIs in adolescents, including HPV, HSV, chlamydia,
and gonorrhea, are usually asymptomatic and, if undetected, can be spread
inadvertently by the infected host. Screening initiatives for chlamydial
infections have demonstrated reductions in PID cases by up to 40%. Federal and professional medical organizations recommend annual chlamydia
and gonorrhea screening for sexually active females <25 years old (Table
163.2). The lack of a dialog about STIs or the provision of STI services
at annual preventive service visits to sexually experienced adolescents is
a missed opportunity for screening and education. Comprehensive, confidential, reproductive health services, including STI screening, should be
offered to all sexually experienced adolescents (see Table 163.2).

COMMON INFECTIONS AND CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS

STI syndromes are generally characterized by the location of the
manifestation (vaginitis, enteritis) or the type of lesion (genital ulcer).
Certain constellations of presenting symptoms suggest the inclusion of
a possible STI in the differential diagnosis.

Urethritis

Urethritis is an STI syndrome characterized by inflammation of the
urethra, usually caused by an infectious etiology. Urethritis may present with urethral discharge, dysuria, urethral irritation, or meatal
pruritus. Urgency, frequency of urination, erythema of the urethral
meatus, and urethral pain or burning are less common clinical presentations. Approximately 30–50% of males are asymptomatic but
may have signs of discharge on diagnosis. On examination, the classic
finding is mucoid or purulent discharge from the urethral meatus (Fig.
163.4). If no discharge is evident on exam, providers may attempt to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections

1241

Table 163.2  Routine Laboratory Screening Recommendations for Sexually Transmitted Infections in Sexually Active
Adolescents and Young Adults
CHLAMYDIA TRACHOMATIS AND NEISSERIA GONORRHOEAE
• Routine screening for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae of all
sexually active females age <25 yr is recommended annually.
• Extragenital chlamydia and gonorrhea screening (pharyngeal or
rectal) can be considered on the basis of reported sexual behaviors
and exposure, through shared clinical decision-­making between
the patient and the provider.
• Routinely screen sexually active adolescent and young adult MSM
at sites of contact for chlamydia (urethra, rectum) and gonorrhea
(urethra, rectum, pharynx) at least annually regardless of condom
use. NAAT is preferred for provider or self-­collected specimens.
More frequent screening (i.e., at 3-­ to 6-­mo intervals) is indicated
for MSM, including those taking PrEP and those with HIV infection,
if risk behaviors persist or if they or their sex partners have multiple
partners or anonymous partners or have sex with illicit drug use.
• Consider screening for C. trachomatis of sexually active adolescent
and young adult males annually who have a history of multiple
partners in clinical settings with high prevalence rates, such as jails
or juvenile correction facilities, national job training programs, STD
clinics, high school clinics, or adolescent clinics.
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (HIV)
The following recommendations apply to testing for HIV:
• HIV testing is recommended for all adolescents and young adults
seeking STI evaluation and/or treatment who are not already
known to have HIV infection. Testing should be routine at the time
of the STI evaluation, regardless of whether the patient reports any
specific behavioral risks for HIV.
• The CDC and USPSTF recommend HIV screening at least once for
all persons age 13-­64 yr or 15-65, respectively.
• Persons at higher risk for HIV acquisition, including sexually
active gay, bisexual, and other MSM, should be screened for HIV
at least annually. Providers can consider the benefits of offering
more frequent screening (e.g., every 3-­6 months) among MSM at
increased behavioral risk for acquiring HIV.
• All pregnant adolescents should be tested for HIV during the first
prenatal visit. A second test during the third trimester, preferably at
<36 weeks’ gestation, should be considered and is recommended
for adolescents and young adults who are at high risk for acquiring
infection.
• HIV screening should be voluntary and free from coercion. Patients
should not be tested without their knowledge.
• Providers should use a laboratory-­based antigen/antibody (Ag/
Ab) combination assay as the first test for HIV, unless persons are
unlikely to follow up with a provider to receive their HIV test results;
in those cases screening with a rapid POC test can be useful.
• Providers should test for HIV RNA if initial testing according to the
HIV testing algorithm recommended by the CDC is negative or
indeterminate when concerned about acute HIV infection (https://
stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/50872).
• HIV screening should be discussed and offered to all adolescents
at least once by age 16-­18 yr and throughout young adulthood in
healthcare settings. HIV risk should be assessed annually for >13 yr
and offered if HIV risk factors are identified.

• Routinely screen sexually active adolescent and young adult
MSM at least annually regardless of condom use. More frequent
screening (i.e., at 3-­ to 6-­mo intervals) is indicated for MSM who
have multiple or anonymous partners or who have sex with illicit
drug use.
SYPHILIS
• Syphilis screening should be offered to sexually active adolescents
reporting risk factors, including MSM.
• Routinely screen sexually active adolescent and young adult
MSM at least annually regardless of condom use. More frequent
screening (i.e., at 3-­ to 6-­mo intervals) is indicated for MSM who
have multiple or anonymous partners or who have sex with illicit
drug use.
• Screen women at 1st prenatal visit, at 28 weeks, at delivery if at
greater behavioral risk.
• Screen asymptomatic women who may have increased behavioral
vulnerability (history of incarceration, transactional sex, higher rate
in community).
• Providers should consult with their local health department
regarding local syphilis prevalence and associated risk factors that
are associated with syphilis acquisition.
HEPATITIS B VIRUS
• All MSM should be screened with HBsAg, HBV core antibody, and
HBV surface antibody.
• Vaccination against both HAV and HBV is recommended for
all MSM when a previous infection or vaccination cannot be
documented.
HEPATITIS C VIRUS AND UNIVERSAL HEPATITIS C SCREENING
• The CDC recommends hepatitis C screening at least once in
a lifetime for all adults age 18 yr and older, except in settings
where the prevalence of HCV infection (HCV RNA positivity) is
<0.1%.
• Hepatitis C screening for all pregnant women during each
pregnancy, except in settings where the prevalence of HCV
infection (HCV RNA positivity) is less than 0.1%.
• Screening adolescents younger than 18 yr old for HCV who report
risk factors, that is, injection drug use, receipt of an unregulated
tattoo, received blood products or organ donation before 1992,
received clotting factor concentrates before 1987, or long-­term
hemodialysis.
• Given the high HCV prevalence among young injection drug users,
screening should be strongly considered.
• All people living with HIV should be screened during the initial HIV
evaluations and at least annually thereafter.
• Screening should be performed using HCV antibody assays
followed by HCV RNA testing for those with a positive antibody
test.
• Routine screening of adolescents and young adults who are
asymptomatic for certain STIs (i.e., syphilis, trichomoniasis, BBV,
HSV, HAV, and HB) is not typically recommended.

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-­guidelines/screening-­recommendations.htm and https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/guideline
sc.htm.

express discharge by applying gentle pressure to the urethra from the
base distally to the meatus 3-­4 times. Chlamydia trachomatis and N.
gonorrhoeae are the most commonly identified pathogens. Mycoplasma
genitalium has been associated with urethritis, but data supporting
Ureaplasma urealyticum have been inconsistent. Trichomonas vaginalis can cause nongonococcal urethritis (NGU), but the prevalence
varies. HSV-­1, HSV-­2, and Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) are also potential
urethritis pathogens in some cases. Sensitive diagnostic C. trachomatis
and N. gonorrhoeae tests are available for the evaluation of urethritis.
However, other pathogens can be considered when NGU is not responsive to treatment. Noninfectious causes of urethritis include urethral
trauma or foreign body. Unlike in females, urinary tract infections
(UTIs) are rare in males who have no genitourinary medical history.

In the typical sexually active adolescent male, dysuria and urethral discharge suggest the presence of an STI unless proven otherwise.

Epididymitis

The inflammation of the epididymis in adolescent males is most often
associated with an STI, most frequently C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae. The presentation of unilateral scrotal swelling and tenderness,
often accompanied by a hydrocele and palpable swelling of the epididymis, associated with the history of urethral discharge constitute the
presumptive diagnosis of epididymitis. Males who practice insertive
anal intercourse are also vulnerable to Escherichia coli infection. Testicular torsion, a surgical emergency usually presenting with sudden
onset of severe testicular pain, should be considered in the differential

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1242 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

Fig. 163.5 Mucopurulent cervical discharge positive swab test. (From

Seattle STD/HIV Prevention Training Center, University of Washington,
Claire E. Stevens and Ronald E. Roddy. http://www2a.cdc.gov/stdtraini
ng/ready-­to-­use/pid.htm.)

Fig. 163.4 Gonococcal urethral discharge. (From Seattle STD/HIV
Prevention Training Center, University of Washington, Connie Celum
and Walter Stamm.)

diagnosis (see Chapter 582). The evaluation for epididymitis should
include obtaining evidence of urethral inflammation by physical exam,
Gram stain of urethral secretions, urine leukocyte esterase test, or
urine microscopy. A C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae nucleic acid
amplification test (NAAT) should be performed.

Vaginitis

Vaginitis is a superficial infection of the vaginal mucosa frequently
presenting as vaginal discharge, with or without vulvar involvement
(see Chapter 586). Bacterial vaginosis, vulvovaginal candidiasis,
and trichomoniasis are the predominant infections associated with
vaginal discharge. Bacterial vaginosis is caused by replacement of
the normal hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)–producing Lactobacillus species vaginal flora by an overgrowth of anaerobic microorganisms,
as well as Gardnerella vaginalis, Ureaplasma, and Mycoplasma. It is
diagnosed based on an individual having at least three out of four
of Amsel’s criteria: (1) thin, gray, homogenous discharge, (2) vaginal pH >4.5, (3) fishy odor after the addition of potassium hydroxide
(KOH) to discharge, and (4) at least 20% clue cells present on wet
prep. It is important to note that research has shown there to be significant variability in providers’ abilities to read wet preps; thus standardization of wet prep analysis via laboratories is recommended. BV
NAATs are also available but should be used only by symptomatic
women because accuracy has not been determined for asymptomatic women. Researchers do not know the cause of bacterial vaginosis
or how some women acquire it. We do know the condition typically
occurs in sexually active women. We also know that sexual activity is
associated with increased frequency of bacterial vaginosis. Additionally, history of a diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis increases the risk of
acquisition of other STIs. Vulvovaginal candidiasis, usually caused by
C. albicans, can trigger vulvar pruritus, pain, swelling, redness, and
dysuria. Findings on vaginal examination include vulvar edema, fissures, excoriations, or thick curdy vaginal discharge. Trichomoniasis
is caused by the protozoan T. vaginalis. Infected females may present with symptoms characterized by a diffuse, malodorous, yellow-­
green vaginal discharge with vulvar irritation or may be diagnosed by
screening an asymptomatic patient. Cervicitis can sometimes cause a
vaginal discharge. Laboratory confirmation is recommended because
clinical presentations may vary and patients may be infected with
more than one pathogen.

Fig. 163.6 Inflamed cervix caused by gonococcal cervicitis. (From

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: STD clinical slides. http://
www.cdc.gov/std/training/clinicalslides/slides-­dl.htm.)

Cervicitis

The inflammatory process in cervicitis involves the deeper structures
in the mucous membrane of the cervix uteri. Vaginal discharge can be
a manifestation, but cervicitis is frequently asymptomatic. Patients also
present with complaints of irregular or postcoital bleeding. Two major
diagnostic signs characterize cervicitis: (1) a purulent or mucopurulent
endocervical exudate visible in the endocervical canal or on an endocervical swab specimen (e.g., swab sign; Fig. 163.5), called mucopurulent cervicitis or cervicitis, and (2) sustained endocervical bleeding
easily induced by gentle passage of a cotton swab through the cervical os, signifying friability. Cervical changes associated with cervicitis
must be distinguished from cervical ectopy in the younger adolescent
to avoid the overdiagnosis of inflammation (Fig. 163.6 and see Fig.
163.3). The pathogens identified most frequently with cervicitis are C.
trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae, although no pathogen is identified in
most cases. HSV is a less common pathogen associated with ulcerative
and necrotic lesions on the cervix.

Pelvic Inflammatory Disease

PID encompasses a spectrum of inflammatory disorders of the female
upper genital tract, including endometritis, salpingitis, tuboovarian
abscess, and pelvic peritonitis, usually in combination rather than
as separate entities. N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis predominate
as the involved pathogenic organisms in younger adolescents (see
Chapters 238 and 271), although PID should be approached as having

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections
a multiorganism etiology, including pathogens such as anaerobes, G.
vaginalis, Haemophilus influenzae, enteric gram-­negative rods, and
Streptococcus agalactiae. In addition, cytomegalovirus, Mycoplasma
hominis, U. urealyticum, and M. genitalium may be associated with
PID. PID (tuboovarian abscess) has rarely been reported in virgins and
is usually caused by E. coli and associated in some patients with obesity
and possible pooling of urine in the vagina.
PID is difficult to diagnose because of the wide variation in symptoms and signs. Many females with PID have subtle or mild symptoms,
resulting in many unrecognized cases. Healthcare providers should
consider the possibility of PID in young, sexually active females presenting with vaginal discharge or abdominal pain.
The clinical diagnosis of PID is based on the presence of at least one
of the minimal criteria, either cervical motion tenderness, uterine tenderness, or adnexal tenderness, to increase the diagnostic sensitivity
and reduce the likelihood of missed or delayed diagnosis. Providers
should also consider that adolescents are the population in whom PID
is typically diagnosed and thus should have a low threshold for initiating empirical treatment. In addition, the majority of females with
PID have either mucopurulent cervical discharge or evidence of white
blood cells (WBCs) on a microscopic evaluation of a vaginal fluid–
saline preparation. If the cervical discharge appears normal and no
WBCs are observed on the wet prep of vaginal fluid, the diagnosis of
PID is unlikely, and alternative causes of pain should be investigated.
Specific, but not always practical, criteria for PID include evidence of
endometritis on biopsy, transvaginal sonography or MRI evidence of
thickened, fluid-­filled tubes, or Doppler evidence of tubal hyperemia
or laparoscopic evidence of PID.

Enteritis

Among men who have sex with men (MSM), both Chlamydia and the
gonococcus can cause enteric (colitis, proctitis) symptoms. In addition,
infections with enteric pathogens (Shigella, Campylobacter, Ameba)
have been noted.

Sepsis

Although there are rare urogenital tract cases of meningococcal infections with heterosexual intercourse (similar to gonococcus), men
who have sex (particularly oral sex) with men are at increased risk

1243

for invasive meningococcal infections, which often occur as an outbreak. Meningococcus may colonize the pharyngeal, anal, or urethral
mucosa. Meningococcemia must be distinguished from disseminated
gonococcal infection (DGI), which will manifest with a gram-­negative
diplococci-­
positive blood culture along with tenosynovitis, septic
arthritis, petechial/pustular rash, and less often, endocarditis.

Genital Ulcer Syndromes

An ulcerative lesion in a mucosal area exposed to sexual contact is the
unifying characteristic of infections associated with genital ulcer syndromes. Genital ulcer lesions are most frequently seen on the penis and
vulva, but also occur on oral and rectal mucosa, depending on the adolescent’s sexual practices. HSV and Treponema pallidum (syphilis) are
the most common organisms associated with genital ulcer syndromes.
Table 163.3 presents the clinical characteristics differentiating the
lesions of the most common infections associated with genital ulcers,
along with the required laboratory diagnosis to identify the causative
agent accurately.
Genital herpes, the most common ulcerative STI among adolescents, is a chronic, lifelong viral infection. Two sexually transmitted
HSV types have been identified: HSV-­1 and HSV-­2. The majority
of cases of recurrent genital herpes are caused by HSV-­2. However,
among young women and MSM, an increasing proportion of anogenital herpes has been HSV-­1. Most HSV-­2–infected persons are unaware
of their diagnosis because they experience mild or unrecognized infections but continue to shed virus intermittently in the genital tract.
Therefore most genital herpes infections are transmitted by asymptomatic persons who are unaware of their infection.
Although the initial herpetic lesion is a vesicle, by the time the
patient presents clinically, the vesicle often has ruptured spontaneously,
leaving a shallow, painful ulcer (Fig. 163.7A). Recurrences are generally less intense and painful (see Fig. 163.7B). Up to 50% of first genital
herpes episodes are caused by HSV-­1. However, recurrences and subclinical shedding are much more frequent for genital HSV-­2 infection.
Syphilis is a less common cause of genital ulcers in adolescents
than in adults. Syphilis is caused by T. pallidum. Primary syphilis
presents as a single painless ulcer or chancre at the site of infection. However, it can also present with multiple atypical or painful lesions. Secondary syphilis manifestations include skin rash,

Table 163.3  Signs, Symptoms, and Presumptive and Definitive Diagnoses of Genital Ulcers
SIGNS/SYMPTOMS

HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS

SYPHILIS (PRIMARY)

CHANCROID

Ulcers

Vesicles rupture to form
shallow ulcers

Ulcer with well-­demarcated, indurated borders
and a clean base (chancre)

Nonindurated and undermined
borders and a purulent base

Painful

Painful

Painless*

Painful

Number of lesions

Usually multiple

Usually single

Multiple

Inguinal
lymphadenopathy

First-­time infections may
cause constitutional
symptoms and
lymphadenopathy

Usually mild and minimally tender

Unilateral or bilateral painful
adenopathy in >50%
Inguinal bubo formation and rupture
may occur

Clinical suspicion

Typical lesions; positive HSV-­2
type–specific virologic test
from the lesion by NAAT or
culture
OR Type-­specific serologic
testing

A presumptive diagnosis requires two
laboratory serologic tests, a nontreponemal
test (i.e., VDRL or RPR), and a treponemal
test (TP-­PA] assay, various EIAs,
chemiluminescence assays [CIA], and
immunoblots or rapid treponemal assay)

If all four criteria are met:
1. ≥1 Painful genital ulcers
2. Typical ulcers and regional
lymphadenopathy
3. No evidence of T. pallidum
4. HSV-­1 or HSV-­2 NAAT or HSV
culture performed on the ulcer
exudate or fluid are negative

Definitive diagnosis

Detection of HSV by culture
or PCR from ulcer scraping
or aspiration of vesicle fluid

Identification of Treponema pallidum from a
chancre or lymph node aspirate on dark-­field
microscopy

Detection of Haemophilus ducreyi by
culture

*Primary syphilitic ulcers may be painful if they become coinfected with bacteria or one of the other organisms responsible for genital ulcers.
EIA, Enzyme immunoassay; HSV, herpes simplex virus; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid plasma reagin; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratories.
From https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-­guidelines/default.htm

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1244 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

A

B

Fig. 163.7 A, Initial herpes infection showing multiple erosions with polycyclic outlines surrounded by an erythematous halo and associated with
intense pain. B, Erosions surrounded by an erythematous halo. Clinical signs and symptoms of recurrences are usually less intense than those of
initial infection. (From Martín JM, Villalón G, Jordá E. Update on treatment of genital herpes. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2009;100:22–32, Figs. 1 and 2.)

mucocutaneous lesions, and lymphadenopathy in addition to other
nonspecific symptoms (e.g., sore throat, malaise), gastrointestinal
symptoms (e.g., hepatitis), and renal symptoms. Tertiary syphilis
presents with cardiac involvement, gummatous lesions, tabes dorsalis, and general paresis. Latent syphilis lacks clinical manifestations
and is detected by serologic testing. Latent syphilis acquired within
the preceding year is referred to as early latent syphilis. Latent syphilis acquired at least 1 year prior is referred to as late latent syphilis.
Infections of the central nervous system (CNS) (neurosyphilis), of
the visual system (ocular syphilis), or auditory system (otosyphilis)
can occur at any stage.
Lymphogranuloma venereum caused by C. trachomatis serovars
L1-­L3 is uncommon, although outbreaks do occur in MSM. In these
circumstances, proctitis or proctocolitis is the usual manifestation.
HIV is often present in affected men. Unusual infectious causes of genital, anal, or perianal ulcers in the United States and other industrialized
countries include chancroid and donovanosis.
Monkeypox (see Chapter 767) has been reported after sexual contact, particularly among MSM.
The differential diagnosis of genital ulcers also includes Behçet disease (see Chapter 202), Crohn disease (see Chapter 382.2), aphthous
ulceration, and acute genital ulcers caused by cytomegalovirus (see
Chapter 302) or EBV (see Chapter 301). Acute genital ulcers often follow a flu or mononucleosis-­like illness in an immunocompetent person
and are unrelated to sexual activity. The lesions are 0.5-­2.5 cm in size,
bilateral, symmetric, multiple, painful, and necrotic and are associated
with inguinal lymphadenopathy. This primary infection is also associated with fever and malaise. The diagnosis may require EBV titers or
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing. Treatment is supportive care,
including pain management.

Genital Lesions and Ectoparasites

Lesions that present as outgrowths on the surface of the epithelium
and other limited epidermal lesions are included under this categorization of syndromes. HPV can cause genital warts and genital-­
cervical abnormalities that can lead to cancer (see Chapter 313).
Genital HPV types are classified according to their association with
cancer. Infections with low-­risk types, such as HPV types 6 and 11,
can cause benign or low-­grade changes in cells of the cervix, genital warts, and recurrent respiratory papillomatosis. High-­risk HPV
types can cause cervical, anal, vulvar, vaginal, head, and neck cancers. High-­risk HPV types 16 and 18 are detected in approximately

70% of cervical cancers. Persistent infection increases the risk of
cervical cancer. Molluscum contagiosum and condyloma latum
associated with secondary syphilis complete the classification of
genital lesion syndromes.
As a result of the close physical contact during sexual contact, common ectoparasitic infestations of the pubic area occur as pediculosis
pubis or the papular lesions of scabies (see Chapter 709.2).

HIV, Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C

HIV and hepatitis B virus (HBV) present as asymptomatic, unexpected occurrences in most infected adolescents. High vaccination coverage rates among infants and adolescents have resulted
in substantial declines in acute HBV incidence among U.S.-­born
adolescents. Risk factors identified in the history or routine screening during prenatal care are much more likely to result in suspicion
of infection, leading to the appropriate laboratory screening, than
are clinical manifestations in this age-­group (see Chapters 322 and
406). HIV incidence among adolescents has also declined, though
disparities based on race, ethnicity, gender, and region persist.
Young adults continue to be affected by HIV as well. The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends all individuals
between ages 15 and 65 be tested for HIV at least once in their life,
and the CDC recommends HIV testing once between 13 and 64 and
once a year based on behaviors. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) incidence
continues to be on the rise not only among individuals known to be
part of the “baby boomer” generation but also among young adults.
Because of the rise in injection opioid use and HCV, the American
Association for the Study of Liver Disease and Infectious Disease
Society of America (AASLD–IDSA), and CDC recommend HCV
screening among all individuals 18 years old and older. They also
recommend screening based on risk behaviors among individuals
younger than age 18 (see Table 163.2).

DIAGNOSIS

Most often, adolescents infected with bacterial and viral STI pathogens do not report symptoms suggestive of infection. With the use
of very sensitive, noninvasive chlamydia and gonorrhea NAAT, providers are finding that most genital infections in females and many
males are asymptomatic. A thorough sexual history is key to identifying adolescents who should be screened for STIs and for identifying those who require a laboratory diagnostic evaluation for an STI
syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections
When eliciting a sexual health history, discussions should be appropriate for the patient’s developmental level. In addition to questions
regarding vaginal or urethral discharge, genital lesions, and lower
abdominal pain among females, one should ask about prior treatment
of any STI symptoms, including self-­treatment using nonprescription
medications. Dyspareunia is a consistent symptom in adolescents with
PID. Providers must ask about oral or anal sexual activity to determine
sites for specimen collection.
Urethritis should be objectively documented by evidence of inflammation or infectious etiology. Patient complaint without objective
clinical or laboratory evidence does not fulfill diagnostic criteria.
Inflammation can be documented by (1) observing urethral mucopurulent discharge, (2) ≥2 WBCs per high-­power field on microscopic
examination of Gram stain urethral secretions, (3) urine microscopic
findings of ≥10 WBCs per high-­power field of first-­void urine specimen, or (4) a positive urine leukocyte esterase test of a first-­void
specimen. Laboratory evaluation is essential to identify the involved
pathogens to determine treatment, partner notification, and disease
control. C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae NAATs of a urine specimen
are recommended. The presence of gram-­negative intracellular diplococci on microscopy obtained from a male urethral specimen confirms
the diagnosis of gonococcal urethritis.
An essential component of the diagnostic evaluation of vaginal,
cervical, or urethral discharge is a chlamydia and gonorrhea NAAT.
NAATs are the most sensitive tests available in such cases and are
licensed for use with urine, urethral, vaginal, and cervical specimens.
Many of the chlamydia NAATs are approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) to test patient-­collected vaginal swabs
in the clinical setting and liquid cytology specimens. Female vaginal
swab specimens and male first-­void urine are considered the optimal
specimen types. Female urine remains an acceptable chlamydia and

Saline: 40X objective

gonorrhea NAAT specimen, but it may have slightly reduced performance when compared with cervical or vaginal swab specimens. Urine
is the recommended specimen for male urethral infection. Gonorrhea and chlamydia NAATs perform well on rectal and oropharyngeal
specimens and can be performed by clinical laboratories that have
completed the appropriate verification studies to obtain Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) approval.
Evaluation of adolescent females with vaginitis includes laboratory
data. Traditionally, the cause of vaginal symptoms was determined by
pH and microscopic examination of the discharge. However, CLIA-­
waived point-­of-­care vaginitis tests are available. Using pH paper,
an elevated pH (i.e., >4.5) is common with bacterial vaginosis and
trichomoniasis. Because pH testing is not highly specific, discharge
should be further examined. For microscopic exam, a slide can be
made with the discharge diluted in 1-­2 drops of 0.9% normal saline
solution and another slide with discharge diluted in 10% KOH solution. Examining the saline specimen slide under a microscope may
reveal motile or dead T. vaginalis or clue cells (epithelial cells with
borders obscured by small bacteria), which are characteristic of bacterial vaginosis. WBCs without evidence of trichomonads or yeast
are usually suggestive of cervicitis. This evaluation has been consistently shown to be highly subjective, which is why there are more
NAAT tests available for diagnosis. The yeast or pseudohyphae of
Candida species are more easily identified in the KOH specimen
(Fig. 163.8). The sensitivity of microscopy is approximately 50%
and requires immediate evaluation of the slide for optimal results.
Therefore lack of findings does not eliminate the possibility of infection. More sensitive point-­of-­care vaginitis tests include the OSOM
Trichomonas Rapid Test (Sekisui Diagnostics, Lexington, MA), an
immunochromatographic capillary flow dipstick technology with
reported 83% sensitivity. The OSOM BVBLUE Test (Sekisui) detects
Saline: 40X objective

Saline: 40X objective
RBCs

1245

Saline: 40X objective

NOT a clue cell
PMN
Trichomonas*
Clue cell
Trichomonas*
Yeast
buds

PMN

Folded
squamous
epithelial
cells

Trichomonas*

Sperm
Squamous
epithelial
cell

RBCs

Squamous
epithelial
cell
PMN

Yeast buds
PMNs

NOT a clue cell
Artifact
Saline: 40X objective

Saline: 40X objective

Lactobacilli 10% KOH: 10X objective

Yeast pseudohyphae

Yeast
pseudohyphae

Masses of yeast
pseudohyphae

Lactobacilli

Yeast
buds
PMNs

10% KOH: 40X objective

Lysed
squamous
epithelial
cells

Artifact
Lactobacilli

Squamous epithelial cells

Yeast
buds

NOT a clue cell

Lysed squamous epithelial cells

Fig. 163.8 Common normal and abnormal microscopic findings during examination of vaginal fluid. KOH, Potassium hydroxide solution; PMN,

polymorphonuclear leukocyte; RBCs, red blood cells. (From Adolescent Medicine: State of the Art Reviews, vol. 14, no. 2. Philadelphia: Hanley &
Belfus; 2003:350–351.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1246 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 163.4  Pathologic Vaginal Discharge
INFECTIVE DISCHARGE
COMMON CAUSES
Organisms
Candida albicans
Trichomonas vaginalis
Chlamydia trachomatis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycoplasma genitalium
Conditions
Bacterial vaginosis
Acute pelvic inflammatory disease
Postoperative pelvic infection
Postabortal sepsis
Puerperal sepsis
LESS COMMON CAUSES
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Syphilis
Escherichia coli

OTHER REASONS FOR
DISCHARGE
COMMON CAUSES
Retained tampon or condom
Chemical irritation
Allergic responses
Ectropion
Endocervical polyp
Intrauterine device
Atrophic changes
LESS COMMON CAUSES
Physical trauma
Vault granulation tissue
Vesicovaginal fistula
Rectovaginal fistula
Neoplasia
Cervicitis

From Mitchell H. Vaginal discharge—causes, diagnosis, and treatment. BMJ.
2004;328:1306–1308; and Sexually Transmitted Infections Treatment Guidelines, 2021:
Vulvovaginal Itching, Burning, Irritation, Odor or Discharge: https://www.cdc.gov/std/tr
eatment-­guidelines/vaginal-­discharge.htm.

Table 163.5  Evaluation for Pelvic Inflammatory
Disease (PID)
2021 CDC DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Minimal Criteria
• Cervical motion tenderness
or
• Uterine tenderness
or
• Adnexal tenderness
Additional Criteria to Enhance Specificity of the Minimal Criteria
• Oral temperature >38.3°C (101°F)
• Abnormal cervical or vaginal mucopurulent discharge*
• Presence of abundant numbers of WBCs on saline microscopy of
vaginal secretions*
• Elevated ESR or C-­reactive protein
• Laboratory documentation of cervical Neisseria gonorrhoeae or
Chlamydia trachomatis infection
Most Specific Criteria to Enhance the Specificity of the Minimal
Criteria
• Transvaginal sonography or MRI techniques showing thickened,
fluid-­filled tubes, with or without free pelvic fluid or tuboovarian
complex, or Doppler studies suggesting pelvic infection (e.g.,
tubal hyperemia)
• Endometrial biopsy with histopathologic evidence of endometritis
• Laparoscopic abnormalities consistent with PID
Differential Diagnosis (Partial List)
• Gastrointestinal: appendicitis, constipation, diverticulitis,
gastroenteritis, inflammatory bowel disease, irritable bowel
syndrome
• Gynecologic: ovarian cyst (intact, ruptured, or torsed),
endometriosis, dysmenorrhea, ectopic pregnancy, mittelschmerz,
ruptured follicle, septic or threatened abortion, tuboovarian
abscess
• Urinary tract: cystitis, pyelonephritis, urethritis, nephrolithiasis
• ESR, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate; WBCs, white blood cells
*If the cervical discharge appears normal and no WBCs are observed on the wet prep of
vaginal fluid, the diagnosis of PID is unlikely and alternative causes of pain should be
investigated.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): https://www.cdc.gov/
std/treatment-­guidelines/pid.htm.

elevated vaginal fluid sialidase activity, an enzyme produced by bacterial pathogens associated with bacterial vaginosis, including Gardnerella, Bacteroides, Prevotella, and Mobiluncus, and has a reported

90% sensitivity. Both tests are CLIA waived, with results available in
10 minutes.
Clinical laboratory–based vaginitis tests are also available. The
Affirm VPIII (Becton Dickenson) is a moderate-­complexity nucleic
acid probe test that evaluates for T. vaginalis, G. vaginalis, and C. albicans and has a sensitivity of 63% and specificity of >99.9%, with results
available in 45 minutes. Some gonorrhea and chlamydia NAATs also
offer an assay for T. vaginalis testing of female specimens tested for
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, considered the gold standard for
Trichomonas testing.
Objective signs of vulvar inflammation in the absence of vaginal
pathogens, along with a minimal amount of vaginal discharge, suggest
the possibility of mechanical, chemical, allergic, or other noninfectious
irritation of the vulva (Table 163.4).
The definitive diagnosis of PID is difficult based on clinical findings
alone. Clinical diagnosis is imprecise, and no single historical, physical,
or laboratory finding is both sensitive and specific for the diagnosis
of acute PID. Clinical criteria have a positive predictive value of only
65–90% compared with laparoscopy. Although healthcare providers
should maintain a low threshold for the diagnosis of PID, additional
criteria to enhance the specificity of diagnosis, such as transvaginal
ultrasonography, can be considered (Table 163.5).
Cell culture and PCR are the preferred HSV tests. Viral culture
sensitivity is low, and intermittent viral shedding causes false-­
negative results. NAATs, including PCR assays for HSV DNA, are
more sensitive and increasingly available for diagnosing genital HSV.
The Tzanck test is insensitive and nonspecific and should not be considered reliable.
Accurate type-­specific HSV serologic assays are based on the HSV-­
specific glycoproteins G2 (HSV-­2) and G1 (HSV-­1). Both laboratory-­
based point-­
of-­
care tests are available. Because almost all HSV-­
2
infections are sexually acquired, the presence of type-­specific HSV-­2
antibody implies anogenital infection. The presence of HSV-­1 antibody
alone is more difficult to interpret because of the frequency of oral HSV
infection acquired during childhood. Type-­
specific HSV serologic
assays might be useful in the following scenarios: (1) recurrent genital symptoms or atypical symptoms with negative HSV cultures; (2) a
clinical diagnosis of genital herpes without laboratory confirmation;
and (3) a patient with a partner with genital herpes, especially if considering suppressive antiviral therapy to prevent transmission.
For syphilis testing, nontreponemal tests, such as the rapid plasma
reagin (RPR) or Venereal Disease Research Laboratories (VDRL), and
treponemal testing, such as fluorescent treponemal antibody absorbed
tests, the T. pallidum passive particle agglutination (TP-­PA) assay, and
various enzyme and chemiluminescence immunoassays (EIA/CIA),
are recommended. However, many clinical laboratories have adopted
a reverse sequence of screening in which a treponemal EIA/CIA is performed first, followed by testing of reactive sera with a nontreponemal
test (e.g., RPR). Treponemal tests often remain positive for life, with
only 15-25% becoming serologically nonreactive, if treated early in
primary syphilis. A positive treponemal EIA or CIA test can identify
both previously treated and untreated or incompletely treated syphilis.
False-­positive results can occur, particularly among populations with
low syphilis prevalence. Persons with a positive treponemal screening test should have a standard nontreponemal test with titer (RPR or
VDRL) to guide patient management decisions. If EIA/CIA and RPR/
VDRL results are discordant, the laboratory should perform a different
treponemal test to confirm the results of the initial test. Patients with
discordant serologic results by EIA/CIA and RPR/VDRL testing whose
sera are reactive by TP-­PA testing are considered to have past or present
syphilis; if sera is TP-­PA nonreactive, syphilis is unlikely (Fig. 163.9).
Rapid HIV testing with third-­and fourth-­generation test results
available in 10-­20 minutes can be useful when the likelihood of adolescents returning for their results is low. Point-­of-­care CLIA-­waived tests
for whole blood finger stick (fourth generation) and oral fluid specimen (third generation) testing are available. Clinical studies have demonstrated that the rapid HIV test performance is comparable to those
of EIAs. Because some reactive test results may be false positive, every
reactive rapid test must be confirmed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections

1247

Treponemal (Immunoassay)

Reactive

Nonreactive
Step 1

Nontreponemal

Reactive

Nonreactive
Step 2

Supplemental treponemal*

Reactive

Nonreactive
Step 3

Consistent with
current or past syphilis
infection

Consistent with past
or potential early
syphilis infection

Inconclusive for
syphilis infection;
potentially early
infection or false
positive

No laboratory
evidence of syphilis
infection

Lab interpretation

Fig. 163.9 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)–recommended algorithm for reverse-­sequence syphilis screening: Treponemal test screening followed by nontreponemal test confirmation. *The supplemental treponemal test should use a unique platform and/or antigen different from the first
treponemal test. (From Association of Public Health Laboratories. Suggested Reporting Language for Syphilis Serological Testing. Association of Public
Health Laboratories August 2020 https://www.aphl.org/programs/infectious_disease/std/Documents/ID-2020Aug-Syphilis-Reporting-Language.pdf.)

Table 163.6  Management Guidelines for Uncomplicated Bacterial STIs in Adolescents and Adults
PATHOGEN

RECOMMENDED REGIMENS

ALTERNATIVE REGIMENS AND SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Chlamydia trachomatis

Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2×/day for 7
days
For pregnancy:
Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose

Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose
OR
Levofloxacin 500 mg orally 1×/day for 7 days
For pregnancy:
Amoxicillin 500 mg orally 3×/day for 7 days

Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(cervix, urethra, and
rectum)

Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM in a single dose
for persons weighing <150 kg
If chlamydial infection has not been
excluded, treat for chlamydia with
doxycycline 100 mg orally 2×/day for
7 days
For person weighing >150 kg, ceftriaxone
1g should be administered

If cephalosporin allergy or unavailable:
Gentamicin 240 mg IM in a single dose PLUS Azithromycin 2 g orally in
a single dose
OR
Cefixime 800 mg orally in a single dose

Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(pharynx)

Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM in a single dose for
person weighing <150 kg
Ceftriaxone 1g IM for a person weighing
≥150 kg

Treponema pallidum
(primary and secondary
syphilis or early latent
syphilis, i.e., infection
<12 mo)

Benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM
in a single dose

Penicillin allergy: Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice daily for 14 days or
tetracycline 500 mg orally 4 times daily for 14 days; limited data suggest
ceftriaxone 1-­2 g daily either IM or IV for 10-­14 days
OR
Azithromycin 2 g orally in a single dose has been effective, but treatment
failures have been documented
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1248 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 163.6  Management Guidelines for Uncomplicated Bacterial STIs in Adolescents and Adults—cont’d
PATHOGEN

RECOMMENDED REGIMENS

ALTERNATIVE REGIMENS AND SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Treponema pallidum (late
latent syphilis or syphilis
of unknown duration)

Benzathine penicillin G 7.2 million units
total, administered as three doses of 2.4
million units IM each at 1-­wk intervals

Penicillin allergy: Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice daily for 28 days or
tetracycline 500 mg orally 4 times daily for 28 days, with close serologic
and clinical follow-­up

Treponema pallidum
(neurosyphilis, ocular
syphilis, and otosyphilis)

Aqueous crystalline penicillin G 18-­24
million units per day, administered
as 3-­4 million units by IV every 4 hr or
continuous infusion, for 10-­14 days

Procaine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM 1×/day for 10-­14 days
PLUS Probenecid 500 mg orally 4×/day for 10-­14 days

Haemophilus
ducreyi (chancroid:
genital ulcers,
lymphadenopathy)

Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose
OR
Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM in a single dose
OR
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally 2× daily for 3
days
OR
Erythromycin base 500 mg orally 3× daily
for 7 days

Chlamydia trachomatis
serovars L1, L2, or L3
(lymphogranuloma
venereum)

Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2× daily for 21
days

Alternative: Erythromycin base 500 mg orally 4× daily for 21 days
OR
Azithromycin 1 g orally once weekly for 3 wk

IM, Intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases: treatment guidelines, 2021. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2021;70:1–187, https://www.cdc.gov/std/
treatment-­guidelines/default.htm.

Table 163.7  Management Guidelines for Uncomplicated Miscellaneous Sexually Transmitted Infections in Adolescents
and Adults
PATHOGEN

RECOMMENDED REGIMENS

ALTERNATIVE REGIMENS AND SPECIAL
CONSIDERATIONS

Trichomoniasis

Women:
Metronidazole 500 mg orally 2×/day for 7 days
Men:
Metronidazole 2 g orally in a single dose

For women and men: Tinidazole 2 g orally in a
single dose

Phthirus pubis (pediculosis
pubis, e.g., pubic lice)

Permethrin 1% cream rinse applied to affected areas and
washed off after 10 min
OR
Pyrethrins with piperonyl butoxide applied to affected
areas and washed off after 10 min
Launder clothing and bedding

Malathion 0.5% lotion applied for 8-­12 hr and
washed off
OR
Ivermectin 250 μg/kg orally, repeat in 7-­14 days

Sarcoptes scabiei (scabies)

Permethrin 5% cream applied to all areas of the body
(from neck down), wash after 8-­14 hr
OR
Ivermectin 200 μg/kg body weight orally, repeated in 14
days
Launder clothing and bedding

Lindane (1%) 1 oz of lotion or 30 g of cream in thin
layer to all areas of body from neck down; wash
off after 8 hr

Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases: treatment guidelines. MMWR. 2021;64(RR-­3); https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-­
guidelines/STI-­Guidelines-­2021.pdf.

TREATMENT

See Part XV for chapters on the treatment of specific microorganisms
and Tables 163.6-­163.8. Treatment regimens using nonprescription
products for candidal vaginitis and pediculosis reduce financial and
access barriers to rapid treatment for adolescents, but potential risks
for inappropriate self-­treatment and complications from untreated,
more serious infections must be considered before using this
approach. Minimizing noncompliance with treatment, notifying and
treating the sexual partners, addressing prevention and contraceptive
issues, offering available vaccines to prevent STIs, and making every
effort to preserve fertility are additional physician responsibilities.

Chlamydia-­and gonorrhea-­infected males and females should be
retested approximately 3 months after treatment, regardless of whether
they believe that their sex partners were treated, or whenever persons
next present for medical care in the 12 months after initial treatment.
Adolescents who are pregnant with chlamydia and gonorrhea infections should be retested in approximately 1 month after treatment. Adolescents with oral gonorrhea should be retested in 7-14 days. Once an
infection is diagnosed, partner evaluation, testing, and treatment are recommended for sexual contacts within 60 days of symptoms or diagnosis,
or the most recent partner if sexual contact was >60 days, even if the
partner is asymptomatic. Abstinence is recommended for at least 7 days

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections

1249

Table 163.8  Management Guidelines for Uncomplicated Genital Warts and Genital Herpes in Adolescents and Adults
PATHOGEN

RECOMMENDED REGIMENS

ALTERNATIVE REGIMENS AND SPECIAL
CONSIDERATIONS

HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS (HPV)
External anogenital
warts (penis, groin,
scrotum, vulva,
perineum, external
anus, and perianus)

Patient applied:
Imiquimod 3.75–5% cream self-­applied to warts at bedtime nightly
for up to 16 wk; wash off after 6-­10 hr
OR
Podofilox 0.5% solution or gel self-­applied to warts twice daily for
3 consecutive days each wk followed by 4 days of no therapy.
May be repeated for up to four cycles.
OR
Sinecatechins 15% ointment self-­applied 3 times daily for up to 16
wk. Do not wash off after use, and avoid genital, anal, and oral
sexual contact while ointment is on skin.
Provider-­administered:
Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen or cryoprobe. Repeat
applications every 1-­2 wk.
OR
Surgical removal either by tangential scissor excision,
electrocautery, tangential shave excision, curettage, laser or
electrosurgery.
OR
Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) or bichloracetic acid (BCA) 80–90%;
small amount applied only to warts and allowed to dry, when
white “frosting” develops; can be repeated weekly.

Cervical warts

Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen
OR
Surgical removal
OR
TCA or BCA 80–90% solution
Management should include consultation with a specialist.

Vaginal warts

Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen; avoid cryoprobe use because of
risk for vaginal perforation and fistula formation.
OR
Surgical removal
OR
TCA or BCA 80–90%; small amount applied only to warts and
allowed to dry, when white “frosting” develops; can be repeated
weekly.

Urethral meatal warts

Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen
OR
Surgical removal

Intraanal warts

Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen
OR
Surgical removal
OR
TCA or BCA 80–90% applied to warts. A small amount should be
applied only to warts and allowed to dry, at which time a white
“frosting” develops. Can be repeated weekly.

HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS (HSV; GENITAL HERPES)
First clinical episode
Treat for 7-­10 days with one of the following:
Acyclovir 400 mg orally 3× daily
Valacyclovir 1 g orally 2× daily
Famciclovir 250 mg orally 3× daily

Provider administered:
Podophyllin resin 10–25% in a compound tincture
of benzoin applied to each wart and then allowed
to air-­dry; thoroughly wash off after 1-­4 hr; can
be repeated weekly. Systemic toxicity has been
reported when podophyllin resin was applied to
large areas of friable tissue and was not washed
off within 4 hr.
Many persons with external anal warts also have
intraanal warts and might benefit from inspection
of anal canal by digital examination, standard
anoscopy, or high-­resolution anoscopy.

Management of intraanal warts should include
consultation with a specialist.

Consider extending treatment if healing is
incomplete after 10 days of therapy.

Episodic therapy for
recurrences

Treat with one of the following:
Acyclovir 800 mg orally 2× daily for 5 days
Acyclovir 800 mg orally 3× daily for 2 days
Valacyclovir 500 mg orally 2× daily for 3 days
Valacyclovir 1,000 mg orally once daily for 5 days
Famciclovir 1,000 mg orally 2× daily for 1 day
Famciclovir 500 mg orally once, then 250 mg 2× daily for 2 days
Famciclovir 125 mg orally twice daily for 5 days

Effective episodic treatment of recurrences requires
initiation of therapy within 1 day of lesion onset
or during the prodrome that precedes some
outbreaks. The patient should be provided with
a supply or a prescription for the medication with
instructions to initiate treatment immediately
when symptoms begin.

Suppressive therapy
to reduce frequency
of recurrences

Treat with one of the following:
Acyclovir 400 mg orally 2× daily
Valacyclovir 500 mg orally once daily* or 1 g orally once daily
Famciclovir 250 mg orally 2× daily

All patients should be counseled regarding
suppressive therapy availability, regardless of
number of outbreaks per year. Because the
frequency of recurrent outbreaks diminishes
over time in many patients, providers should
periodically discuss the need to continue therapy.
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1250 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 163.8  Management Guidelines for Uncomplicated Genital Warts and Genital Herpes in Adolescents and
Adults—cont’d
PATHOGEN

ALTERNATIVE REGIMENS AND SPECIAL
CONSIDERATIONS

RECOMMENDED REGIMENS

Daily suppressive
therapy in persons
with HIV infection

Acyclovir 400-­800 mg orally 2-­3× daily
OR
Famciclovir 500 mg orally 2× daily
OR
Valacyclovir 500 mg orally 2× daily

If lesions persist or recur in a patient receiving
antiviral treatment, acyclovir resistance should
be suspected and a viral culture obtained for
phenotypic sensitivity testing. Consultation with
an infectious disease specialist is recommended.

Episodic infection in
persons with HIV

Acyclovir 400 mg orally 3× daily for 7-­10 days
OR
Famciclovir 250 mg orally 3×/day for 7-­10 days
OR
Valacyclovir 1g orally 2× for 7-­10 days

If lesions persist or recur in a patient receiving
antiviral treatment, acyclovir resistance should
be suspected and a viral culture obtained for
phenotypic sensitivity testing. Consultation with
an infectious disease specialist is recommended.

Daily suppressive
therapy of recurrent
genital herpes in
pregnant women

Treatment is recommended to start at 36 wk gestation:
Acyclovir 400 mg orally 3× daily
OR
Valacyclovir 500 mg orally 2× per day

*Valacyclovir 500 mg once daily might be less effective than other valacyclovir or acyclovir dosing regimens in patients who have very frequent recurrences (i.e., ≥10 episodes per yr).
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases: treatment guidelines, MMWR 2021;64(RR-­3): https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-­
guidelines/STI-­Guidelines-­2021.pdf.

Table 163.9  Option for Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV Prevention
GENERIC

DOSE

FREQUENCY

POPULATION

Tenofovir disproxil fumarate
+ emtricitabine (F/TDF)*

200 mg/300 mg

Daily pill

Any person weighing at least 35 kg

Tenofovir alafenamide
+emtricitabine (F/TAF)

200 mg/25 mg

Daily pill

Individuals engaging in anal sex
who are cis male, transwomen
weighing at least 35 kg

Cabotegravir

200 mg/mL

Every 2 month
injection

Any person weighing at least 35 kg

*F/TDF is also available by brand name and generic depending on insurance. It can also be used as intermittent dosing for cis-men and transwomen engaging in anal sex.

after both patient and partner have completed treatment. A test for pregnancy should be performed for all females with suspected PID because
the test outcome will affect management. Repeat testing 3 months after
treatment is also recommended for Trichomonas infection.
Diagnosis and therapy are often carried out within the context of a
confidential relationship between the physician and the patient. Therefore the need to report certain STIs to health department authorities
should be clarified at the outset. Health departments are Health Insurance Portability and Affordability Act (HIPAA) exempt and will not
violate confidentiality. The health department’s role is to ensure that
treatment and case finding have been accomplished and that sexual
partners have been notified of their STI exposure. Expedited partner
therapy (EPT), the clinical practice of treating sex partners of patients
diagnosed with chlamydia or gonorrhea by providing prescriptions or
medications to the patient to take to the partner without the healthcare provider first examining the partner, is a strategy to reduce further
transmission of infection. In randomized trials, EPT has reduced the
rates of persistent or recurrent gonorrhea and chlamydia infection.
Serious adverse reactions are rare with recommended chlamydia and
gonorrhea treatment regimens, such as doxycycline, azithromycin, and
ceftriaxone. Transient gastrointestinal side effects are more common
but rarely result in severe morbidity. Most states expressly permit EPT
or may allow its practice. Resources for information regarding EPT and
state laws are available at the CDC website.

PREVENTION

Healthcare providers should integrate comprehensive sexuality
education into clinical practice with children from early childhood

through adolescence. Providers should counsel adolescents regarding
sexual behaviors associated with risk of STI acquisition and should
educate using evidence-­based prevention strategies, which include
a discussion of abstinence and other risk reduction strategies, such
as consistent and correct condom use, and distribution of educational materials for reinforcement. The USPSTF recommends high-­
intensity behavioral counseling to prevent STIs for all sexually active
adolescents.
The following recommendations for the primary prevention of STIs
through vaccination are based on published guidelines from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices:
• HPV vaccination is recommended through age 26 years for males
and females not vaccinated previously at the routine age of 11
or 12 years. Vaccination can be started at age 9. Two doses of
HPV vaccine are recommended for most persons starting the series before their 15th birthday; three doses are recommended at ≥
15 years.
• The HBV vaccination series is recommended for all adolescents and
young adults who have not previously received the universal HBV
vaccine series during childhood.
• Mpox vaccination is recommended for gay, bisexual, transgender
persons and if the patient has had sexual or intimate contact with
someone who may have mpox. Mpox vaccination is a two-dose
schedule separated by 4 weeks.
Preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) offers another strategy to specifically prevent HIV infection (Table 163.9).
The CDC and USPSTF recommend offering HIV PrEP to adolescents weighing ≥35 kg and young adults who are HIV negative and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Immunology
Section 1

Evaluation of the
Immune System

Immunology
164
Chapter

Orientation to the
­Consideration of Inborn
Errors of Immunity
Soma Jyonouchi and Kathleen E. Sullivan
Primary immune deficiency diseases (PIDDs) comprise more than
450 disorders that impair the development or function of the immune
system. Most these disorders result from a single gene pathogenic variant, although more complex inheritance patterns can also occur.
The initial diagnosis and subsequent treatment of PIDDs are often
delayed due to a low index of suspicion, a rare individual disease incidence, protein manifestations including infection, autoimmunity, cutaneous lesions, and failure to thrive all in the background of a higher
frequency of more common childhood illnesses (nonspecific viral illness, allergy). This diagnostic delay can lead to irreversible end-­organ
damage or death.
Newborn screening for severe combined immune deficiency (SCID)
has helped the early detection of SCID and other immune deficiencies associated with very low T cells. However, the vast majority of
immune deficiencies will not be detected by this method. Physicians
must be aware of concerning manifestations or events that suggest an
underlying PIDD. The varied presentations and complex phenotypes,

PART

XII

some of which have minimal or no infectious manifestations, make
the initial diagnosis of PIDDs difficult (Table 164.1). Manifestations
of PIDD include recurrent and/or sentinel infections, fever without a
focus, periodontitis, poor formation of pus at a site of infection, and
unusual inflammatory (including autoimmune) diseases. PIDDs may
involve defects in one or more host defense mechanism, or they may
be an independent isolated disorder or part of a recognizable syndrome
(Table 164.2).
The immune system is primarily responsible for protecting the
body against invading infectious pathogens. Recurrent (often in multiple sites), severe, or unusual infections are typical presentations of
PIDDs. Viral, bacterial, fungal, and mycobacterial infections each
require distinct arms of the immune system for eradication; identification of the microbe causing an infection is helpful in directing the
evaluation of a patient with suspected PIDD (see Table 164.1; Table
164.3). Children who exceed the normal frequency of infections or who
have very prolonged symptoms suggesting failure of pathogen clearance may also warrant evaluation. The typical preschool child can have
6-­10 viral respiratory infections per year, making this assessment less
than straightforward. Patients with PIDD are significantly more likely
to have severe infections requiring hospitalization and prolonged or
unsuccessful treatment with IV antibiotics. Infections with unusual
pathogens (opportunistic organisms) or infections resulting from live
attenuated virus vaccines (rotavirus, varicella, MMR) are important
warning signs. Neutropenia or lymphocytopenia may be present.
In addition to pathogen defense, the immune system must demonstrate tolerance to the host and prevent excessive inflammation that can
result in tissue damage. In addition to infections, patients can present
with autoimmune disease and/or autoinflammatory conditions. The
presence of a family history of PIDD or consanguinity should increase
suspicion for these conditions.
The patient’s clinical presentation can help guide the initial laboratory evaluation (Fig. 164.1).

INFECTION RED FLAGS

Infections are one of the more common reasons to initiate an immunologic evaluation. The pattern and etiology of the infections dictate
the appropriate diagnostic evaluation. A high burden of infections
in a child is the most common reason for referral to an immunology

Table 164.1  Patterns of Infections and Other Conditions in Primary Immunodeficiency
ILLNESSES
DISORDER

TYPE OF INFECTION

OTHER CONDITIONS

Antibody defects

Sinopulmonary infections (Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae, or Mycoplasma sp.)
Gastrointestinal (enteroviruses, Salmonella,
Campylobacter, Giardia, norovirus)

Autoimmune disease (thrombocytopenia, hemolytic
anemia, neutropenia)
Inflammatory bowel disease
Lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly
Otitis, mastoiditis

Cell-­mediated immunity
defects

Pneumonia (Pneumocystis jirovecii), Mycobacterium
avium-­intracellulare
Severe Epstein-­Barr infection
Gastrointestinal disease (viruses, cytomegalovirus)
Fungi of the skin, nails, mucous membranes

Failure to thrive
Splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy

Defects of phagocytosis

Skin, liver, lymph nodes, abscesses
(Staphylococcus, gram-­negative bacteria, fungi)

Inflammatory bowel disease
Granulomatous infiltrations

Defects of complement

Sepsis and other blood-­borne encapsulated bacteria;
meningitis, (Streptococcus, Pneumococcus, Neisseria)

Autoimmune disease (systemic lupus erythematosus,
ANA+, glomerulonephritis)

ANA, Antinuclear antibodies.
From Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021. Table 4.1, p. 32.

1252
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 164 u Orientation to the ­Consideration of Inborn Errors of Immunity

1253

Table 164.2  Types of Primary Immune Defects
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES AFFECTING CELLULAR AND HUMORAL IMMUNITY
T– B+ NK– SCID
Common gamma chain (IL2RG, X-­linked), JAK3
T– B+ NK+ SCID
IL7-­α, T-­cell receptor defects, CD45, PNP deficiency
T– B– SCID
RAG1, RAG2 defects, adenosine deaminase deficiency
COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCIES, GENERALLY LESS SEVERE
MHC class I and II defects; T-­cell receptor defects; DOCK8, IL21, and IL21R, and others
COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCIES WITH SYNDROMIC OR OTHER FEATURES
With thrombocytopenia
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
DNA repair defects
Ataxia telangiectasia, Nijmegen breakage syndrome; Bloom syndrome,
dyskeratosis congenital, LIG-­4
Hyper-­IgE syndromes
STAT3 loss of function, and others
Immuno-­osseous dysplasias
Cartilage hair hypoplasia
Schimke immuno-­osseous dysplasia
Ectodermal dysplasia
IKBKG deficiency (NEMO)
THYMIC DEFECTS WITH ADDITIONAL CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
DiGeorge, velocardiofacial syndrome
CHARGE syndrome
ANTIBODY DEFECTS
Agammaglobulinemias
Hyper-­IgM syndromes
IgG or IgA deficiency
IgG, and IgA and or IgM deficiency
DISEASES OF IMMUNE DYSREGULATION
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
With hypopigmentation
With autoimmunity

X-­linked and autosomal forms of agammaglobulinemia
X-­linked and autosomal forms
IgG subclass and IgA deficiency
Common variable immunodeficiency

With colitis

Perforin deficiency; UNC13D.
Chédiak-­Higashi, Griscelli, Hermansky-­Pudlak syndromes
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy with candidiasis and ectodermal
dystrophy, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome
X-­linked immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy enteropathy
(IPEX), defects of CTLA4, STAT3
X-­linked autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, XIAP deficiency,
magnesium transporter 1 (MAGT1)
IL-­10 defects

CONGENITAL DEFECTS OF PHAGOCYTE NUMBER OR FUNCTION
Neutropenia
Defects of motility
Defects of respiratory burst
Other nonlymphoid defects

Elastase deficiency, HAX1 deficiency, and others
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency
Chronic granulomatous disease
GATA2 deficiency

With defects of regulatory T cells
Leading to severe Epstein-­Barr virus

DEFECTS IN INTRINSIC AND INNATE IMMUNITY
Mycobacterial disease
Warts
Viral infections
Herpes simplex encephalitis
Fungal diseases
Bacterial susceptibility

IL-­12, IL-­23, INF-­γ, STAT1 defects, and others
Epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EVER), hypogammaglobulinemia,
infections, myelokathexis syndrome (WHIM)
STAT1, STAT2, IRF7, and others
TLR3, UNC93B1
CARD9, IL17 defects, STAT1
IRAK4, MYD88, IRAK1, and others

COMPLEMENT DEFICIENCY
Classical pathway
Alternative pathway
Regulatory and membrane controls

C1q-­C9 defects
Factors B, D, I, H, properdin, and others
Co-­factor proteins

CHARGE defect, Disorder with coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanae (also known as choanal atresia), growth retardation, genital abnormalities, and ear abnormalities; Ig,
immunoglobulin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NK, natural killer; PNP, purine nucleoside phosphorylase; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency.
From Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021. Table 4.2, p. 33-­34.

center; there are certain patterns that can collectively be thought of as
red flags, mandating an immunologic evaluation.

Recurrent Sinopulmonary Infections

Recurrent bacterial sinopulmonary infections (ear, sinus, pneumonia)
with encapsulated organisms are a common presentation for PIDDs.
It can be challenging to define a number of infections that represent a

threshold to begin an immunologic evaluation. Typically, most patients
with a PIDD will have a diversity of sites impacted by infection; the
frequency will be higher or the severity more severe than the clinician
would expect. Recurrent sinopulmonary infections are highly suggestive of patients with antibody deficiencies, such as common variable
immunodeficiency (CVID; see Chapter 165) or X-­linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA; see Chapter 166). Patients often require longer courses

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1254 Part XII u Immunology
Table 164.3  Sentinel Infections and Related Genes
RECOGNIZED GENE DEFECTS
AND WELL-­CHARACTERIZED
SYNDROMES

INFECTIONS
VIRUSES
Herpes simplex
encephalitis
Cutaneous herpes simplex
EBV—chronic
EBV—HLH
CMV
Papilloma virus

FUNGI
Candida
Aspergillus

TBK1, TLR3, TRAF3, TRIF, UNC93B
Severe T-­cell defects, DOCK8, GATA2,
WAS
CD21, CD27, CORO1A, ITK, MAGT1,
PRKCD, CXCR4
AP3B1, LYST1, PRF1, RAB27A, SH2D1A,
STX11, UNC13D, XIAP
Severe T-­cell defects, Good syndrome,
DOCK8, GATA2, STIM1, WAS
Idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia, ATM,
CD40L, EVER1, EVER2, DOCK8,
GATA2, IKBKG, MST1, RORH, STK4,
CXCR4
AIRE, CARD9, IL17F, IL17RA, STAT1
Idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia, CYBA,
CYBB, DOCK8, GATA2, ITGB2, NCF1,
NCF2, NCF4, STAT3

BACTERIA
Pseudomonas

Congenital neutropenia, IRAK4, ITGB2,
MYD88, BTK (neutropenia), CD40LG
(neutropenia)
CYBB, IFNGR1, IFNGR2, IL12B,
IL12RB1
CYBA, CYBB, NCF1, NCF2, NCF4
C5, C6, C7, C8A, C8B, C8G, C9, CFD,
CFH, CFI, CFP
C1QA, C1QB, C1QC, C4A + C4B, C2,
C3, IRAK4, MYD88

Salmonella
Serratia
Neisseria
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
MYCOBACTERIA
Mycobacteria

CYBA, CYBB, GATA2, IFNGR1,
IFNGR2, IKBKG, IL12, IL12RB1, IRF8,
NCF1, NCF2, NCF4, STAT1, TYK2

CMV, Cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
From Sullivan KE, Stiehm ER, eds. Stiehm’s Immune Deficiencies. 2nd ed. London:
Elsevier; 2020. Table 1.2.

IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE
Vaccine titers
Lymphocyte flow cytometry

Neutrophil count
Oxidative burst (DHR)

• Recurrent sinopulmonary
infections
• Enteroviral
meningoencephalitis
• Bronchiectasis
• Recurrent
gastroenteritis

of antibiotics to clear infections and may not have improvement with
standard interventions such as bilateral myringotomy tubes or sinus
surgery.

Recurrent Invasive Pneumococcal Infections

Invasive pneumococcal infections (sepsis, septic arthritis, meningitis)
may occur in patients with antibody deficiency (Table 164.4). A single
episode need not imply a PIDD. Recurrent invasive pneumococcal
infections should elicit an evaluation. Pneumococcus has a polysaccharide capsule that permits it to evade the immune system. Antibodies bind to these bacteria (opsonization), which facilitates phagocytosis
and bacterial killing. The early complement fragment C3b also opsonizes bacteria, labeling it for destruction. Patients with early classical complement component deficiencies (see Chapter 173) have an
increased risk of invasive infections with encapsulated bacteria such
as pneumococcus. The spleen plays a key role in the phagocytosis
and clearance of nonopsonized bacteria. Thus primary or secondary
asplenia is associated with an increased risk of disseminated infections
with pneumococcus (and meningococcus) requiring patients to take
antibiotic prophylaxis. Patients with toll-­like receptor (TLR) defects
(IRAK4, MyD88, and NEMO deficiency) develop invasive pneumococcal and Staphylococcus aureus infections. These patients uniquely
fail to (or minimally) manifest signs of inflammation (fevers, elevated
CRP, ESR) despite having invasive infections; this is the result of a block
in the pathway that produces inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-­6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, critical for recruitment
of neutrophils and fever generation.

Severe Papillomavirus

A number of PIDDs are characterized by recurrent, severe human
papillomavirus (HPV) infections (see Table 164.3). Warts are common
in the general population but high numbers should suggest a PIDD.
Patients with WHIM syndrome (warts, hypogammaglobulinemia,
immunodeficiency, myelokathexis) have a unique susceptibility to
HPV-­induced warts in addition to bacterial sinopulmonary infections
and cutaneous abscesses (immunity to other viral infections is intact)
(see Fig. 708.6). One of the hallmarks of DOCK8 deficiency is severe
cutaneous viral infections with HPV, molluscum contagiosum, herpes
simplex, and varicella zoster. Patients with epidermodysplasia verruciformis have markedly increased susceptibility to cutaneous HPV
infections. Patients with GATA2 deficiency can suffer from severe disseminated HPV, including genital locations, and molluscum contagiosum infections. Treatment is distinct for each condition, but knowing

• Failure to thrive
• Severe viral infections
• Pneumocystis
• Candida
• Low TRECs

B cell

T cell

Phagocyte

Complement

• Abscesses
• Adenitis
• Severe bacterial
infections
• Poor wound healing
• Periodontal disease

• Neisseria
• Early-onset lupus
• Encapsulated bacterial
infections

Lymphocyte count
Lymphocyte flow cytometry
T cell proliferation

CH50
AH50

Fig. 164.1 When infections are the major manifestation of the inborn error of immunity, several types of laboratory tests can yield a diagnosis. The
specific type of infection suggests the effector arm of the immune system that may be dysfunctional, and the testing can be applied in a targeted
fashion. Laboratory evaluation is noted in the light blue boxes. DHR, dihydrorhodamine, Ig, immunoglobulin; TRECs, T cell receptor excision circles.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 164 u Orientation to the ­Consideration of Inborn Errors of Immunity

1255

Table 164.4  Recurrent Invasive Pneumococcal Infections
CONDITION

GENE/CONDITION SUBSET

INHERITANCE

Asplenia

ATRX

XL

Developmental delay, low-­set ears, single palmar crease

OTHER FEATURES

Asplenia

HMOX1

AR

Hemolysis, nephritis

Asplenia

NKX2-­5

AD

Asplenia

RPSA

AD

Asplenia

ZEB2

AD

Asplenia

Gene unknown/syndromic

Antibody deficiency

BTK

XL

Antibody deficiency

Hypogammaglobulinemia

Various

Antibody deficiency

Specific antibody deficiency

Various

Antibody deficiency

IgG subclass deficiency

Various

Antibody deficiency

CVID

Various

Innate immune deficiency

MYD88

AR

Poor fever formation

Innate immune deficiency

IRAK4

AR

Poor fever formation

Innate immune deficiency

IKBKG

XL

Peg teeth, ectodermal dysplasia

Complement deficiency

C2

AR

Can have lupus

Complement deficiency

C1

AR

Can have lupus

Complement deficiency

C4

AR

Can have lupus

Complement deficiency

C3

AR

Glomerulonephritis

Mowat-­Wilson syndrome, microcephaly, Hirschsprung
disease, defects in corpus callosum
Can occur in heterotaxy syndromes

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CVID, common variable immunodeficiency; XL, X-­linked.

the immune etiology is critical because of the substantial morbidity
associated with continually spreading warts.

Herpes Simplex Virus Encephalitis

Several innate PIDDs uniquely present with recurrent herpes simplex virus (HSV) encephalitis (without mucosal HSV infections) due
to disruption of the signaling pathways regulating antiviral cytokines
interferon (IFN)-­α and -­β, which are critical for control of HSV infections (see Table 164.3). Examples of these PIDDs include TLR3 deficiency, UNC93b deficiency, and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
deficiency. The importance of recognition relates to the likelihood of
recurrence, with the attendant central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction that can result.

Epstein-­Barr Virus

Severe life-­threatening infections with fulminant Epstein-­Barr virus
(EBV) are a hallmark of certain PIDDs, whereas typical outpatient
infectious mononucleosis infections are not concerning (see Chapter
301) (see Table 164.3). Patients with familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) have a block in the cytotoxic lymphocyte
(NK and CD8 T cell) pathway necessary to control EBV infections
(see Chapter 556). Patients develop uncontrolled immune hyperactivation (cytokine storm) from unchecked EBV infections resulting
in life-­threatening HLH. Clinical symptoms include fever, hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, and multi-­system organ failure. There
may be evidence of hemophagocytosis activated by macrophages in
a bone marrow biopsy. Patients with X-­linked lymphoproliferative
syndrome (XLP) are predisposed to fatal fulminant EBV with or without HLH, as well as lymphoma. Patients with XLP who survive acute
EBV infections will often go on to develop hypogammaglobulinemia.
Multiple PIDD disorders have an increased risk of HLH (Table 164.5).
These conditions are more likely to require hematopoietic cell transplantation (see Chapter 176) than HLH occurring in the non-­PIDD
community.

Severe Candida

Severe oral thrush from Candida albicans (as well as other opportunistic infections such a Pneumocystis jiroveci) can be seen in patients
with SCID who have very low CD3 T cells (classically <300) and poor
T-­cell function; this mirrors the clinical phenotype of infants with HIV
who also have low T cells (see Table 164.3). Intact T-­cell IL-­17 immunity is essential for control of Candida infections and overall decrements in the entire T-­cell population or selective defects in the Th17
population are strongly associated with Candida. Patients with specific gene pathogenic variants in IL-­17 signaling (IL-­17RA, IL-­17RC,
IL-­17F, and ACT1) present with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
(CMCC; Candida infections of the skin, nails, mucosa). STAT1 gain-­
of-­function pathogenic variants result in decreased IL-­17 production
that also predisposes patients to skin and mucosal Candida infections.
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in
the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. Patients develop CMCC and
autoimmune endocrine disorders such as hypoparathyroidism and
adrenal insufficiency.

Aspergillus

Neutrophils are responsible for engulfing and killing fungal organisms.
Aspergillus species are a major cause of infections in chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), a PIDD characterized by defective neutrophil function (see Table 164.3). CGD patients most commonly develop
Aspergillus pneumonia or osteomyelitis, although all sites are susceptible to fungal infection. Aspergillus nidulans infections occur almost
exclusively in CGD and result in a much higher rate of osteomyelitis
and mortality than A. fumigatus. Exposure to Aspergillus through handling of mulch with gardening or exposure to hay can cause fulminant pneumonitis in CGD patients. Patients with GATA2 deficiency
and STAT1 gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants can develop fungal
infections such as aspergillus and histoplasmosis as well as atypical
mycobacteria. Patients with autosomal dominant hyper-­IgE syndrome

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1256 Part XII u Immunology
Table 164.5  Primary Immune Deficiency Disease and Risk of Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis*
CONDITION

GENE/CONDITION SUBSET

INHERITANCE

RISK OF HLH

CD48 deficiency

CD48

AD

High

OTHER FEATURES

Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome

LYST

AR

High

Pigmentary dilution

NLRC4

NLRC4

High

IBD

Perforin deficiency (FHL2)

PRF1

AR

High

Griscelli syndrome, type 2

RAB27A

AR

High

X-­linked lymphoproliferative disease 1

SH2D1A

XL

High

Syntaxin 11 deficiency (FHL4)

STX11

AR

High

STXBP2/Munc18-­2 deficiency (FHL5)

STXBP2

AR or AD

High

UNC13D/Munc13-­4 deficiency (FHL3)

UNC13D

AR

High

X-­linked lymphoproliferative disease 2

XIAP

XL

High

CD27 deficiency

CD27

AR

Medium

Unable to control EBV

Chronic granulomatous disease

All genetic types

XL, AR

Low

Infections, granulomas

Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome, type 2

AP3B1

AR

Low

Pigmentary dilution

Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome, type 10

AP3D1

AR

Low

Pigmentary dilution

Lysinuric protein intolerance SLC7A7
deficiency

SLC7A7

AR

Low

Lung disease, feeding intolerance

Pigmentary dilution

Hypogammaglobulinemia, IBD

*Other primary immune deficiency diseases, including most T-­cell deficiencies have been associated with HLH in rare patients.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; HLH, Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease.

(STAT3 deficiency) commonly develop lung pneumatoceles (cavities),
which can then become superinfected with Aspergillus.

Sentinel Bacterial Infections

Certain bacterial infections are considered sentinel infections because
the pathogen is highly associated with specific PIDDs. The following
bacteria are considered highly suspicious for CGD: Burkholderia cepacia, Nocardia, Serratia marcescens, Chromobacterium violaceum, and
Granulibacter bethesdensis. Unlike patients with cystic fibrosis, B. cepacia in CGD can cause pneumonia but also rapidly fatal sepsis. Terminal
complement (C5-­C9) and alternative complement defects (properdin or factor D deficiency) have increased susceptibility to recurrent
invasive Neisseria species (recurrent meningococcal and disseminated
gonococcal infections). Complement deficiencies are also found more
frequently in patients with meningitis due to unusual serotypes of
Neisseria.

Mycobacterial Infections

Intact IL-­12 and IFN-­γ signaling is required to activate phagocytes
such as macrophages to clear intracellular pathogens such as mycobacteria (see Table 164.3). Patients who have defects along this pathway
such as IL-­12 p40, IL-­12 receptor, and IFN-­γ receptor deficiency present with atypical mycobacterial infections; these infections can spread
to bones and visceral organs (rather than isolated uncomplicated cervical lymphadenitis, which does not suggest a PIDD). STAT1 deficiency
is associated with mycobacterial infections because STAT1 is required
for IFN-­γ signaling. Patients with NEMO deficiency due to pathogenic
variants in IKBKG develop mycobacterial disease due to impaired IL-­
12 production in response to infection and impaired TLR signaling.
Atypical mycobacteria also cause pulmonary disease in patients with
CGD. Patients with the PIDDs mentioned previously born outside
of the United States who receive the bacilli Calmette-­Guérin (BCG)
attenuated vaccine can present with disseminated BCG strain mycobacterial infection often complicating subsequent hematopoietic cell
transplantation.

Severe Cryptosporidia

Cryptosporidium is a protozoan parasite that causes diarrheal disease in humans. Exposure occurs from contaminated drinking water

sources as well as fresh water and public swimming pools. Patients with
PIDD can develop infections outside of the GI tract such as the lungs,
biliary tract, and pancreas. Intact T-­cell immunity appears to play a
critical role in resolution of Cryptosporidium infection as evidenced
by the high incidence of this infection in patients with HIV. PIDDs
with impaired T-­cell immunity are characterized by increased risk for
developing Cryptosporidium. In X-­linked hyper-­IgM syndrome, major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II deficiency, DOCK8 deficiency, IL-­21 receptor deficiency, sclerosing cholangitis, and cirrhosis
from chronic Cryptosporidium infection can occur. The presence of
liver disease from Cryptosporidium appears to increase the risk of mortality from curative hematopoietic cell transplantation.

SCHEMA FOR DIAGNOSIS

Clues to the diagnosis of a PIDD may be obtained by the past and current history and the physical exam (Tables 164.6 and 164.7)
Laboratory studies typically used in the diagnosis of PIDD are rudimentary. Typical laboratory studies measure the amount of antibody
or count the numbers of a given cell type (T cells as an example). There
is a relatively limited ability to test function. Figures 164.1 and 164.2
outline a strategy to approach the diagnostic testing for PIDDs.

NONINFECTIOUS PRESENTATIONS SUGGESTING
PIDD

Autoimmunity and inflammation can be indicators of a possible PIDD.
Infections may be falsely attributed to the medications used to control
the autoimmunity or inflammation. Often the usual immunologic testing is normal. Many of the autoimmune or autoinflammatory disorders associated with PIDD may need to be identified through genetic
sequencing.

Autoimmunity

Autoimmunity can be the presenting manifestation of a PIDD. Rather
than having the more familiar infectious phenotype, these patients have
defects in tolerance or lymphocyte function that compromise their
homeostasis. HLH is a profound form of immune dysregulation (see
Chapter 556.2). These conditions are important to recognize because
targeted therapies can be beneficial and because they can evolve to
complex phenotypes with severe morbidity. The typical laboratory

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 164 u Orientation to the ­Consideration of Inborn Errors of Immunity
Table 164.6  Clinical Aids to the Diagnosis of
Immunodeficiency
SUGGESTIVE OF B-­CELL DEFECT
(HUMORAL IMMUNODEFICIENCY)
Recurrent bacterial infections of the upper and lower respiratory
tracts
Recurrent skin infections, meningitis, osteomyelitis secondary to
encapsulated bacteria (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus
influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus, Neisseria meningitidis)
Severe Giardia lamblia infections
Paralysis after vaccination with live attenuated poliovirus
Reduced levels of immunoglobulins
SUGGESTIVE OF T-­CELL DEFECT
(COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY)
Systemic illness after vaccination with any live virus or BCG
Unusual life-­threatening complication after infection with benign
viruses (giant cell pneumonia with measles; varicella pneumonia)
Chronic oral candidiasis after 6 mo of age
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
Graft versus host disease after blood transfusion
Reduced lymphocyte counts for age
Low level of immunoglobulins
Absence of lymph nodes and tonsils
Small thymus
Chronic diarrhea
Failure to thrive
Recurrent infections with opportunistic organisms
Generalized, recurrent, recalcitrant warts
SUGGESTIVE OF MACROPHAGE DYSFUNCTION
Disseminated atypical mycobacterial infection, recurrent Salmonella
infection
Fatal infection after BCG vaccination
CONGENITAL SYNDROMES WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
Ataxia-­telangiectasia: ataxia, telangiectasia
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome: hypofunction of one or more
endocrine organs, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia: short-­limbed dwarfism, sparse hair,
neutropenia
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome: thrombocytopenia, male gender, eczema
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome: oculocutaneous albinism, nystagmus,
recurrent bacterial infections, peripheral neuropathies
DiGeorge syndrome (22q deletion syndrome): unusual facies, heart
defect, hypocalcemia
CHARGE syndrome: coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanae,
retarded growth, genital hypoplasia, ear anomalies/deafness
Short-­limb skeletal dysplasia with combined immune deficiency:
metaphyseal dysplasia, ADA deficiency, or Omenn syndrome
X-­linked agammaglobulinemia with growth hormone deficiency:
hypogammaglobulinemia, growth hormone deficiency
Kabuki syndrome: long palpebral fissures, prominent eyelashes,
congenital heart disease
Timothy syndrome: prolonged QT, congenital heart disease,
developmental delay
PTEN tumor hamartoma syndrome: multiple hamartomas, cancer
SUGGESTIVE OF ASPLENIA
Heterotaxia, complex congenital heart disease, Howell-­Jolly bodies
on blood smear, sickle cell anemia
ADA, Adenosine deaminase; BCG, bacille Calmette-­Guérin.
From Verbsky JW, Routes JM. Recurrent fever, immune deficiency, and autoinflammatory
disorders. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric
Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023.Table 54.7, p. 1028.

evaluations used in the diagnosis of the PIDD are often unrevealing or
minimally abnormal, leading to delay in diagnosis and implementation
of appropriate therapy. The prognosis may be poor; hematopoietic cell
transplantation is recommended.

Early-­Onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

Prepubertal systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is uncommon and
onset of SLE before 5 years of age is exceptionally unusual (Table 164.8);

1257

onset before 5 years of age suggests a monogenic condition such as
early complement component deficiencies (see Chapter 173). Complement deficiencies also have an infection phenotype. SLE is the dominant phenotype for C1 and C4 deficiencies. The mechanism by which
these complement deficiencies lead to susceptibility to SLE is through
impaired clearance of apoptotic material and compromised tolerance.
SLE may present in infancy in C1 and C4 deficiencies and it is typically severe. C2 deficiency, in contrast, is associated with a milder susceptibility to SLE and proportionally higher susceptibility to infection.
Other gene defects associated with early-­onset SLE include lymphocyte
defects such as PRKCD, FAS, and FASL. Manifestations of the interferonopathies such as Aicardi Goutières can resemble SLE and may
have a high rate of antinuclear antibodies (ANA). CNS involvement
and a cutaneous vasculopathy are hallmarks of interferonopathies (see
Chapter 205).

Early-­Onset Enteropathy

Small bowel enteropathy in these conditions is defined as non–gluten
sensitive and associated with villous blunting or atrophy (Table 164.9).
A key component of the differential diagnosis is the congenital diarrheas associated with either solute carrier defects or altered epithelial
function (see Chapter 385). However, many of the solute carrier defects
do not have villous blunting or atrophy. The early-­onset enteropathy
conditions are most often related to T-­cell defects in intolerance and
are classically associated with dysfunctional regulatory T cells such as
in IPEX (immune dysregulation enteropathy X-­linked). Identical but
milder enteropathy is also seen in patients with STAT5B deficiency
and IL2RA deficiency. Both of these molecules are required for critical
signal transduction in regulatory T cells. Although enteropathy is often
the presenting manifestation in these regulatory T-­cell deficiency states,
many of these patients will develop additional autoimmune features.
The progression of autoimmune involvement of different organ systems
can only be altered through hematopoietic cell transplantation. Enteropathy can also be seen in older individuals with one of the immune
dysregulation conditions associated with CVID. In these conditions,
the enteropathy may appear in early childhood or as late as middle age.
The key to suspecting a monogenic immune dysregulation condition is
the finding of villous atrophy that is not gluten-­restriction responsive.
Expanded populations of intraepithelial lymphocytes are also common.

Pleomorphic Autoimmunity

Autoimmunity in children usually does not imply an inherited monogenic condition (Table 164.10). In a setting where there is a strong family history and a suspected autosomal dominant condition, the first
onset of autoimmunity may prompt a genetic evaluation; a single organ
autoimmune disease does not strongly suggest that there is a monogenic condition underlying that autoimmune disease.
Pleomorphic autoimmunity refers to autoimmune disease affecting
multiple organs in a pattern that is not typical for either age of onset
or evolution. SLE can affect a number of organs as can mixed connective tissue disease, but it would be unusual for those conditions to also
be associated with diabetes mellitus or autoimmune hepatitis. When
autoimmunity does not fall cleanly into a particular diagnosis, it is suggestive of pleomorphic autoimmunity.
There is a broad range of defects in T-­and B-­cell tolerance and conditions associated with impaired regulation of T-­cell behavior that can
lead to an array of autoimmune conditions. The organs affected by
autoimmunity typically accrue over time and in a pattern that is not
standard for the known sporadic systemic autoimmune conditions. In
some cases, these conditions may also have peculiar pathologic features that represent a clue that the underlying diagnosis is something
other than a standard autoimmune disease of childhood. Table 164.10
attempts to categorize conditions according to the pathway implicated.
There is wide heterogeneity in the timing of the autoimmune disease,
the penetrance of the disease, and the end organs affected. This combination makes this particular subset of PIDD extraordinarily difficult
to conceptualize. Only a high index of suspicion and the use of genetic
evaluations can identify these patients who will often benefit from targeted therapeutics.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1258 Part XII u Immunology
Table 164.7  Special Physical Features Associated with Immunodeficiency Disorders
CLINICAL FEATURES
DERMATOLOGIC
Eczema
Sparse and/or hypopigmented hair
Ocular telangiectasia
Oculocutaneous albinism
Severe dermatitis
Erythroderma
Recurrent abscesses with pulmonary pneumatoceles
Recurrent organ granulomas or abscesses, lung, liver, and
rectum especially
Recurrent abscesses or cellulitis
Cutaneous granulomas
Oral ulcers
Periodontitis, gingivitis, stomatitis
Oral or nail candidiasis

DISORDERS
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, IPEX, hyper-­IgE syndromes, hypereosinophilia
syndromes, IgA deficiency
Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia, Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome, Griscelli syndrome
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome
Omenn syndrome
Omenn syndrome, SCID, graft versus host disease, Comèl-­Netherton syndrome
Hyper-­IgE syndromes
CGD

Vitiligo
Alopecia
Chronic conjunctivitis

CGD, hyper-­IgE syndrome, leukocyte adhesion defect
Ataxia telangiectasia, SCID, CVID, RAG deficiency
CGD, SCID, congenital neutropenia
Neutrophil defects
T-­cell immune defects, combined defects (SCIDs); mucocutaneous candidiasis;
hyper-­IgE syndromes; IL-­12, IL-­17, and IL-­23 deficiencies; CARD9 deficiency;
STAT1 deficiency
B-­cell defects, mucocutaneous candidiasis
B-­cell defects, mucocutaneous candidiasis
B-­cell defects

EXTREMITIES
Clubbing of nails
Arthritis

Chronic lung disease caused by antibody defects
Antibody defects, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, hyper-­IgM syndrome

ENDOCRINOLOGIC
Hypoparathyroidism
Endocrinopathies (autoimmune)
Diabetes, hypothyroid
Growth hormone deficiency
Gonadal dysgenesis

DiGeorge syndrome, mucocutaneous candidiasis
Mucocutaneous candidiasis
IPEX and IPEX-­like syndromes
X-­linked agammaglobulinemia
Mucocutaneous candidiasis

HEMATOLOGIC
Hemolytic anemia
Thrombocytopenia, small platelets
Neutropenia
Immune thrombocytopenia

B-­and T-­cell immune defects, ALPS
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Hyper-­IgM syndrome, Wiskott-­Aldrich variant, CGD
B-­cell immune defects, ALPS

SKELETAL
Short-­limb dwarfism
Bony dysplasia

Short-­limb dwarfism with T-­cell and/or B-­cell immune defects
ADA deficiency, cartilage-­hair hypoplasia

ADA, Adenosine deaminase; ALPS, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome; CGD, chronic granulomatous disease; CVID, common variable immunodeficiency; IPEX, X-­linked
immune dysfunction enteropathy polyendocrinopathy; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency.
From Goldman L, Ausiello D, ed. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. 22nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2004. p 1599.

Inflammatory Diseases

Many of the recognized inflammatory diseases are the periodic fever
(autoinflammatory) syndromes (see Chapter 204). Distinguishing
fevers related to infection and those fevers that are driven by endogenous immune dysfunction is often initially difficult. The first contact
with the healthcare system may be by a subspecialist who may only
recognize the initial presenting manifestation. The inflammatory diseases are typically managed according to the pathway that is defective;
therefore the distinction between these conditions and the autoimmune conditions is critically important.

Very Early Onset Inflammatory Bowel Disease

A key setting where a monogenic inflammatory condition should be
considered is infantile-­onset inflammatory bowel disease or early-­onset
inflammatory bowel disease with additional autoimmune features (see
Chapter 382.1). Overall, approximately 20% of children who develop
inflammatory bowel disease prior to 6 years of age will have a monogenic immune-­based condition. The frequency increases with infantile
onset or with panenteric disease. The diagnosis is most often established through genetic sequencing because the implicated genes are

numerous and diverse (see Chapters 174 and 382.3). These conditions
are managed with targeted biologic or small molecule agents with a
few select patient subsets requiring hematopoietic cell transplantation.

Fever Syndromes

The central feature of the inherited fever syndromes is fever arising
in the absence of infectious trigger (see Chapter 204). Infants and
toddlers may have infections with a frequency of one per month and
take as long as 2 weeks to recover. Nevertheless, the parents will often
remark that the fevers “came out of the blue” or no one else in the
household was ill at the time and express surprise at the frequency with
which their child has been diagnosed with a viral infection with no
viral symptoms. Some of the fever syndromes have fever that is typically isolated with no additional end-­organ effects, whereas others have
fever as a component of a much larger systemic inflammatory picture.
The most familiar inherited fever syndromes are those associated with inflammasome activation and typically treated with IL-­1
inhibitors. A key consideration in the differential diagnosis for
these conditions is the nongenetic condition called periodic fever
aphthous stomatitis pharyngitis adenitis (PFAPA; see Chapter 204).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 164 u Orientation to the ­Consideration of Inborn Errors of Immunity

1259

• History and physical exam
• CBC with differential counts
• Cultures/Imaging
• IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE levels
• Diphtheria, tetanus titers
• Pneumococcus, Haemophilus titers
• CH50, AH50
If normal, consult with clinical
immunologist, consider the
following

Suspect phagocyte
defect

Suspect humoral defect

Suspect combined
defect

• Dihydrorhodamine for
CGD

• Flow cytometry for T
cells (CD4, CD8), B
cells, NK cells
• Enumerate
percentage of naïve,
memory, and switched
memory B cells

• Flow cytometry for T
cells (CD4, CD8), B
cells, NK cells
• Enumerate
percentage of
memory vs naïve T
cells (CD45 isoform
expression)
• T cell mitogen studies

• Flow cytometry for
LAD1 (CD11/CD18) or
LAD2 (CD15)

• Consider neutrophil
chemotaxis assays

• Functional B cell
studies

• IL-12 receptor/IFN
receptor expression
and function

Fig. 164.2 Initial work-­up and follow-­up studies of patients with suspected immune deficiency. Consultation with a clinical immunologist is rec-

ommended to guide advanced testing and interpret results. CGD, Chronic granulomatous disease; Ig, immunoglobulin; LAD, leukocyte adhesion
defect; NK, natural killer; IL, interleukin; IFN, interferon. (From Verbsky JW, Routes JM. Recurrent fever, immune deficiency, and autoinflammatory
disorders. In Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023. Fig.
54.9, p. 1029.)

Table 164.8  Early-­Onset Monogenic Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
PATHWAY

GENE

INHERITANCE

SLE FREQUENCY

OTHER FEATURES

Complement

C1QA

AR

High

Infections

Complement

C1QB

AR

High

Infections

Complement

C1QC

AR

High

Infections

Complement

C1R

AR

High

Infections

Complement

C1S

AR

High

Infections

Complement

C2

AR

Low

Infections

Complement

C3

AR

Low

Infections, GN

Complement

C4

AR

High

Infections

Type I Interferon-­AGS

ADAR

AR or AD (DN)

Low

AGS, CNS

Type I Interferon-­AGS

IFIH1

AD (GOF)

Low

AGS, arthropathy, CNS

Type I Interferon-­AGS

RNASEH2A/B/C

AR

Low

AGS

Type I Interferon-­AGS

SAMHD1

AR

Low

AGS, FCL, CNS

Type I Interferon-­AGS

TREX1

AR or AD (DN)

Low

AGS, FCL

Type I Interferon

ACP5

AR

High

Bone, CNS

Type I Interferon

DNASE1

AR

High

Type I Interferon

DNASE2

AR

High

GN

Type I Interferon

DNASE1L3

AR

High

HUVS

Type I Interferon

OTUD1

AD

Medium

Arthritis, IBD

Type I Interferon

STING

AD (GOF)

Medium

Vasculopathy, arthritis, ILD

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1260
Part XII
u Immunology
Table 164.8
 Early-­
Onset Monogenic Systemic Lupus Erythematosus—cont’d
PATHWAY

GENE

INHERITANCE

SLE FREQUENCY

OTHER FEATURES

RAS/MAPK

KRAS

AD

Low

Short stature

RAS/MAPK

PTPN1

AD

Low

Short stature

RAS/MAPK

SHOC2

AD

Low

Noonan-­like syndrome

Proteasome

PSMA3

AD

Low

Dermatosis, lipodystrophy

Proteasome

PSMB4

AD

Low

Dermatosis, lipodystrophy

Proteasome

PSMB8

AD

Low

Dermatosis, lipodystrophy

Proteasome

PSMB9

AD

Low

Dermatosis, lipodystrophy

Apoptosis

FASLG

AD

Medium

ALPS

Apoptosis

TNFRSF6

AD

Medium

ALPS

Tolerance

PRKCD

AR

High

Infections

Tolerance

RAG1/2

AR

Medium

Infections, granulomas

Oxidase

CYBB

XL

Low

Males, CGD; females, discoid SLE

AKT

PTEN

AD

Medium

Malignancy risk

Collagen

PEPD

AR

Low

Leg ulcers

Amino acids

SLC7A7

AR

Low

Lysinuric protein intolerance

Carbohydrate

MAN2B1

AR

Low

Mannosidase

NFKappaB

TNFAIP3

AD

Medium

Vasculitis, ALPS

Adenosine

ADA2

AR

Low

Vasculitis, CNS, ALPS

Transcription factor

IKZF1

AD

Low

Leukemia, infections

AD, Autosomal dominant; AGS, Aicardi Goutières syndrome; ALPS, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome; AR, autosomal recessive; CNS, central nervous system; DN, dominant negative; FCL, familial chilblains lupus; GOF, gain of function; GN, glomerulonephritis; HUVS, hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; ILD:
interstitial lung disease; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; XL, X-­linked.

Table 164.9  Early-­Onset Enteropathy (Not Gluten Sensitive)
CONDITION

GENE

INHERITANCE

ENTEROPATHY FREQUENCY

OTHER FEATURES

Microvillous inclusion disease

MYO5B

AR

Always

Neonatal onset

Microvillous inclusion disease

STX3

AR

Always

Neonatal onset

Tufting enteropathy

EPCAM

AR

Always

Neonatal onset

Tufting enteropathy

SPINT2

AR

Always

Keratitis, anal/choanal atresia

Trichohepatoenteric syndrome

SKIV2L

AR

Always

Trichorrhexis nodosa, IUGR

Trichohepatoenteric syndrome

TTC37

AR

Always

Trichorrhexis nodosa, IUGR

Multiple intestinal atresia

TTC7A

AR

High

Lymphopenia, IA

Immune dysregulation

CARD11

AD

Low

CVID, alopecia, atopy

Immune dysregulation

CTLA4

AD

Medium (broad age of onset)

LP, CVID, infections

Immune dysregulation

DEF6

AR

Medium

Cardiomyopathy, infections

Immune dysregulation

FOXP3

XL

Always

Diabetes

Immune dysregulation

ICOS

AR

Medium (broad age of onset)

LP, CVID, infections

Immune dysregulation

IL2RA

AR

Low

Lymphopenia, infections, LP

Immune dysregulation

LRBA

AR

Medium (broad age of onset)

LP, CVID, infections

Immune dysregulation

MALT1

AR

High

Infections, LP, eczema

Immune dysregulation

RLTPR

AR

Medium

Infections, EBV

Immune dysregulation

STAT1

AD (GOF)

High

Candida, diabetes

Immune dysregulation

STAT3

AD (GOF)

High

Short, LP

Immune dysregulation

XIAP

XL

High

EBV, HLH

MHC class II deficiency

RFXANK

AR

Low

Infection, cytopenias

MHC class II deficiency

CIITA

AR

Low

Infection, cytopenias

MHC class II deficiency

RFX5

AR

Low

Infection, cytopenias

MHC class II deficiency

RFXAP

AR

Low

Infection, cytopenias

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CVID, Common variable immune deficiency; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; GOF, gain of function; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis;
IA, intestinal atresia and fibrosis; IUGR, intrauterine growth retardation; LP, lymphocytic infiltrates in multiple organs; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; XL, X-­linked.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 164 u Orientation to the ­Consideration of Inborn Errors of Immunity

1261

Table 164.10  Pleomorphic Autoimmunity (Autoimmunity Not Limited to a Single Organ)
PATHWAY

GENE

INHERITANCE

MAIN ORGANS
INVOLVED

NONIMMUNE
FEATURES

INFECTIONS

B-­cell tolerance

AID

AR

Lymphoid hyperplasia,
cytopenias, GI

High IgM, frequent
infections

T-­cell tolerance

AIRE

AR/AD

Endocrine organs, lung,
skin

Nail dystrophy

Candida

T-­cell tolerance

ARPC1B

AR

Cytopenias, GI

Thrombocytopenia

Frequent infections

T-­cell tolerance

CTLA4

AD

GI, lung, CNS

T-­cell tolerance

COPA

AD

Lung, joint, renal

T-­cell tolerance

FOXP3

XL

GI, endocrine, skin

T-­cell tolerance

HAVCR2

AR

HLH, panniculitis, SLE-­like,
joint

T-­cell tolerance

IL2RA

AR

Skin, GI, endocrine

T-­cell tolerance

IL2RB

AR

GI, skin

T-­cell tolerance

ITCH

AR

Joints, lung, enteropathy

T-­cell tolerance

JAK1

AD (GOF)

Skin, renal, GI

T-­cell tolerance

LRBA

AR

GI, lung, CNS

T-­cell tolerance

ORAI1

AR

Cytopenias, vasculitis

T-­cell tolerance

PRKCD

AR

SLE-­like

T-­cell tolerance

PTEN

AD

Cytopenias, GI, endocrine

T-­cell tolerance

STAT1

AD (GOF)

GI, endocrine

T-­cell tolerance

STAT3

AD (GOF)

GI, lung, endocrine

Short stature

T-­cell tolerance

STIM1

AR

Cytopenias, Sjögren
syndrome

Myopathy, poor dental
enamel

Frequent infections

T-­cell tolerance

TPP2

AR

Hematopoietic

CNS

Viral

T-­cell tolerance

WAS

XL

Cytopenias, GI

Thrombocytopenia

Frequent infections

T-­cell tolerance

WIP

AR

Cytopenias, GI

Thrombocytopenia

Frequent infections

Inflammatory pathway

RBCK1

AR

Joints, skin, GI

Amylopectin deposits in
muscle

Frequent infections

Inflammatory pathway

RIPK1

AD

GI, joint

HSM episodic

Fevers

Inflammatory pathway

RNF31

AR

Joints, skin

Amylopectin deposits in
muscle

Frequent infections,
CVID-­like

Inflammatory pathway

TNFAIP3

AD

Mucosal ulcers, GI,
arthritis, skin

Lysinuric protein intolerance

SLC7A7

AR

HLH, SLE, PAP

Frequent infections

Lymphoma
Viral
Viral
Developmental delay

Myopathy, poor dental
enamel

Frequent infections
Frequent infections

Malignancy,
macrocephaly,
developmental delay
Candida

Fevers
HSM, poor growth,
osteoporosis, renal

Infections trigger
metabolic
decompensation

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CNS, central nervous system; CVID, common variable immune deficiency; GI, gastrointestinal, GOF, gain of function; HLH,
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; HSM, hepatosplenomegaly; PAP, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; XL, X-­linked.

Although genetic fever syndromes may have a cutaneous component, abdominal pain, or nausea, fever is by far the dominant manifestation. There may be a family history or there may be an ethnic
background that suggests the diagnosis (e.g., familial Mediterranean fever).
Other fever syndromes are related to proteasome dysfunction.
These often have a very strong cutaneous component that can be
a neutrophilic dermatosis or more of a vasculopathic picture with
chilblains affecting the ears, fingers, and toes. Over time, these
conditions may develop lipodystrophy. Fever is often seen in these

conditions before 5 years of age. Treatment often includes a Jak
inhibitor.
In their most severe form, interferonopathies present with the
infantile-­onset leukoencephalopathy called Aicardi Goutières syndrome. There are milder variants leading to interferon production
that can be associated with later onset and a picture more typical for
SLE. The earlier the onset the more likely there is to be significant brain
involvement. These conditions are treated with Jak inhibitors.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1262 Part XII u Immunology

Section 2

The T-, B-, and NK-Cell
Systems
Chapter 165

T-Cell and Combined
Deficiencies

the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules; therefore the
randomly generated variable region of the TCR needs to be able to interact with the individual’s MHC molecules. During T-­cell development in
the thymus, only thymocytes with TCRs that recognize the individual’s
MHC molecules are selected to survive (positive selection) and all other
thymocytes die (by neglect). Among the thymocytes that survive, those
with self-­reactive TCRs are eliminated (negative selection) or develop into
regulatory T cells to prevent autoimmune disease (Fig. 165.1). There is a
symbiotic relationship between the thymus and developing thymocytes,
where the absence of a thymus affects T-­cell development and the absence
of thymocytes leads to disruption of the thymic architecture. Pathogenic
gene variants affecting any of the signaling pathways, DNA recombination,
and repair enzymes as well as the thymic environment can lead to T-­cell
and combined immune deficiency diseases.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography

Ramsay L. Fuleihan

165.1 Severe Combined Immunodeficiencies
Ramsay L. Fuleihan

T-­CELL AND COMBINED DEFICIENCIES

T lymphocytes (T cells) play a central role in the orchestration and regulation of the adaptive immune response. CD4 T cells help B cells synthesize
specific IgG, IgA, and IgE antibodies and develop into memory B cells,
help macrophages kill intracellular pathogens, and regulate the immune
response. CD8 T cells kill virus-­infected or malignant cells. Immune
deficiency diseases that disrupt T-­cell development or function are usually severe, affecting multiple aspects of adaptive immunity, and are thus
combined immune deficiency diseases. A hallmark of the adaptive immune
response is specific recognition of pathogen proteins via antigen receptors,
the T-­cell receptor (TCR) in T cells and immunoglobulin in B cells. Antigen
receptors have a variable region that is formed by random rearrangement
of two to three gene segments, V(D)J, allowing a large variety of antigen
recognition. TCRs recognize a fragment of a protein that is presented by

Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is caused by diverse pathogenic gene variants that lead to absence of T-­and B-­cell function. Patients
with this group of disorders have the most severe immunodeficiency.

GENETICS AND PATHOGENESIS

SCID is caused by pathogenic variants in genes crucial for lymphoid
cell development or function (Table 165.1 and Fig. 165.2). All patients
with SCID have very small thymuses that contain no thymocytes and
lack corticomedullary distinction and lack Hassall’s corpuscles. The
thymic epithelium appears histologically normal. Both the follicular
and the paracortical areas of the spleen are depleted of lymphocytes.
Lymph nodes, tonsils, adenoids, and Peyer patches are absent or
extremely underdeveloped.

Bone marrow thymic precursors
CD3–
CD4–
CD8–

Thymus
CD3+
CD4+
CD8+

Double positive thymocyte
MHC class I recognition

MHC class II recognition

Positive selection

CD3+
CD8+

CD3+
CD4+

Self-recognition

Self-recognition
CD3+
CD4+

CD3+
CD4+
FoxP3+

CD3+
CD8+

Apoptosis

Treg

Apoptosis

Negative selection

No self-recognition

CD3+
CD4+

CD3+
CD8+

Naïve single positive T cells
Recent thymic emigrants

Fig. 165.1 Schematic representation of T-­
cell development in the thymus. Thymocyte
precursors leave the bone marrow and enter
the thymus with no expression of CD3, CD4, or
CD8 (double negative T cells). Later the thymocytes express CD3 and both CD4 and CD8. If
the newly formed T-­cell receptor (TCR) recognizes major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
class I or class II molecules, the thymocytes receive a positive selection signal and develop
into CD8 or CD4 single positive thymocytes,
respectively. Single positive thymocytes with
TCR that recognize self-­proteins will be killed
by apoptosis or develop into regulatory T cells
(Treg) to prevent autoimmune disease. Single
positive thymocytes that are non–self-­reactive
leave the thymus as naïve single positive T cells
ready to engage in the immune response when
needed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 165 u T-Cell and Combined Deficiencies

1263

Table 165.1  	 Genetic Basis of Severe Combined Immunodeficiency and SCID Variants
DISEASE

INHERITANCE

T–­B–­ SCID
Reticular dysgenesis

PATHOGENESIS

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

TREATMENT

AR

Impaired mitochondrial energy
metabolism and leukocyte
differentiation

Severe neutropenia, deafness
Pathogenic variants in adenylate kinase 2

Reticular dysgenesis

AD

Impaired hematopoiesis

Severe neutropenia but no deafness, gain-­ HSCT
of-­function variant in RAC2

Adenosine
deaminase
deficiency

AR

Accumulation of toxic purine
nucleosides

Neurologic, hepatic, renal, lung, skeletal,
bone marrow abnormalities

HSCT, PEG-­ADA,
gene therapy

RAG1 and RAG2
deficiency

AR

Defective V(D)J recombination

None

HSCT

Artemis deficiency

AR

Defective V(D)J recombination,
radiation sensitivity

DCLERE1C pathogenic gene variants

HSCT

DNA-­PK deficiency

AR

Defective V(D)J recombination

None

HSCT

DNA ligase IV
deficiency

AR

Defective V(D)J recombination,
radiation sensitivity

Growth delay, microcephaly, bone marrow
abnormalities, lymphoid malignancies

HSCT

Cernunnos-­XLF

AR

Defective V(D)J recombination,
radiation sensitivity

Growth delay, microcephaly, birdlike
facies, bone defects

HSCT

T–­B+ SCID
γc (CD132) deficiency

XL

Abnormal signaling via γc-­ILRs (IL-­2, 4,
7, 9, 15, 21)

None

HSCT, gene
therapy

Jak3 deficiency

AR

Abnormal signaling downstream of γc

None

HSCT

IL-­7Rα deficiency

AR

Abnormal IL-­7R signaling

Thymus absent

HSCT

CD45 deficiency

AR

None

HSCT

CD3δ deficiency

AR

Arrest of thymocytes differentiation at
CD4−CD8− stage

Thymus size may be normal

HSCT

CD3ε deficiency

AR

Arrest of thymocytes differentiation at
CD4−CD8− stage

γ/δ T cells absent

HSCT

CD3ζ deficiency

AR

Abnormal signaling

None

HSCT

Coronin-­1A deficiency

AR

Abnormal T-­cell egress from thymus
and lymph nodes

Normal thymus size
Attention deficit disorder

HSCT

LAT deficiency

AR

Defective T-­cell development in the
thymus

Autoimmune disease

HSCT

SLP76

AR

Abnormal signaling

Neutrophil defect, skin abscesses, rash,
autoimmunity

HSCT attempted

GCSF, HSCT

γc, Common gamma chain; AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; GCSF, granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; IL,
interleukin; Jak3, Janus kinase 3; PEG-­ADA, polyethylene glycol-­modified adenosine deaminase; R, receptor; RAG1, RAG2, recombinase-­activating genes 1 and 2; SCID, severe
combined immune deficiency; V(D)J, variable, diversity, joining domains; XL, X-­linked.
Adapted from Roifman CM, Grunebaum E. Primary T-­cell immunodeficiencies. In: Rich RR, Fleisher TA, Shearer WT, et al., eds. Clinical Immunology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders;
2013. pp. 440-­441.

The 4 most common types of SCID are the X-­linked forms caused by
pathogenic variants in CD132, autosomal recessive RAG1 and RAG2 deficiencies, and adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency. Additional forms
are listed in Table 165.1. For X-­linked SCID and ADA deficiency, gene
therapy exists, but genetic counseling is the most compelling reason for
genetic sequencing to identify the pathogenic gene variant. Several specific pathogenic gene variants are associated with increased sensitivity to
radiation and chemotherapy, and their early identification can lead to a
better transplant experience by avoiding or reducing dosages of conditioning agents.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

SCID is included in the newborn screening program in all states in the
United States and in several countries around the world. Thus infants
can be identified and treated prior to development of symptoms, which
has dramatically improved the survival of infants with SCID. A few
genetic types of SCID are not detected by newborn screening, and
there are many countries where newborn screening for SCID is not yet

performed. Therefore an awareness of the clinical presentation of SCID
remains important in the early diagnosis and treatment of patients.
When infants with SCID are not detected through newborn screening, they most often present with infection during infancy. Diarrhea,
pneumonia, otitis media, sepsis, and cutaneous infections are common
presentations. Infections with a variety of opportunistic organisms,
either through direct exposure or immunization, can lead to death.
Potential infectious threats include Candida albicans, Pneumocystis
jiroveci (PJP), parainfluenza 3 virus, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV),
varicella-­zoster virus, measles virus, and attenuated organisms from
the MMRV (measles, mumps, rubella, varicella), rotavirus, oral polio,
nasal influenza, yellow fever, or bacille Calmette-­Guérin (BCG) vaccines. Disseminated BCG infection may be the presenting feature of
SCID in countries where the vaccine is given at birth. Infants with SCID
also lack the ability to reject foreign tissue and are therefore at risk for
severe or fatal graft versus host disease (GVHD) from T lymphocytes
in nonirradiated blood products or maternal immunocompetent T cells

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1264 Part XII u Immunology
as reticular dysgenesis where neutrophils, myeloid cells, and lymphocytes are all low. This condition is also often associated with deafness.

216 SCIDs: Genetic types

13
Jak3 Def
6%

10
RAG
4.6%

9
13
AutoRec Unknown
4.2%
6%

7
Artemis
3.2%

DIAGNOSIS

99
γc Def
45.8%

34
ADA Def
15.7%
1
CD3ε Def
0.5%
26
IL-7Rα Def
12%

2
1
CD3δ Def CD3ζ
Def
0.9%
0.5%

1
CD45 Def
0.5%

Fig. 165.2 Relative frequencies of the different genetic types of se-

vere combined immunodeficiency (SCID) among 216 patients seen
consecutively. (From Buckley RH, Orange JS. Primary immunodeficiency diseases. In: Burks AW, Holgate ST, O’Hehir RE, et al., eds. Middleton’s Allergy: Principles and Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2020. Fig. 69.2, p. 1126.)

A high index of suspicion is very important in the diagnosis of SCID. A
key feature of SCID is that almost all patients will have a low lymphocyte count. Some patients may have a normal lymphocyte count from
proliferation of B cells and/or natural killer (NK) cells. A combination
of infection and a persistently low lymphocyte count is an indication to
test for SCID. The diagnostic strategy both for symptomatic infants and
those detected by newborn screening or with a family history of SCID
is to perform flow cytometry to quantitate the T, B, and NK cells in the
infant (Fig. 165.4). The CD45RA (naïve T-­cell) and CD45RO (memory T-­cell) markers can be helpful to identify patients with maternal
engraftment or Omenn syndrome with predominantly memory T cells.
Identification of a limited TCR repertoire is also helpful in the diagnosis of Omenn syndrome. T-­cell function is often assessed by measuring
proliferative responses to stimulation with mitogens.
Gene sequencing is often done by requesting a SCID gene panel or
a more extensive primary immunodeficiency (PID) gene panel. There
are certain laboratory features that predict specific gene defects. When
both T and B cells are low with normal numbers of NK cells, often a
gene encoding a protein involved in V(D)J recombination is the cause
such as RAG1 and 2. Similarly, certain cytokine receptor defects are
associated with specific SCID lymphocyte phenotypes, such as absent
T cells and NK cells, but normal or elevated numbers of B cells in
X-­SCID caused by pathogenic variants in the common gamma chain
(CD132) of cytokine receptors. Pathogenic variants in Janus kinase
(JAK)3, which signal downstream of CD132, cause an autosomal recessive form of SCID affecting both females and males, with an identical
lymphocyte phenotype as X-­SCID.
The diagnosis of SCID can be established by the presence of a known
pathogenic gene variant, low T-­cell counts with proliferative response
to the mitogen phytohemagglutinin (PHA) less than 10% of a normal
control, or the identification of maternal T cells in the child. In male
infants, this can be determined by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) for the X and Y chromosomes.

Newborn Screening

Fig. 165.3 Typical clinical features in an infant with Omenn syndrome.

Note generalized erythroderma with scaly skin, alopecia, and edema.
(From Notarangelo LD. T cell immunodeficiencies. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021. Fig 6.1.)

that crossed the placenta during pregnancy. The latter is usually not
fatal but can be severe. This devastating presentation is characterized by
expansion of the allogeneic cells, rash, hepatosplenomegaly, and diarrhea. A third presentation is often called Omenn syndrome, caused by
hypomorphic pathogenic variants in SCID-­causing genes, which allow
few T cells to be generated in the infant that then expand, unregulated,
and cause a clinical picture similar to GVHD (Fig. 165.3) with a severe
dermatitis, lymphadenopathy, and diarrhea. The difference in this case
is that the cells are the infant’s own cells. Dermatitis, especially if it is
difficult to treat, failure to thrive, and infection in the first 6 months of
life, particularly severe infections from commonly mild pathogens or
opportunistic organisms, should raise the suspicion of SCID.
All genetic types of SCID are associated with profound immunodeficiency. A small number have other associated features or atypical
features that are important to recognize. ADA deficiency can be associated with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and chondroosseous dysplasia. Adenylate kinase 2 (AK2) deficiency causes a picture referred to

Newborn screening for SCID has allowed the early diagnosis and treatment of SCID, improving the outcome of therapy and changing the
natural history of the disease. Newborn screening is based on quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of T-­cell receptor excision
circles (TRECs), which are formed during V(D)J rearrangement of
the variable region of the TCR chains. These TRECs do not replicate
during cell division; they are thus present in most or all recent thymic emigrants but get diluted out as T cells divide in the periphery.
The TREC assay identifies low numbers of recent thymic emigrants,
which is not diagnostic of SCID, but raises suspicion to proceed with
an evaluation of lymphocyte subsets and function followed by confirmation with genetic testing. Other diseases with low T-­cell counts may
also be identified by newborn screening and include 22Q11.2 deletion
syndrome, Rac2 deficiency, trisomy 21, and idiopathic lymphopenia,
which was not well appreciated until newborn screening was implemented. In many countries, kappa excision circles (KRECs), generated
during B-­cell development, are assayed simultaneously with TRECs
allowing a larger number of types of SCID to be identified as well as
allowing identification of infants with agammaglobulinemia.

TREATMENT

SCID is a true pediatric immunologic emergency. Unless immunologic
reconstitution is achieved through hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) or gene therapy, death usually occurs during the first
year of life and almost invariably before 2 years of age. HSCT in the
first 100 days of life or in an infant prior to infection is associated with
a 95% survival rate. In patients with SCID, 92% have survived after
T-­cell–depleted parental marrow is given soon after birth when the
infant is healthy, without pretransplant chemotherapy or posttransplant GVHD prophylaxis, although T-­cell reconstitution is improved
with pretransplant conditioning including reduced-­intensity protocols.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 165 u T-Cell and Combined Deficiencies

1265

Absolute
lymphocytes

Low

Normal

T–B–

T–B+NK–

T–B+NK+

ADA activity

X-linked
IL2RG

PNP activity

T –B+NK+

Absent

Normal

Absent

Normal

ADA
deficiency

RAG1 or
RAG2

PNP
deficiency

IL-7Ra, CD45,
CD3

T+B+

T+B–

Normal CD4/
CD8

Low CD4

Low CD8

Omenn
syndrome

MHC II
deficiency

ZAP-70
deficiency

Fig. 165.4 Using the absolute lymphocytes count as a starting place to suggest the type of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) that may be
present. ADA, Adenosine deaminase; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; PNP, purine nucleoside phosphorylase. (From Cunningham-­Rundles
C. Approach to the child with recurrent infections and molecular diagnosis. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds. Pediatric Allergy
Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021. Fig. 4.2.)

Bone marrow transplantation remains the most important and effective therapy for SCID. In ADA-­deficient and X-­linked SCID, there
has been success in correcting the immune defects with ex vivo gene
transfer to autologous hematopoietic stem cells. Initial protocols of
gene therapy for X-­linked SCID resulted in insertional mutagenesis
with the development of leukemic-­like clonal T cells or lymphoma in
some patients. Modification of the gene therapy protocol has greatly
reduced the risk of insertional mutagenesis. ADA-­deficient SCID can
also be treated with enzyme replacement by repeated injections of
polyethylene glycol-­ADA (PEG-­ADA), although the immune reconstitution achieved is not as effective as with HSCT or gene therapy. Until
definitive therapy can be achieved, SCID patients should be treated
with supportive care for prevention and treatment of infections with
immunoglobulin replacement and microbial prophylaxis starting at
4-­6 weeks of age including PJP prophylaxis as well as viral and fungal
prophylaxis. Breastfeeding should be avoided if the mother is CMV or
EBV positive as infection can be transmitted via breast milk.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

165.2 Combined Immunodeficiencies
Ramsay L. Fuleihan
Combined immunodeficiency (CID) is distinguished from SCID by the
presence of low but not absent T-­cell function. CID is a syndrome of
diverse genetic causes and, therefore, diverse clinical and laboratory characteristics. Patients with CID may have recurrent or chronic pulmonary
infections, opportunistic infections, failure to thrive, oral or cutaneous
candidiasis, chronic diarrhea, recurrent skin infections, gram-­negative
bacterial sepsis, urinary tract infections, or severe varicella in infancy.
Although they usually survive longer than infants with SCID, patients with
CID fail to thrive and often die before reaching adulthood. Neutropenia

and eosinophilia are common. Serum immunoglobulins may be normal
or elevated for all classes; selective IgA deficiency, marked elevation of IgE,
and elevated IgM levels occur in some cases. Although antibody-­forming
capacity is impaired in most patients, it may not be absent.
Studies of cellular immune function may show lymphopenia, deficiencies of T cells, specific T-­cell subsets, or switched memory B cells,
and extremely low but not absent lymphocyte proliferative responses to
mitogens, antigens, or allogeneic cells in vitro. Peripheral lymphoid tissues may demonstrate paracortical lymphocyte depletion. The thymus
is usually small, with a paucity of thymocytes and usually no Hassall’s
corpuscles.
There is a large number and variety of CIDs caused by pathogenic variants in many different genes. A list of known causes of CID with some of
their characteristic features can be found in Tables 165.2 to 165.7.

COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCIES THAT ARE
GENERALLY LESS PROFOUND THAN SCID

Several types of CID are characterized by a severe immunodeficiency
but affected patients tend to survive longer than patients with SCID
(see Table 165.2). These patients are susceptible to severe viral, opportunistic, and/or fungal infections. Their laboratory features are variable
from normal lymphocyte subsets to a severe deficiency of CD4, CD8,
or both cell types. Invariably, T-­cell function is decreased but proliferative responses to mitogens and, in some cases, to antigens may be
normal, making it difficult to have unifying laboratory characteristics
for this group of diseases. The severity of clinical infection and/or the
presence of a family history of CID should raise suspicion and initiate
a laboratory evaluation for these diseases.

COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY FROM
DEFICIENCY IN CD4 T-­CELL HELPER FUNCTION

CD4 T cells play an important role in orchestrating the immune
response. Helper function from CD4 T cells is critical for immunoglobulin isotype switching, somatic hypermutation, and B-­cell memory

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1266 Part XII u Immunology
Table 165.2  	 Combined Immunodeficiencies Generally Less Profound Than SCID
DISEASE
(DEFICIENCY)

INHERITANCE

PATHOGENESIS

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

CD40 Ligand (CD154)

XL

Defective CD40 ligand:CD40 signaling

Opportunistic infections, neutropenia,
biliary tract and liver disease/cancer,
neuroectodermal cancer

HSCT

CD40

AR

Defective CD40 ligand:CD40 signaling

Opportunistic infections, neutropenia,
biliary tract and liver disease

HSCT

ICOS

AR

ICOS Ligand

AR

Decreased T and B cells

Neutropenia

CD3γ

AR

Low TCR expression

Autoimmunity of variable severity

CD8

AR

Absent CD8 T cells

May be asymptomatic

ZAP-­70 LOF

AR

Low CD8 T cells, poor CD4 T-­cell
function

May have immune dysregulation,
autoimmunity

HSCT

ZAP-­70 LOF/GOF

AR

Low CD8 T cells

Severe autoimmunity, bullous
pemphigoid, inflammatory colitis

HSCT

MHC class I (TAP1,
TAP2, TAPBP, β2-­
microglobulin)

AR

Low CD8 T cells, absent MHC I on
lymphocytes and thymic epithelium

Vasculitis, pyoderma gangrenosum

MHC class II (CIITA,
RFX5, RFXANK,
RFXAP)

AR

Low CD4 T cells absent MHC II on
lymphocytes and thymic epithelium

Failure to thrive, liver biliary tract disease

IKAROS

AD

No memory T cells or B cells

Opportunistic infections, early CID onset

DOCK2

AR

Low T cells and poor NK cell function

Invasive herpesvirus infections, poor
interferon responses

Polymerase and
(POLD1, POLD2)

AR

Low CD4 T cells

Skin infections, warts and molluscum,
short stature, intellectual disability

RHOH

AR

Restricted TCR repertoire

HPV infection, lung granulomas,
molluscum, lymphoma

STK4

AR

Low CD4 T cells

Intermittent neutropenia, viral and
Candida infection, lymphoproliferation,
autoimmune cytopenias, lymphoma,
congenital heart disease

TCRα

AR

Absent TCRαβ

Immune dysregulation, autoimmunity,
diarrhea

LCK

AR

Poor TCR signaling, low CD4 T cells and
low regulatory T cells, restricted TCR
repertoire

Immune dysregulation, autoimmunity

ITK

AR

Decreased T-­cell activation, progressive
decline in CD4 T cells

EBV-­associated B-­cell lymphoproliferation,
immune dysregulation

MALT1

AR

Poor T-­cell proliferation

CARD11 LOF

AR

Poor T-­cell proliferation

Opportunistic infections

BCL10

AR

Poor T-­cell antigen or anti-­CD3 proliferation,
few memory T cells and Tregs

Candidiasis, gastroenteritis

IL-­21

AR

Low T-­cell function, low memory/
switched B cells

Opportunistic infections, liver disease

IL-­21R

AR

Low cytokine production, low T-­cell
antigen proliferation

OX40

AR

Low Ag-­specific memory CD4 T cells

Impaired immunity to HHV8, Kaposi’s
sarcoma

IKBKB

AR

Impaired TCR activation, absent Treg
and γ/δ T cells

Opportunistic infections

NIK

AR

Poor T-­cell antigen proliferation, low
switched memory B cells

Cryptosporidium infection

RelB

AR

Reduced TCR diversity with poor
proliferation to mitogens and absent
to antigens

TREATMENT

Autoimmunity, gastroenteritis,
granulomas

HSCT

HSCT

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 165 u T-Cell and Combined Deficiencies

1267

Table 165.2  	 Combined Immunodeficiencies Generally Less Profound Than SCID—cont’d
DISEASE
(DEFICIENCY)

INHERITANCE

PATHOGENESIS

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

TREATMENT

RelA
haploinsufficiency

AD

Impaired NFκB activation with decreased
inflammatory cytokines

Chronic mucocutaneous ulceration

Moesin

XL

Defective T-­cell migration and
proliferation

Varicella infections, neutropenia

TFRC

AR

Poor T-­cell proliferation, low memory B
cells

Neutropenia, thrombocytopenia

c-­Rel

AR

Poor T-­and B-­cell proliferation, low
memory CD4 and low memory B cells

Mycobacteria and Salmonella infections,
opportunistic infections, defective
innate immunity

FCHO1

AR

Poor T-­cell proliferation

Mycobacterial infections,
lymphoproliferation, failure to thrive

Ag, antigen; AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CID, combined immune deficiency; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HHV8, human herpesvirus-­8; HPV, human papillomavirus;
HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; IL, interleukin; GOF, gain of function; LOF, loss of function; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NK, natural killer; R, receptor;
TCR, T-­cell receptor; Treg, regulatory T cell; XL, X-­linked.
Adapted from Tangye SG, Al-Herz W, Bousfiha A, et al. Human inborn errors of immunity: 2022 update on the classification from the International Union of Immunological Societies
Expert Committee. J Clin Immunol 2022;42:1473–1507.

Table 165.3  	 DNA Repair Defects Other Than Causing SCID
DISEASE

PATHOGENESIS

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

Ataxia-­telangiectasia

ATM

GENE

AR

INHERITANCE

Progressive decrease in T cells,
poor T-­cell proliferation

Ataxia, telangiectasia,
elevated IgM,
lymphoreticular
malignancy, increased
radiosensitivity,
chromosomal instability
and translocations

Ig replacement,
supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

TREATMENT

Nijmegen breakage
syndrome

NBS1

AR

Progressive decrease in T cells

Microcephaly, dysmorphic
features, lymphomas and
solid tumors, hyper-­IgM

Ig replacement,
supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

Bloom syndrome

BLM

AR

Marrow failure, low Ig

Short stature, dysmorphic
facies, sun-­sensitive
erythema, leukemia,
lymphoma,
chromosomal instability

Ig replacement,
supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

Immunodeficiency
with centromeric
instability and facial
anomalies (ICF
types 1, 2, 3, 4)

DNMT3B
ZBTB24
CDCA7
HELLS

AR

Decreased T cells, decreased
Facial dysmorphism,
response to PHA,
developmental
hypogammaglobulinemia with
delay, macroglossia,
variable antibody deficiency
opportunistic infections,
malabsorption,
cytopenias, malignancies,
multiradial configurations
of
chromosomes 1, 9, 16

Ig replacement,
supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

PMS2 deficiency

PMS2

AR

Low B cells, abnormal
antibody responses

Café-­au-­lait spots,
hyper-­IgM, lymphoma,
colorectal
carcinoma, brain tumors

Ig replacement,
supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

Radiosensitivity,
immune deficiency,
dysmorphic
features, learning
difficulties (RIDDLE)
syndrome

RNF168

AR

Low IgG or IgA

Short stature, mild defects
of motor control to
ataxia, may have learning
difficulties

Ig replacement,
supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

MCM4 deficiency

MCM4

AR

Low number and
function of NK cells

Short stature, B-­cell
lymphoma, adrenal failure

Supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

Polymerase ε subunit
1 deficiency (FILS
syndrome)

POLE1

AR

Decreased T-­cell
proliferation

Short stature, facial
dysmorphism, livedo

Ig replacement,
supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1268 Part XII u Immunology
Table 165.3  	 DNA Repair Defects Other Than Causing SCID—cont’d
DISEASE

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

TREATMENT

Polymerase ε
subunit 2
deficiency

POLE2

GENE

AR

INHERITANCE

Lymphopenia, absent
T-­cell proliferation to Ags,
hypogammaglobulinemia

PATHOGENESIS

Disseminated BCG,
autoimmunity (type 1
diabetes), hypothyroidism,
facial dysmorphism

Ig replacement,
supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

Ligase 1 deficiency

LIG1

AR

Lymphopenia, increased γ/δ
T cells, decreased T-­cell
proliferation,
hypogammaglobulinemia
antibody deficiency

Growth restriction, sun
sensitivity, radiation
sensitivity, macrocytic RBC

Ig replacement,
supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

NSMCE3
deficiency

NSMCE3

AR

Decreased T cells and T-­cell
response to mitogens and
antigens

Thymic hypoplasia,
severe lung disease,
chromosomal breakage,
radiation sensitivity

Ig replacement,
supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

ERCC6L2
deficiency

ERCC6L2

AR

Lymphopenia

Facial dysmorphism,
microcephaly, bone
marrow failure

Supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

GINS1 deficiency

GINS1

AR

Low NK cells, high IgA with
low IgM and IgG

Neutropenia, IUGR

Supportive care,
avoid ionizing
radiation

Ag, Antigen; AR, Autosomal recessive; BCG, bacilli Calmette-­Guérin; FILS, facial dysmorphism, immunodeficiency, livedo, and short stature; ICF, instability, centromeric, facial anomalies; Ig, immunoglobulin; IUGR, intrauterine growth retardation; NK, natural killer; PHA, phytohemagglutinin; RBC, red blood cell.
Adapted from Tangye SG, Al-Herz W, Bousfiha A, et al. Human inborn errors of immunity: 2022 update on the classification from the International Union of Immunological Societies
Expert Committee. J Clin Immunol 2022;42:1473–1507.

Table 165.4  	 Immunoosseous Dysplasias
DISEASE

PATHOGENESIS

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

TREATMENT

Cartilage hair
hypoplasia

RMRP

GENE

AR

INHERITANCE

Normal to severely
decreased T-­cell counts
Decreased T-­cell
proliferation

Short-­limbed dwarfism with
metaphyseal dysostosis, sparse
hair, bone marrow failure,
autoimmunity, susceptibility to
lymphoma and other cancers,
impaired spermatogenesis,
neuronal dysplasia of the intestine

HSCT for the
immunodeficiency

Schimke immuno­
osseous dysplasia

SMARCAL1

AR

Decreased T cells

Short stature, spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia, intrauterine growth
restriction; nephropathy; bacterial,
viral, fungal infections; may
present as
SCID; bone marrow failure

HSCT for the
immunodeficiency

MYSM1 deficiency

MYSM1

AR

Decreased T cells,
naïve T cells, and NK cells
B-­cell deficiency with
hypogammaglobulinemia

Short stature; recurrent infections;
congenital bone marrow failure,
myelodysplasia; immunodeficiency
affecting B cells and granulocytes;
skeletal anomalies;
cataracts; developmental delay

HSCT for the
immunodeficiency

MOPD1 deficiency
(Roifman
syndrome)

RNU4ATAC

AR

Decreased NK cell function
Decreased total and
memory B cells
Hypogammaglobulinemia,
variably decreased
specific antibodies

Recurrent bacterial infections;
lymphadenopathy;
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia,
extreme intrauterine growth
restriction; retinal dystrophy; facial
dysmorphism; may present with
microcephaly; short stature

HSCT for the
immunodeficiency

Immunoskeletal
dysplasia with
neurodevelopmental
abnormalities (EXTL3
deficiency)

EXTL3

AR

Decreased T cells,
decreased to normal Ig
levels

Short stature; cervical spinal
stenosis, neurodevelopmental
impairment;
eosinophilia; may have early
infant
mortality

HSCT for the
immunodeficiency

AR, Autosomal recessive; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; Ig, immunoglobulin; NK, natural killer; SCID, severe combined immune deficiency.
Adapted from Tangye SG, Al-Herz W, Bousfiha A, et al. Human inborn errors of immunity: 2022 update on the classification from the International Union of Immunological Societies
Expert Committee. J Clin Immunol 2022;42:1473–1507.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 165 u T-Cell and Combined Deficiencies

1269

Table 165.5  	 Other Combined Immunodeficiencies
DISEASE

GENE

INHERITANCE

PATHOGENESIS

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

TREATMENT

PNP deficiency

PNP

AR

Progressive decrease in T cells

Autoimmune hemolytic anemia,
neurologic impairment

HSCT

Immunodeficiency
with multiple
intestinal atresias

TTC7A

AR

Variable T-­cell counts but may be
as low as SCID with low TRECs
at NBS

Multiple intestinal atresias,
intrauterine polyhydramnios,
early demise, bacterial (sepsis),
viral and fungal infections

HSCT for
severe T-­cell
deficiency

Trichohepatoenteric
syndrome (THES)

TTC37
SKIV2L

AR

Impaired IFNγ production,
variably low switched memory B
cells, hypogammaglobulinemia,
may have low antibody
responses

Respiratory infections; IUGR;
facial dysmorphic features,
wooly hair; early-­onset
intractable diarrhea, liver
­cirrhosis; platelet abnormalities

Hepatic venoocclusive
disease with
immunodeficiency
(VODI)

SP110

AR

Decreased memory T and B cells;
low IgG, IgA, and IgM; absent
germinal centers and tissue
plasma cells

Hepatic venoocclusive disease
Susceptibility to opportunistic
infections: PJP, CMV, Candida
Thrombocytopenia,
hepatosplenomegaly,
cerebrospinal leukodystrophy

BCL11B deficiency

BCL11B

AD

Decreased T-­cell counts with poor
proliferation

Congenital abnormalities,
neonatal teeth, dysmorphic
facies; absent corpus callosum,
neurocognitive deficits

EPG5 deficiency
(Vici syndrome)

EPG5

AR

Very low CD4 T cells, decreased
Ig levels especially IgG2,
defective B cells

Chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis, recurrent
infections, agenesis of the
corpus callosum, microcephaly,
cataracts; cardiomyopathy,
skin hypopigmentation,
intellectual disability

HOIL1 deficiency

RBCK1

AR

Decreased memory B cells with
poor antibody response to
polysaccharide antigens

Bacterial infections,
autoinflammation,
amylopectinosis

HOIP deficiency

RNF31

AR

Decreased memory B cells with
decreased Ig levels

Bacterial infections,
autoinflammation,
amylopectinosis,
lymphangiectasia

Hennekam
lymphangiectasia-­
lymphedema
syndrome

CCBE1 FAT4

AR

Variably decreased T-­and B-­cell
counts, decreased Ig levels

Facial anomalies and other
dysmorphic features,
lymphangiectasia and
lymphedema

Activating de novo
mutations in
nuclear factor,
erythroid 2-­like
(NFE2L2)

NFE2L2

AD

Decreased switched memory B
cells, hypogammaglobulinemia
and decreased antibody
responses

Recurrent respiratory and skin
infections; growth restriction,
developmental delay; white
matter cerebral lesions;
increased level of homocysteine;
increased expression of stress
response genes

STAT5b deficiency

STAT5B

AR

Slightly decreased T cells, decreased
Treg number and function,
hypogammaglobulinemia with
elevated IgE

Growth-­hormone insensitive
dwarfism, dysmorphic
features, eczema, lymphocytic
interstitial pneumonitis,
autoimmunity

STAT5b deficiency

STAT5B

AD (dominant
negative
variants)

Increased IgE

Growth failure, eczema, lack
immune defects of AR
STAT5b deficiency

Kabuki syndrome
(type 1 and 2)

KMT2D
KDM6A

AD
XL (females may
be affected)

Low IgA, occasionally low IgG

Typical facial abnormalities,
cleft or high arched palate,
skeletal abnormalities, short
stature; intellectual disability;
congenital heart defects;
recurrent infections (otitis
media, pneumonia);
autoimmunity
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1270 Part XII u Immunology
Table 165.5  	 Other Combined Immunodeficiencies—cont’d
DISEASE

GENE

KMT2A deficiency
(Wiedemann-­
Steiner syndrome)

KMT2A

INHERITANCE
AD

PATHOGENESIS

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

Decreased memory B cells,
hypogammaglobulinemia with
decreased antibody responses

Respiratory infections; short
stature; hypertelorism; hairy
elbows; developmental delay,
intellectual disability

TREATMENT

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; CMV, cytomegalovirus; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; IFN, interferon; Ig, immunoglobulin; IUGR, intrauterine
growth retardation; NBS, newborn screening; PJP, Pneumocystis jiroveci; PNP, purine nucleoside phosphorylase; SCID, severe combined immune deficiency; TREC, T-­cell receptor
excision circle; Treg, regulatory T cells; XL, X-­linked.
Adapted from Tangye SG, Al-Herz W, Bousfiha A, et al. Human inborn errors of immunity: 2022 update on the classification from the International Union of Immunological Societies
Expert Committee. J Clin Immunol 2022;42:1473–1507.

Table 165.6  	 Thymic Disorders
DISEASE

ADDITIONAL
FEATURES

GENE

INHERITANCE

PATHOGENESIS

TREATMENT

DiGeorge/Velocardio­
facial syndrome/
chromosome
22Q11.2 deletion
syndrome TBX1
deficiency

22Q11.2del including
TBX1, TBX1
Unknown

AD
(Unknown defects
are sporadic)

Variable T-­cell counts,
may have low TRECs
at NBS, may have
hypogammaglobulinemia

Conotruncal
cardiac defects,
hypoparathyroidism,
abnormal facies,
velopalatal
insufficiency,
intellectual disability,
autoimmunity

Thymic transplant
for severe T-­cell
deficiency

CHARGE syndrome

CHD7
SEMA3E
Unknown

AD
AD

Variable T-­cell counts,
may have low TRECs
at NBS, may have
hypogammaglobulinemia

Coloboma of eye;
heart anomaly;
choanal atresia;
intellectual
disability; genital
and ear anomalies
(CHARGE), CNS
malformation

Thymic transplant
for severe T-­cell
deficiency

Winged helix nude
FOXN1 deficiency

FOXN1

AR

Very low T cells,
decreased Ig levels

Severe infections,
abnormal thymic
epithelium,
congenital alopecia,
nail dystrophy,
neural tube defect

Thymic transplant
attempted

FOXN1
haploinsufficiency

FOXN1

AD

Severe T-­cell lymphopenia
at birth, normal by
adulthood

Recurrent, viral and
bacterial respiratory
tract infections;
(eczema, dermatitis),
nail dystrophy

Chromosome
10p13-­p14 deletion
syndrome (10p13-­
p14DS)

10p13-­p14del

AD

T-­cell lymphopenia
rarely with decreased
proliferation to mitogens
and antigens, may have
hypoplastic thymus

Hypoparathyroidism,
renal disease,
deafness, growth
retardation, facial
dysmorphism,
cardiac defects
may be present,
may have recurrent
infections

Chromosome 11q
deletion syndrome
(Jacobsen syndrome)

11q23del

AD

T-, B-, and NK cell
lymphopenia, low
switched memory B cells,
variable Ig levels and
antibody responses

Recurrent respiratory
infections; multiple
warts; facial
dysmorphism,
growth retardation

Ig replacement
for antibody
deficiency

PAX1

PAX1

AR

Absent thymus

Omenn-­like syndrome

HSCT attempted,
thymic
transplantation
attempted

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; del, deletion; CNS, central nervous system; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; TREC, T-­cell receptor excision circle;
NBS, newborn screening; Ig, immunoglobulin.
Adapted from Tangye SG, Al-Herz W, Bousfiha A, et al. Human inborn errors of immunity: 2022 update on the classification from the International Union of Immunological Societies
Expert Committee. J Clin Immunol 2022;42:1473–1507.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 165 u T-Cell and Combined Deficiencies

1271

Table 165.7  	 Hyper IgE Syndromes
DISEASE

INHERITANCE

PATHOGENESIS

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

TREATMENT

HIE (Job
syndrome)

STAT3

GENE

AD (DN LOF)

Decreased response to
STAT3-­activating cytokines;
decreased Th17, T follicular
helper, MAIT, NKT cells,
reduced memory B cells,
elevated IgE

Coarse facial features, broad nasal bridge;
staphylococcal abscesses, eczema,
pneumatoceles, pulmonary Aspergillus,
PJP, mucocutaneous candidiasis;
hyperextensible joints, osteoporosis and
bone fractures, scoliosis, retained primary
teeth; coronary and cerebral aneurysms

Bacterial
and fungal
prophylaxis

DOCK8
deficiency

DOCK8

AR

T-­cell lymphopenia with poor
proliferation, few Tregs with
poor function, reduced MAIT
and NKT cells, very high IgE

Low NK cells with poor function
Eosinophilia, recurrent infections, cutaneous
viral, fungal and staphylococcal infections,
severe atopy/allergic disease, cancer diathesis

HSCT

IL-­6 receptor
deficiency

IL6R

AR

Decreased switched memory B
cells, very high IgE

Recurrent pyogenic infections, cold abscesses,
elevated IL-­6 levels

Bacterial
prophylaxis

IL-­6 signal
transducer
(IL6ST)
deficiency

IL6ST

AR

Decreased Th17 cells, reduced
memory B cells, high IgE,
variable antibody responses

Bacterial infections, abscesses, eczema,
pulmonary abscesses, pneumatoceles;
bone fractures; scoliosis; retention of
primary teeth; craniosynostosis

Bacterial
prophylaxis

IL6ST

IL6ST

AD (DN)

Increased Th2, naïve T cells,
low memory T and B cells,
low to normal NK cell counts,
elevated IgE with normal or
low IgG

Similar to AD HIE syndrome: dermatitis/
eczema, eosinophilia, recurrent skin
infections, pneumonia, bronchiectasis,
pneumatoceles, pulmonary aspergillosis,
connective tissue defects (scoliosis, face,
joints, fractures, palate, tooth retention)

Bacterial
and fungal
prophylaxis

IL6ST

IL6ST

AR (LOF)

Death in utero or in neonatal
period

Fatal Stuve-­Wiedemann-­like syndrome;
skeletal dysplasia, lung dysfunction,
renal abnormalities, thrombocytopenia,
dermatitis, eczema, defective acute phase
response, complete unresponsiveness to
IL-­6 family cytokines

None

ZNF341
deficiency

ZNF341

AR

Decreased Th17 and NK cells,
Similar to AD-­HIE: mild facial dysmorphism;
Bacterial
reduced memory B cells,
early-­onset eczema, mucocutaneous
and fungal
decreased response to STAT3-­
candidiasis, bacterial skin infections,
prophylaxis
activating cytokines
Staphylococcus aureus abscesses, recurrent
bacterial respiratory infections, pneumatoceles;
hyperextensible joints; bone fractures and
retention of primary teeth

ERBIN
deficiency

ERBB2IP

AD

Increased Treg, moderate
increased IgE

Susceptibility to S. aureus, eczema, recurrent
respiratory infections, hyperextensible
joints, scoliosis, arterial dilatation in some
patients

Bacterial
prophylaxis

Loeys-­Dietz
syndrome

TGFBR1,
TGFBR2

AD

Elevated IgE

Recurrent respiratory infections; eczema,
food allergies; hyperextensible joints,
scoliosis, retention of primary teeth; aortic
aneurysms

Bacterial
prophylaxis

Comèl-­
Netherton
syndrome

SPINK5

AR

Low memory B cells, elevated
IgE and IgA, variable antibody
responses

Congenital ichthyosis, bamboo hair, atopic
diathesis, bacterial infections, failure to
thrive

Bacterial
prophylaxis; Ig
replacement
for antibody
deficiency

PGM3
deficiency

PGM3

AR

May have low T cells, B cells,
memory B cells, normal or
elevated IgG, IgA, and high
IgE, eosinophilia

Severe atopy; autoimmunity; bacterial and
viral infections; short stature, brachydactyly,
dysmorphic facial features; intellectual
disability and cognitive impairment, delayed
CNS myelination in some patients

CARD11
deficiency

CARD11
DN LOF

AD

Defective T-­cell activation
and proliferation, high IgE,
Th2 skewing, poor specific
antibody production,
impaired activation of
the NF-­κB and mTORC1
pathways

Variable atopy, eczema, food allergy,
eosinophilia; cutaneous viral infections,
recurrent respiratory infections; lymphoma;
CID

Ig replacement
for antibody
deficiency

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; CID, combined immunodeficiency; CNS, central nervous system; DN, dominant negative; HIE, hyper-­IgE; Ig, immunoglobulin;
IL, interleukin; IL6ST, gp130 common signal transducer of the IL-­6 cytokine family; LOF, loss of function; MAIT, mucosal-­associated invariant T cells; NKT, natural killer T cells; PJP,
Pneumocystis jiroveci; Th, T helper; Treg, regulatory T cells.
Adapted from Tangye SG, Al-Herz W, Bousfiha A, et al. Human inborn errors of immunity: 2022 update on the classification from the International Union of Immunological Societies
Expert Committee. J Clin Immunol 2022;42:1473–1507.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1272 Part XII u Immunology
formation as well as helping macrophages kill intracellular pathogens.
In addition, patients with poor or absent CD4 T-­cell helper function
are susceptible to opportunistic infection. The consequences of defects
in CD40 ligand and CD40 highlight the role CD4 T-­cell–dependent
helper function plays in immunity.

MHC CLASS II DEFICIENCY AND OTHER CAUSES
OF CD4 T-­CELL DEFICIENCY

CD40 LIGAND AND CD40 DEFICIENCY

CD40 ligand (CD154) deficiency (X-­linked) and similarly, CD40 deficiency (autosomal recessive), cause a severe form of hyper-­IgM syndrome that is a CID.

MHC class I and II molecules play an important role in T-­cell development and function by presenting a peptide fragment from a pathogen-­
derived protein to the TCR of CD8 or CD4 T cells, respectively. MHC
class II molecules are required for processing and presentation of peptides derived from exogenous antigens to CD4 T cells and for positive selection of CD4 T cells in the thymus. Therefore MHC class II
deficiency is a severe form of bare lymphocyte syndrome resulting in
decreased CD4 T cells and impairment in their function.

Genetics and Pathogenesis

Clinical Manifestations

Pathogenic variants in the CD40 ligand or CD40 genes, disrupt the
interaction between CD4 T cells and antigen-­presenting cells (APCs):
dendritic cells, monocytes/macrophages, and B cells. CD40 ligand is
expressed on activated CD4 T cells and delivers signals to APC via
CD40 to stimulate expression of co-­stimulatory molecules that help
T-­cell activation and differentiation, immunoglobulin isotype switching and somatic hypermutation in B cells as well as memory B-­cell
development, and signals to macrophages to kill intracellular pathogens. Therefore disruption of the CD40 signaling pathway affects several key elements of the adaptive immune response leading to a CID
disease characterized by failure of immunoglobulin isotype switching, a process important for synthesis of IgG, IgA, and IgE antibodies;
failure of somatic hypermutation, a process by which B cells generate
antibodies of higher affinity; and absent B-­cell memory, susceptibility to opportunistic infections including PJP, and Cryptosporidium and
enhanced susceptibility to some cancers especially of the liver or of
neuroectodermal origin.

Clinical Manifestations

Recurrent and opportunistic infections usually develop in the first year
of life. About half the patients present with PJP pneumonia. Recurrent
bacterial sinopulmonary infections are also common as well as Cryptosporidium infection and sclerosing cholangitis. Chronic or recurrent
neutropenia is also a feature of this disease, although the pathogenesis
of neutropenia is not well known. Patients have a higher susceptibility to
cancer of the liver or biliary tree as well as primitive neuroectodermal carcinoma, which usually develop after the first 10 years of life. Few patients
survive beyond 30 years of age. Some patients with milder genetic variations present in adolescence with parvovirus-­induced aplastic anemia.

Diagnosis

Serum immunoglobulin levels show very low or absent IgG, IgA, and
IgE, with normal or elevated IgM. Some patients have normal serum
IgA levels, likely the result of a non–CD40-­dependent isotype switching mechanism. The term hyper-­IgM is a misnomer because most
patients are identified before they have elevation of serum IgM levels.
Lymphocyte subsets as well as lymphocyte proliferation to mitogens
are usually normal. Characteristically, there is an absence or paucity of
switched memory B cells. Patients may or may not have neutropenia,
which can be severe. Flow cytometry for expression of CD40 on resting
B cells or CD40 ligand on activated T cells can identify patients with
these defects. Staining for CD40 ligand expression with soluble CD40
will identify all CD40 ligand variants that prevent binding to CD40.
Gene sequencing of CD40 and CD40 ligand can be done separately or
within a larger PID gene panel with known pathogenic variants confirming the disease.

Treatment

Patients should be treated with immunoglobulin replacement therapy
and PJP prophylaxis as soon as the diagnosis is suspected. Attention
to hygiene and clean drinking water as well as avoiding swimming
in lakes will help prevent exposure to opportunistic organisms such
as Cryptosporidium. HSCT can be curative and is recommended if
the patient has a matched related or unrelated donor. Outcomes after
stem cell transplantation have a trend toward improved survival and a
reduced risk for cancer and improved quality of life.

Patients with low, or occasionally normal, CD4 T-­cell numbers from
MHC class II deficiency are susceptible to bacterial, viral, fungal, and
opportunistic infections. Patients usually present in the first year of
life with respiratory infections, chronic diarrhea, and failure to thrive.
Cryptosporidium infections may be associated with sclerosing cholangitis and liver failure.

Genetics and Pathogenesis

MHC class II deficiency results from defects in genes encoding for
transcription factors necessary for expression of MHC class II molecules from the HLA-­DR, HLA-­DP, and HLA-­DQ loci including CIITA,
RFXANK, RFX5, and RFXAP, which explains the concomitant loss of
expression from all three loci.

Diagnosis

Immunodeficiencies with MHC class II deficiency can be identified by
absent or low CD4 T cells on lymphocyte phenotyping by flow cytometry and absent MHC class II molecules. In some cases, CD8 T-­cell
numbers are also decreased. Lymphocyte proliferation to mitogens is
normal but absent in response to antigens.

Treatment

The prognosis for MHC class II deficiency is poor with most patients
dying in the first decade of life. HSCT has been performed and
improves CD4 T-­cell proliferation but not numbers because it does not
correct the expression of MHC class II molecules on thymic epithelial
cells. The outcome of HSCT in MHC class II deficiency is not as good
as in SCID and other severe immunodeficiency diseases.

MHC CLASS I DEFICIENCY AND OTHER CAUSES OF
CD8 T-­CELL DEFICIENCY

MHC class I molecules play an important role in T-­cell development and
function by presenting a peptide fragment from an intracellular pathogen, such as viruses, or cancer-­derived proteins to the TCR of CD8 T
cells. In the thymus, MHC class I molecules provide the positive selection signal for thymocytes to develop into CD8 T cells. Therefore the
absence of MHC class I molecules in the thymus (and on all nucleated
cells) is associated with very low or absent CD8 T cells. There are several
other pathogenic gene variants that cause a deficiency in CD8 T cells.

Genetics and Pathogenesis

MHC class I deficiency results from pathogenic variants in the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) 1 or 2, TAP binding
protein, or β2-­microglobulin genes. The TAP proteins play an important role in allowing the expression of MHC class I molecules on the
surface of all nucleated cells and β2-­microglobulin associates with
MHC class I molecules on the surface of cells.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with low CD8 T cells from MHC class I deficiency may be
asymptomatic in some cases but may present with chronic respiratory
infections including bronchiectasis and granulomatous skin ulcers.

Diagnosis

Immunodeficiency patients with MHC class I deficiency can be identified by absent or low CD8 T cells on lymphocyte phenotyping by flow

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 165 u T-Cell and Combined Deficiencies
cytometry and absent MHC class I molecules. Lymphocyte proliferation is normal.

Treatment

MHC class I deficiency is treated with supportive therapy and avoidance of immunosuppression if possible.

OTHER FORMS OF CD8 DEFICIENCY
CD8 α Gene Defects

CD8 deficiency also results from pathogenic variants in the CD8 α
gene. Patients are susceptible to bacterial and viral respiratory infections. CD8 T-­cell numbers are low and there is an increase in CD4-­
CD8-­T cells. Lymphocyte proliferation is normal. CD8 α deficiency
is also treated with supportive therapy and avoidance of immunosuppression if possible.

Defects in the Zeta-­Associated Protein 70

The zeta-­associated protein (ZAP-­70) is a severe immunodeficiency
similar to SCID with absent or very low numbers of CD8 T cells.
Although CD4 T cells develop in adequate numbers, they are defective in proliferation and function. Patients with ZAP-­70 deficiency are
susceptible to all types of infection including opportunistic infections,
disseminated varicella, and mucocutaneous candidiasis with failure to
thrive and diarrhea. The diagnosis of ZAP-­70 deficiency can be made
by low CD8 T-­cell counts and deficient T-­cell proliferation to mitogens
that can be rescued by bypassing ZAP-­70 signaling with phorbol ester
and ionomycin, helping confirm that the defect is in the proximal signaling pathway in T cells. The diagnosis is confirmed by identification
of a homozygous or combined heterozygous pathogenic variant in the
ZAP-­70 gene. Treatment of ZAP-­70 deficiency requires HSCT. Immunoglobulin replacement and microbial prophylaxis should be initiated
until immune reconstitution after HSCT is achieved.

COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCIES WITH
CONGENITAL THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Wiskott-­Aldrich Syndrome

Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X-­linked recessive disorder
characterized by atopic dermatitis, thrombocytopenic purpura with
normal-­appearing megakaryocytes but small defective platelets, and
susceptibility to infection.

Genetics and Pathogenesis

The Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) controls the assembly
of actin filaments required for cell migration and cell-­cell interactions.
Specific pathogenic variants in the WASP gene cause X-­linked thrombocytopenia (XLT) without immunodeficiency and gain-­of-­function
variants cause X-­linked severe congenital neutropenia. A similar phenotype to WAS occurs with pathogenic variants in the WASP interactive Protein (WIP) that is an autosomal recessive disease affecting both
females and males.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients often have prolonged bleeding from the circumcision site
or bloody diarrhea during infancy. The thrombocytopenia is not
caused initially by antiplatelet antibodies, although autoimmunity
may develop later in life. Atopic dermatitis and recurrent infections
usually develop during the first year of life. Streptococcus pneumoniae
and other bacteria having polysaccharide capsules cause otitis media,
pneumonia, meningitis, and sepsis. Later, infections with agents such
as P. jiroveci and the herpesviruses become more frequent. Infections,
bleeding, and EBV-­associated malignancies are major causes of death.

Diagnosis

The predominant immunoglobulin pattern is a low serum level of
IgM, elevated IgA and IgE, and a normal or slightly low IgG. Percentages of T cells are moderately reduced, and lymphocyte responses
to mitogens are variably depressed. The presence of low numbers of
platelets that are small in size is typical. Immunologically, patients with
this defect uniformly have an impaired humoral immune response to

1273

polysaccharide antigens, as evidenced by absent or greatly diminished
isohemagglutinins, and poor or absent antibody responses after immunization with polysaccharide vaccines. In addition, antibody responses
to protein and conjugate vaccines may also be diminished.

Treatment

Good supportive care includes appropriate nutrition, immunoglobulin replacement, use of killed vaccines, and aggressive management of
eczema and associated cutaneous infections. Because of their profound
antibody deficiency, these patients should be given immunoglobulin
replacement regardless of their serum levels of the different immunoglobulin isotypes. HSCT is the treatment of choice when a high-­quality
matched donor is available and is usually curative. Gene therapy has
resulted in sustained benefits in several patients. As in X-­SCID, early trials of gene therapy were associated with the development of malignancy.
In addition to WAS and WIP deficiency, there is a third cause of
immunodeficiency with thrombocytopenia from pathogenic variants
in the ARPC1B gene affecting Arp2/3-­mediated filament branching
presenting with mild thrombocytopenia but normal-­sized platelets
and recurrent infections. Patients have high IgA and IgE as in WAS.

DNA REPAIR DEFECTS OTHER THAN THOSE
­ AUSING SCID
C

DNA repair plays an important role during lymphocyte development
and differentiation including V(D)J recombination and immunoglobulin isotype switching. Therefore defects in DNA repair enzyme are
frequently associated with CID and many have other characteristic features to identify them (see Table 165.3).

ATAXIA-­TELANGIECTASIA

Ataxia-­telangiectasia is a complex syndrome with immunologic, neurologic, endocrinologic, hepatic, and cutaneous abnormalities.

Genetics and Pathogenesis

The ataxia-­telangiectasia pathogenic variant (ATM) gene encodes a
protein critical for responses to DNA damage. Cells from patients, as
well as from heterozygous carriers, have increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation, defective DNA repair, and frequent chromosomal
abnormalities.
In vitro tests of lymphocyte function have generally shown moderately depressed proliferative responses to T-­and B-­cell mitogens. Percentages of CD3 and CD4 T cells are moderately reduced, with normal
or increased percentages of CD8 T cells and elevated numbers of γ/δ T
cells. The thymus is very hypoplastic, exhibits poor organization, and
lacks Hassall’s corpuscles.

Clinical Manifestations

The most prominent clinical features are progressive cerebellar ataxia,
oculocutaneous telangiectasias, chronic sinopulmonary disease, a high
incidence of malignancy, and variable humoral and cellular immunodeficiency. Ataxia typically becomes evident soon after these children
begin to walk and progresses until they are confined to a wheelchair,
usually by age 10-­12 years. The telangiectasias begin to develop at 3-­6
years of age, contributing to a delay in diagnosis. Recurrent sinopulmonary infections occur in approximately 80% of patients. Although common viral infections have not usually resulted in untoward sequelae,
fatal varicella has occurred. The malignancies associated with ataxia-­
telangiectasia are usually of the lymphoreticular type, but adenocarcinomas also occur. Carriers of pathogenic variants have an increased
incidence of malignancy.

Diagnosis

Patients have elevated serum α-­fetoprotein levels. The most frequent
humoral immunologic abnormality is the selective absence of IgA,
which occurs in 50–80% of these patients. IgG2 or total IgG levels may
be decreased, and specific antibody levels may be decreased or normal. Some patients have an elevated serum IgM level. Identification
of homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the
ATM gene confirms the diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1274 Part XII u Immunology
Treatment

Therapy in ataxia-­telangiectasia is supportive but includes immunoglobulin replacement and avoidance of ionizing radiation unless absolutely necessary to establish a clinical diagnosis and initiate appropriate treatment.

Immunoosseous Dysplasias

Immunoosseous dysplasias are a group of combined immune deficiency diseases affecting bone development as well as T-­cell development or function. They are characterized by skeletal abnormalities and
recurrent infections (see Table 165.4).

CARTILAGE-­HAIR HYPOPLASIA

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia (CHH) is an unusual form of metaphyseal
dysplasia with frequent and severe infections. It occurs with a high
frequency among the Amish and Finnish people (Chapter 741).

Genetics and Pathogenesis

CHH is an autosomal recessive condition. Numerous pathogenic variants that cosegregate with the CHH phenotype have been identified in
the untranslated RNase MRP (RMRP) gene. The RMRP endoribonuclease consists of an RNA molecule bound to several proteins and has
at least two functions: cleavage of RNA in mitochondrial DNA synthesis
and nucleolar cleaving of pre-­RNA. Defects in RMRP cause CHH by
disrupting a function of RMRP RNA that affects multiple organ systems. In vitro studies show decreased numbers of T cells and defective T-­cell proliferation because of an intrinsic defect related to the G1
phase, resulting in a longer cell cycle for individual cells. NK cells are
increased in number and function.

Clinical Manifestations

Clinical features include short, pudgy hands; redundant skin; hyperextensible joints of hands and feet but an inability to extend the elbows
completely; and fine, sparse, light hair and eyebrows. Infections range
from mild to severe (Fig. 165.5). Associated conditions include deficient erythrogenesis, Hirschsprung disease, and an increased risk of
malignancies. The bones radiographically show scalloping and sclerotic or cystic changes in the metaphysis and flaring of the costochondral junctions of the ribs.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of CHH is suspected by the clinical constellation of skeletal dysplasia and immune deficiency and supporting laboratory findings. Homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in
the RMRP gene confirms the diagnosis.

Treatment

Treatment of CHH is supportive. Some patients have been treated with
HSCT, which will correct the T-­cell immunodeficiency and erythrogenesis but will not affect other organ systems.

ANHIDROTIC ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA WITH
IMMUNODEFICIENCY

Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-­ID) is a
CID characterized by susceptibility to infection, thin sparse hair, abnormal
dentition (conical teeth), and absence of salivary gland (Chapter 690).

Genetics and Pathogenesis

X-­linked EDA-­ID results from hypomorphic gene variants in the IKKγ
gene that encodes the NF-­κB essential modulator (NEMO). Complete
loss-­of-­function (LOF) variants are deleterious early in embryogenesis. Carriers of LOF variants have features of incontinentia pigmenti.
NEMO is a member of the IKK complex that phosphorylates the
inhibitor of NF-­κB (IκB), which then allows NF-­κB to translocate to
the nucleus and turn on gene expression. In lymphocytes, NF-­κB is
involved in signaling via the antigen receptors, the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor family, and toll-­like receptors as well as the interleukin (IL)-­1 receptor. Defects in NEMO affect both the innate and
adaptive immune systems and can be severe. Autosomal dominant
gain-­of-­function variants in IκBα also result in a similar phenotype

Fig. 165.5 Metaphyseal dysplasia, McKusick type. Note the fine,

sparse hair and short limbs. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M.
Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022. Fig.1, p. 529.)

that affects both females and males as well as gain-­of-­function variants
in IKBKB. The latter is also associated with recurrent bacterial, viral,
and fungal infections, but the ectodermal defects are variable.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with EDA-­ID suffer from recurrent and severe infections from
gram-­positive and gram-­negative bacteria, mycobacteria, viruses, and
fungi. Patients have thin sparse hair and conical teeth and may have colitis. More severe variants may be associated with osteopetrosis and lymphedema; their disease is termed OL-­EDA-­ID (osteopetrosis, lymphedema,
EDA-­ID).

Diagnosis

The diagnosis can be suspected from the clinical features of anhidrosis, ectodermal dysplasia, and recurrent infections. Patients frequently
present with hypogammaglobulinemia as in the hyper-­IgM syndrome
because CD40 signaling involves NF-­κB, with elevated IgM in some
patients. Most if not all patients have poor NK cell function. The diagnosis can be confirmed by identification of hypomorphic variants in
the IKKγ gene or gain-­of-­function variants in the IκBα gene.

Treatment

Patients are usually treated with immunoglobulin replacement and
close monitoring. The outcome is dependent on the severity of the
phenotype. HSCT has been successful in some patients, but it may not
correct the colitis or other features of the disease.

Calcium Channel Defects

Calcium signaling plays an important role in T-­cell activation, where initially calcium is released from the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytoplasm, which is sensed by STIM1 that in turn activates calcium release
activated channels (CRACs), which are made up of the pore-­forming subunit ORAI-­1, to bring in additional calcium from outside the cell. Intracellular calcium activates calcium-­dependent enzymes including calcineurin,
which activates the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), which

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 165 u T-Cell and Combined Deficiencies

1275

translocates to the nucleus and activates gene transcription including IL-­2
and the CD40 ligand. Pathogenic variants in ORAI-­1 or STIM1 result in
a CID associated with hypotonia because calcium is also important for
muscle function.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with calcium channel defects have recurrent and severe infections
with bacteria, viruses, and fungi. They typically have pneumonia but may
present with a variety of infections including BCG lymphadenitis, chronic
rotavirus diarrhea, and mucocutaneous candidiasis. They may also present
with failure to thrive, ectodermal dysplasia defective dental enamel, and
mydriasis. Patients also have a nonprogressive hypotonia.

Diagnosis

Patients have normal numbers of T cells, but the T cells have decreased
or have absent proliferation to mitogens, antigens, or anti-­
CD3.
Although serum immunoglobulins are normal or increased, specific
antibody levels are diminished and NK cell function may also be
decreased as B cells and NK cells also depend on calcium signaling
for their activation. The clinical features and laboratory test results are
similar for both ORA-­1 and STIM1 deficiency. Therefore genetic testing is required to identify the specific pathogenic variants, which will
aid in genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis.

Treatment

HSCT is the optimal treatment for the immunodeficiency; however,
it does not correct the hypotonia, which may contribute to recurrent
pneumonia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

165.3 Thymic Disorders
Ramsay L. Fuleihan
The thymus is the organ where T-­cell development occurs and central T-­cell tolerance to self-­proteins develops by negative selection of
self-­reactive thymocytes or development of regulatory T cells. Defects
in thymic development affect T-­cell development causing a variable
degree of T-­cell immunodeficiency and are associated with higher risk
for the development of autoimmunity.

DIGEORGE/VELOCARDIOFACIAL SYNDROME/
CHROMOSOME 22Q11.2 DELETION SYNDROME
(22Q11.2DS)

Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is the most common of the
T-­cell disorders, occurring in about 1 in 3,000 births in the United
States. Chromosome 22q11.2 deletions disrupt development of
the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches during early embryogenesis, leading to hypoplasia or aplasia of the thymus and parathyroid
glands. Other structures forming at the same age are also frequently
affected, resulting in anomalies of the great vessels (right-­sided aortic arch), esophageal atresia, bifid uvula, congenital heart disease
(conotruncal, atrial, and ventricular septal defects), a short philtrum
of the upper lip, hypertelorism, an antimongoloid slant to the eyes,
mandibular hypoplasia, and posteriorly rotated ears (see Chapter 99)
(Fig. 165.6). With advanced fetal ultrasound and fetal echocardiography, the diagnosis is often identified prenatally. Other patients may
be identified by low TREC counts on newborn screening for SCID or
sometimes by the development of hypocalcemic seizures during the
neonatal period.

Genetics and Pathogenesis

Chromosome 22q11.2 deletions occur with high frequency because
complex repeat sequences that flank the region represent a challenge
for DNA polymerase. This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and occurs with comparable frequency in all populations.
Within the deleted region, haplosufficiency for the TBX1 transcription
factor appears to underlie the majority of the phenotype. The phenotype is highly variable; a subset of patients has a phenotype that has

Fig. 165.6 Typical facial appearance of a child with DiGeorge syn-

drome. Notice the microstomia, hypertelorism, upturned nose, and posteriorly rotated and small, low-­set ears. (From Chinn IK, Chinen J, Shearer
WT. Primary immunodeficiency diseases. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, et al., eds. Feigin and Cherry’s Textbook of Pediatric Infectious
Diseases. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019. Fig. 67.1, p. 641.)

also been called DiGeorge syndrome, velocardiofacial syndrome, or
conotruncal anomaly face syndrome.
Variable hypoplasia of the thymus occurs in 75% of the patients with
the deletion, which is more frequent than total aplasia; aplasia is present
in <1% of patients with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Slightly less than half
of patients with complete thymic aplasia are hemizygous at chromosome
22q11.2. Approximately 15% are born to diabetic mothers. Another 15% of
infants have no identified risk factors. Approximately 30% of infants with
complete DiGeorge syndrome have CHARGE association (coloboma,
heart defect, choanal atresia, growth or developmental retardation, genital hypoplasia, and ear anomalies including deafness). Pathogenic variants
in the chromodomain helicase DNA-­binding protein 7 (CHD7) gene on
chromosome 8q12.2 are found in approximately 60–65% of individuals
with CHARGE syndrome; some have pathogenic variants in SEMA3E.

Clinical Manifestations

Children with partial thymic hypoplasia may have little trouble with infections and grow normally. Patients with thymic aplasia (complete DiGeorge
syndrome) resemble patients with SCID in their susceptibility to infections
with low-­grade or opportunistic pathogens, including fungi, viruses, and
P. jiroveci, and to GVHD from nonirradiated blood transfusions. Patients
with thymic aplasia can develop an atypical phenotype in which oligoclonal T-­cell populations appear in the blood associated with rash and
lymphadenopathy. These atypical patients appear phenotypically similar to
patients with Omenn syndrome or maternal T-­lymphocyte engraftment.
It is critical to ascertain in a timely manner whether an infant has thymic aplasia, because this disease is fatal without treatment. A T-­cell count
should be obtained on all infants born with primary hypoparathyroidism,
CHARGE syndrome, and conotruncal cardiac anomalies with syndromic
features. Some but not all infants are identified by newborn screening for
SCID and when 22q11.2 deletion is suspected, a calcium level should be
obtained at the time of T-­cell evaluation. The three manifestations with the
highest morbidity in early infancy are profound immunodeficiency, severe
cardiac anomaly, and seizures from hypocalcemia. Thus an early focus
on these concerns is warranted even before the diagnosis is confirmed.
Affected patients may also develop autoimmune cytopenias, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, atopy, and malignancies (lymphomas).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1276 Part XII u Immunology
Diagnosis

The clinical features of DiGeorge/CHARGE/22Q11.2DS will help in
establishing the diagnosis, but there is a wide variety of clinical phenotypes. In most patients, absolute lymphocyte counts are usually only
moderately low for age. The CD3 T-­cell counts are variably decreased in
number, corresponding to the degree of thymic hypoplasia. Lymphocyte responses to mitogen stimulation are absent, reduced, or normal,
depending on the degree of thymic deficiency. Immunoglobulin levels
are often normal, but there is an increased frequency of IgA deficiency,
low IgM levels, and some patients develop progressive hypogammaglobulinemia. FISH for 22Q11.2 may identify patients with 22Q11.2DS
as well as the more sensitive DNA microarray. Pathogenic variants in
TBX1 may be found in DiGeorge syndrome, and pathogenic variants
in CHD7 or SEMA3E in CHARGE syndrome.

Treatment

The immunodeficiency in thymic aplasia is correctable by cultured
allogenic (donor derived) thymic tissue transplants. Following thymic
tissue transplantation, a cytokine release syndrome may develop. Some
infants with thymic aplasia have been given nonirradiated unfractionated bone marrow or peripheral blood transplants from a human leukocyte antigen–identical sibling, with subsequent improved immune
function because of adoptively transferred T cells. Infants and children
with low T-­cell counts but not low enough to consider transplantation
should be monitored for evolution of immunoglobulin defects as well
as autoimmunity. Infections in these patients are multifactorial. Their
anatomy may not favor drainage of secretions; they have a higher rate
of atopy, which may complicate infections; and their host defense may
allow persistence of infections. Interventions range from hand hygiene,
probiotics, prophylactic antibiotics, and risk management to immunoglobulin replacement for those who have demonstrated defective
humoral immunity. Live-­viral vaccines should be avoided until adequate CD4 and CD8 T-­cell counts are confirmed and normal response
to antigens is documented with T-­cell proliferation to antigens or a
protective antibody response to a protein vaccine such as tetanus.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

165.4 Inborn Errors of Immunity with a
Strong Atopic Diathesis
Ramsay L. Fuleihan

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT HYPER-­IgE SYNDROME
STAT3 DEFICIENCY (JOB SYNDROME)

This syndrome is associated with early-­onset atopy and recurrent skin
and lung infections.

Genetics and Pathogenesis

The autosomal dominant hyper-­IgE syndrome is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the gene encoding signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). These pathogenic variants result
in a dominant negative effect. The many clinical features are caused by
compromised signaling downstream of the IL-­6, type I interferon, IL-­
22, IL-­10, and epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptors.

Clinical Manifestations

The characteristic clinical features are staphylococcal abscesses, pneumatoceles, osteopenia, and unusual facial features. There is a history from
infancy of recurrent staphylococcal abscesses involving the skin, lungs,
joints, viscera, and other sites. Persistent pneumatoceles develop as a result
of recurrent pneumonia. Patients often have a history of sinusitis and mastoiditis. C. albicans is the second most common pathogen. Allergic respiratory symptoms are usually absent. The pruritic dermatitis that occurs is
not typical of atopic eczema and does not always persist. There can be a
prominent forehead, deep-­set wide-­spaced eyes, a broad nasal bridge, a

Fig. 165.7 Mucocutaneous inflammation and infections in DOCK8-­
HIES. Severe eczema, molluscum contagiosum and fungal skin infections, and benign tumorous mucosa proliferations progressing from the
inner eyelid and from oral mucosa are clinical signs of DOCK8-­HIES.
(From Hagl B, Heinz V, Schlesinger A, et al. Key findings to expedite the
diagnosis of hyper-­IgE syndromes in infants and young children. Pediatr
Allergy Immunol. 2016;27[2]:177-­184. Fig. 1)

wide fleshy nasal tip, mild prognathism, facial asymmetry, and hemihypertrophy, although these are most evident in adulthood. In older children,
delay in shedding primary teeth, recurrent fractures, and scoliosis occur.
These patients demonstrate an exceptionally high serum IgE concentration; usually normal concentrations of IgG, IgA, and IgM; pronounced
blood and sputum eosinophilia; and poor antibody and cell-­mediated
responses to neoantigens. Although IgE levels >2,000 IU/mL are characteristic, IgE levels may fluctuate and even decrease in adulthood. In neonates and infants with the pruritic pustular dermatosis, IgE levels will be
elevated for age and are usually in the 100s. In vitro studies show normal
percentages of blood T, B, and NK lymphocytes, except for a decreased
percentage of T cells with the memory (CD45RO) phenotype and an
absence or deficiency of T-­helper type 17 (Th17) cells. Most patients have
normal T-­lymphocyte proliferative responses to mitogens but very low
or absent responses to antigens or allogeneic cells from family members.
Blood, sputum, and histologic sections of lymph nodes, spleen, and lung
cysts show striking eosinophilia. Hassall’s corpuscles and thymic architecture are normal.

Treatment

Therapy is generally directed at prevention of infection using antimicrobials including antibiotics and antifungals as well as immunoglobulin replacement.

DOCK8 DEFICIENCY

Deficiency of DOCK8 (dedicator of cytokinesis 8) is an autosomal
recessive severe immunodeficiency that most often presents with
impressively severe eczema in infancy and toddlerhood, food allergy,
and eosinophilic esophagitis. Patients commonly have cutaneous viral
infections with herpes simplex virus (HSV), varicella, or molluscum
contagiosum; susceptibility to infection by CMV and EBV; recurrent
pneumonia leading to bronchiectasis; and opportunistic infections
with PJP. In some patients, cryptosporidia causes sclerosing cholangitis
(Fig. 165.7). The infectious susceptibility tends to worsen over time,
as do the laboratory features of immune dysfunction, most often low
T-­cell counts and poor proliferative function. Serum IgE levels tend to
be elevated with eosinophilia, whereas other immunoglobulin levels
may be decreased, especially IgM. Specific antibody levels are variably
decreased. Patients are also susceptible to autoimmune disease as well
as cancer. Although these patients can survive to adulthood without
transplantation, they suffer many complications and their quality of life
is often poor. For this reason, most patients are now transplanted early
in life to avoid the later complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 166 u B-Cell and Antibody Deficiencies

Chapter 166

B-Cell and Antibody
Deficiencies
Vivian P. Hernandez-­Trujillo and
Camile Ortega
Of the primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDDs), those affecting
antibody production are the most prevalent. Selective absence of IgA
is the most common defect, with rates ranging from 1 in 333 to 1 in
18,000 persons among different races and ethnicities. Patients with
antibody deficiency are usually recognized because they have recurrent
infections with encapsulated bacteria, predominantly in the upper and
lower respiratory tracts. Some individuals with selective IgA deficiency
or infants with transient hypogammaglobulinemia may have few or
no infections. These conditions have a complex and likely polygenic
inheritance, as do the common variable immunodeficiency (CVID)
syndromes. The gene defects for many primary antibody deficiency
disorders have been identified (Table 166.1). Sometimes the defect is
not in the B cell itself but in T cells, which are required for complete
B-­cell function. Some disorders are caused by unknown factors or are
secondary to an underlying disease or its treatment.

166.1 Agammaglobulinemia
Vivian P. Hernandez-­Trujillo and Camile Ortega

X-­LINKED AGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA

Patients with X-­linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), or Bruton agammaglobulinemia, have a profound defect in B-­
lymphocyte development resulting in severe hypogammaglobulinemia, an absence
of circulating B cells, small to absent tonsils, and no palpable lymph
nodes. These patients present with an increased susceptibility to infection (Fig. 166.1) and have increased risk of neutropenia and autoimmunity, particularly presenting as colitis.

Genetics and Pathogenesis

The variant gene in XLA maps to q22 on the long arm of the X chromosome and encodes the B-­cell protein tyrosine kinase Btk (Bruton tyrosine kinase). Btk is a member of the Tec family of cytoplasmic protein
tyrosine kinases and is expressed at high levels in all B-­lineage cells,
including pre-­B cells. Some pre-­B cells are found in the bone marrow,
but the percentage of peripheral blood B lymphocytes is <1%. The percentage of T cells is increased, ratios of T-­cell subsets are normal, and
T-­cell function is intact. The thymus is normal.
Several autosomal recessive defects have also been shown to result in
agammaglobulinemia with an absence of circulating B cells (see Table
166.1; Table 166.2), including pathogenic variants in the genes encoding
the (1) μ heavy chain gene; (2) Igα and (3) Igβ signaling molecules; (4)
B-­cell linker adaptor protein (BLNK); (5) surrogate light chain, λ5/14.1;
(6) leucine-­rich repeat-­containing 8 (LRRC8); (7) p85α subunit of phosphatidylinositol-­3 kinase; (8) p110 δ subunit of phosphatidylinositol-­3
kinase; (9) TCF3; (10) SLC39A7; and (11) TOP2B. These are rare but
are clinically indistinguishable from the X-­linked form (see Fig. 166.1).

Clinical Manifestations/Complications

Most males afflicted with XLA remain well during the first 6-­9 months
of life by virtue of maternally transmitted IgG antibodies. Thereafter
they acquire infections with extracellular pyogenic organisms, such as
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae, unless they are

1277

given prophylactic antibiotics or immunoglobulin therapy. Infections
include sinusitis, otitis media, pneumonia, or, less often, sepsis or meningitis (Fig. 166.2). Infections with Mycoplasma are also particularly
problematic, specifically as they can affect the joints. Chronic fungal
infections are seen; Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia rarely occurs.
Viral infections are usually handled normally, with the exceptions
of hepatitis viruses and enteroviruses. There are examples of paralysis when live polio vaccine was administered to these patients, and
chronic, eventually fatal, central nervous system (CNS) infections with
various echoviruses and coxsackieviruses have occurred in a significant
number of patients. An enterovirus-­associated myositis resembling
dermatomyositis has also been observed. Enteroviral encephalitis can
also be life-­threatening in patients with XLA. Neutropenia, typically
seen at diagnosis when infected, can be associated with Pseudomonas
or staphylococcal infections. In addition, Pseudomonas can lead to
severe and life-­threatening invasive infections. Giardia can also lead to
diarrhea and weight loss. A sudden decrease in serum IgG level should
prompt an evaluation for Giardia.
Long-­term complications include bronchiectasis and colitis, presenting like an inflammatory bowel disease. Gastrointestinal (GI) disease has been increasingly reported in patients with XLA. Although
immune globulin replacement decreased severe infectious complications, the chronic lung disease persisted in a recent cohort study. In
addition, in a separate cohort, infections were highest before initiation
of antibody replacement; however, patients continued to have infections despite adequate IgG levels.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of XLA should be suspected if lymphoid hypoplasia is
found on physical examination (minimal or no tonsillar tissue and no
palpable lymph nodes), and serum concentrations of IgG, IgA, IgM,
and IgE are far below the 95% confidence limits for appropriate age-­
and race-­matched controls; total immunoglobulins are usually <100
mg/dL. Levels of natural antibodies to type A and B red blood cell
polysaccharide antigens (isohemagglutinins) and antibodies to antigens given during routine immunizations are abnormally low in XLA,
whereas they are typically normal in transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy. In infants below the age of 6 months, care should
be taken when interpreting normal IgG, which can represent maternal
IgG passed in utero. In this case, flow cytometry is essential in making
the diagnosis of XLA. Flow cytometry is an important test to demonstrate the absence of circulating B cells, which will distinguish XLA
from most types of CVID, the hyper-­IgM syndrome, and transient
hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy (Fig. 166.3). Genetic testing is
also available to detect absence of Btk.

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE AGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA

Autosomal recessive agammaglobulinemia (ARA) is a clinically indistinguishable disorder from XLA presenting in males and females. The successful assembly and subsequent signaling capacity of the pre-­B cell receptor
complex (pre-­BCR) in the bone marrow is central to the production of B
cells and antibody-­secreting plasma cells. A pathogenic variant in any of
the components of the pre-­BCR, or in the downstream signaling cascade,
results in these rare forms of agammaglobulinemia (see Fig. 166.1).

Genetics and Pathogenesis

Hematopoietic stem cells develop into B cells in the bone marrow.
The maturation into antibody-­secreting plasma cells occurs in peripheral lymphoid tissues. B-­cell development relies on a tightly regulated
sequence of events from the pro-­B cell stage to the formation of the
pre-­BCR and onward (see Fig. 166.1).
The pre-­BCR is composed of the membrane form of the μ heavy
chain, the surrogate light chain composed of VpreB and λ5/14.1 and
the immunoglobulin-­associated signal transducing chains, Igα and
Igβ. An autosomal pattern of inheritance occurs in approximately
10% of agammaglobulinemic syndromes, and, in some affected families, there is known consanguinity. Approximately half of these pathogenic variants are in μ heavy (IGHM) and have a clinical picture that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1278 Part XII u Immunology
Table 166.1

Genetic Basis of the Most Common Primary Antibody Deficiency Disorders

GENE

PHENOTYPE

DISORDER

BAFFR

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia

CD19

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia

CD20

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia

CD21

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia

CD81

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia

CTLA4

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia, pronounced lymphoproliferation and autoimmunity

ICOS

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia, autoimmunity, neoplasia

LRBA

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia, pronounced lymphoproliferation and autoimmunity

NFKB2

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia, autoimmunity

NFKB1

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia, autoimmunity

PIK3CD (AD)

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia, adenopathy

PI3KR1 (AD)

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia

TNFRSF13B

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia, low penetrance of disease

Unknown

CVID

Hypogammaglobulinemia, autoimmunity
Majority of patients with CVID have no known gene variant

Unknown

IgG subclass deficiency

Variable association with infection

Unknown

Specific antibody deficiency

Normal immunoglobulin levels with poor vaccine responses

Unknown

Transient
hypogammaglobulinemia
of infancy

Vaccine responses are usually preserved, and most children outgrow this by age 3 yr

Unknown

Selective IgA deficiency

Low or absent IgA; low concentrations of all immunoglobulins and of switched memory B cells
in CVID

BLNK

Agammaglobulinemia

Absence of antibody production, lack of B cells

BTK

Agammaglobulinemia

Absence of antibody production, lack of B cells, X-­linked agammaglobulinemia

CD79A

Agammaglobulinemia

Loss of the Igα required for signal transduction, absence of antibody production, lack of B cells

CD79B

Agammaglobulinemia

Loss of the Igβ required for signal transduction, absence of antibody production, lack of B cells

IGHM

Agammaglobulinemia

Loss of the Ig heavy chain, absence of antibody production, lack of B cells

IGLL1

Agammaglobulinemia

Loss of the surrogate light chain, absence of antibody production, lack of B cells

PI3KR1 (AR)

Agammaglobulinemia

Loss of signal transduction through the B-­cell receptor, absence of antibody production, lack
of B cells

PIK3CD δ (AR)

Agammaglobulinemia

Severely impaired signal transduction through B-­cell receptor, absence of antibody
production, lack of B cells

SLC39A7

Agammaglobulinemia

Impaired signal transduction through the B-­cell receptor, absence of antibody production, lack
of B cells

TCF3

Agammaglobulinemia

Loss of a key transcription factor for B-­cell development, absence of antibody production, lack
of B cells

AID

Class switch defect

Failure to produce IgG, IgA, and IgE antibodies

CD40

Class switch defect

Failure to produce IgG, IgA, and IgE antibodies, Pneumocystis and Cryptosporidium
susceptibility

CD154

Class switch defect

Failure to produce IgG, IgA, and IgE antibodies, Pneumocystis and Cryptosporidium
susceptibility

INO80

Class switch defect

Failure to produce IgG, IgA, and IgE antibodies

MSH6

Class switch defect

Failure to produce IgG, IgA, and IgE antibodies, malignancy

UNG

Class switch defect

Failure to produce IgG, IgA, and IgE antibodies

CD27

EBV lymphoproliferation

Memory B-­cell deficiency
Hypogammaglobulinemia

NEMO

Anhidrotic ectodermal
dysplasia with
immunodeficiency

Phenotype highly variable but includes specific antibody deficiency and CVID

AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CVID, common variable immunodeficiency; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 166 u B-Cell and Antibody Deficiencies

1279

• BTK deficiency
• BLNK deficiency
• PI3K (p85α) deficiency
• λ5 deficiency
• Cµ deficiency
• lgα or lgβ deficiencies

Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson
(shelterin deficiency)
AK2 deficiency
ADA deficiency

GATA2
deficiency

B cell and NK cell
progenitor

• RAG (RAG1 and RAG2) deficiency
• NHEJ (Artemis) deficiency

CD19

CD19
B cell

MLP

ProB cell

PreB cell

Immature
B cell
T cell

ETP

Selfrenewal

HSC

NK cell

Dendritic
cell

MPP

GATA2 deficiency
Monocyte

GMP

CMP

Granulocyte

Erythrocyte
MEP

Megakaryocyte
Platelets

Fig. 166.1 B-­cell development defects in primary antibody deficiencies (PADs) result from developmental defects that are either B-­cell specific or

affect several hematopoietic cell lineages. B-­cell development occurs in the bone marrow, where hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) undergo B-­cell
lineage specification. Some autosomal-­recessive forms of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) are associated with an early defect in both B
and T cells and are diagnosed in the first few months or years of life. For example, adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency leads to an accumulation of adenosines and thus the death of the lymphocytes. Moreover, adenylate kinase 2 (AK2) deficiency (also known as reticular dysgenesis) is a
metabolic defect that mostly affects T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, neutrophils, and (in some cases) B cells. It is associated with very early onset
hypogammaglobulinaemia or even agammaglobulinaemia. Dyskeratosis congenita is caused by mutations in genes encoding components of the
telomerase or shelterin complexes; it is a rare inherited bone-­marrow failure syndrome that leads to progressive B-­and T-­cell lymphopenia and
hypogammaglobulinaemia. Finally, mutations in GATA2 (which encodes a transcription factor required for early differentiation of hematopoietic cells
in the bone marrow) also lead to B-­cell, dendritic cell, monocyte, and NK cell deficiencies. Successive B-­cell differentiation stages are characterized by ordered gene expression and stochastic immunoglobulin gene rearrangements. The V(D)J recombination of the immunoglobulin locus is
achieved by the lymphocyte-­specific RAG molecules and the non–lymphocyte-­specific nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) complex and leads to
the expression of the pre-­B cell receptor (BCR). Defects in V(D)J recombination (as observed in RAG deficiency and NHEJ deficiency) typically result
in the absence of mature B and T cells. The pre-­BCR is affected in these cases, leading to PADs as V(D)J recombination is required for heavy chain
expression. The dashed lines indicate a block of differentiation. BLNK, B-­cell linker; Btk, Bruton tyrosine kinase; CMP, common myeloid progenitor;
ETP, early T-­cell precursor; GMP, granulocyte/macrophage progenitor; MEP, megakaryocyte/erythrocyte progenitor; MLP, multi-­lymphoid progenitor; MPP, multipotent progenitor; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-­kinase. (From Durandy A, Kracker S, Fischer A. Primary antibody deficiencies. Nat Rev
Immunol. 2013;13:519-­533. Box 1, p. 520.)

is similar to XLA. Variants in the genes encoding for Igα (CD79a), Igβ
(CD79b), λ5 (IGLL1), BLNK, and p85α (PI3KR1) have been identified
as other, more rare, causes for ARA in humans (see Fig. 166.1). Autosomal dominant forms of agammaglobulinemia have also been identified
in patients with an unusual phenotype characterized by an increased
expression of CD19, but with the absence of the BCR. Genetic studies demonstrated a de novo variant in the broadly expressed transcription factor E47, which functions as a quality control mechanism
of enforcing a block to prevent cells that lack a pre-­BCR from further
development.

Clinical Manifestations

Absent peripheral B cells and severe hypogammaglobulinemia due to a
developmental arrest at the pro-­B stage to pre-­B stage is characteristic
of ARA. Although these patients generally have clinical findings that
are indistinguishable from Btk mutations, patients with the pathogenic
variants in any of the components of the BCR leading to ARA tend
to have a more severe phenotype. ARA is diagnosed at a mean age of
11 months, rather than 35 months in patients with XLA. There is also
a higher incidence of enteroviral infections and Pseudomonas sepsis
with neutropenia. These differences suggest there is protective value in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1280 Part XII u Immunology
Table 166.2  	 Patterns of Inheritance for Different Forms of Agammaglobulinemia
DISEASE

GENE/PROTEIN AFFECTED

PATTERN OF INHERITANCE

XLA

Btk

X-­linked

IGHM

μ heavy chain

Autosomal recessive

Igα

CD79a

Autosomal recessive

Igβ

CD79b

Autosomal recessive

λ5

IGLL1

Autosomal recessive

BLNK

BLNK scaffolding protein

Autosomal recessive

PIK3R1

PIK3 regulatory subunit

Autosomal recessive

PIK3CD

PIK3 regulatory subunit

Autosomal recessive

SLC39A7

Zinc transporter protein ZIP7

Autosomal recessive

TCF3

Transcription factors E12 and E47

Autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant

LRRC8

LRRC8 deficiency

Autosomal dominant

Hoffman syndrome

TOP2B

Autosomal dominant

XLA, X-­linked agammaglobulinemia.

Types of infections in XLA patients

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

ry
em
a
Si
nu
O
s
i
tit
is tis
m
e
di
U
pp
a
er
re Ski
s
n
C pira
on
to
G jun ry
as
c
tro tivi
ti
in
te s
st
in
al
C
N
S
Se S
e
pt
ps
ic
ar is
th
rit
is
Ly
O
st
m
G
ph
O eom U
ad
ra
en l c yel
it
a
iti
s/ ndi is
Ly
di
a
m
ph sis
an
gi
tis

T

ia

/E

m

py

to
ra

EN

pi
es
R

on
m
eu

agammaglobulinemia (XLA) patients. USIDNET Registry. Infections affect many body systems in XLA patients. CNS, Central nervous system: ENT, ear, nose, and
throat; GU, genitourinary. (Data from Groth D, Wright H,
Marsh R, et al. X-­linked agammaglobulinemia: Infection
frequencies in 226 patients from the USIDNET Registry.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;145[2 Supplement]:AB80.)

Pn

Fig. 166.2 Types of Infections in a cohort of X-­linked

% patients

the small amount of immunoglobulins produced by patients with XLA.
Treatment using immunoglobulin and aggressive use of antibiotics is
identical to that for patients with XLA.

Diagnosis

Due to the early B-­cell developmental arrest, ARA variants have been
associated with the complete absence of CD19+ B cells in the peripheral circulation and profound hypogammaglobulinemia. Identifying a
genetic cause of ARA is challenging, and there is a need for a better
understanding of susceptibility genes and modifying genetic factors.
The goal of further areas of investigation should include the identification of variant genes in patients who do not appear to have defects in
the genes already associated with immunodeficiency.
Whole genome sequencing will greatly facilitate the molecular diagnosis of abnormalities in additional genes that can cause ARA.

Inheritance Patterns

XLA affects males, as it is an X-­linked disorder. The inheritance patterns include all female offspring as carriers, and none of the male
offspring will be affected. Autosomal recessive forms of agammaglobulinemia result in both males and females affected, as each parent passes
on the affected gene. Patients with agammaglobulinemia tend to have
more severe disease, often presenting earlier in life compared with

patients with hypogammaglobulinemia, specific antibody deficiency
(SAD), or CVID.
Treatment with antibody replacement and prophylactic antibiotics
for patients with any form of agammaglobulinemia is essential in preventing infections and will be further reviewed later.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

166.2 Hypogammaglobulinemia, Transient
Hypogammaglobulinemia of Infancy,
Specific Antibody Deficiency, and
Common Variable Immunodeficiency
Vivian P. Hernandez-­Trujillo and Camile Ortega
Patients with low IgG may present at different ages. Hypogammaglobulinemia results from low, but not absent, levels of serum immunoglobulins. If a patient is diagnosed with a specific pathologic genetic variant,
this aids in making a specific diagnosis. Otherwise, in patients with a
low IgG, the diagnosis may be arbitrary when considering the differential
of hypogammaglobulinemia, SAD, and CVID (Tables 166.3 and 166.4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 166 u B-Cell and Antibody Deficiencies

Increased loss can result from protein-­losing enteropathies, intestinal
lymphangiectasia, nephrotic syndrome, burns, and trauma.

1
Suspected primary antibody deficiency
in patient >4 years of age

Specific Antibody Deficiency

SAD is defined as patients, 2 years old and older, with recurrent
infections and normal immunoglobulin isotypes who lack antibody
response to purified S. pneumoniae capsular polysaccharide antigens,
while responding normally to protein antigens.

2
Measure serum immunoglobulins,
IgG subclasses, antibodies to vaccination,
and lymphocyte subsets

Genetics and Pathogenesis

3
Is IgG profoundly reduced?
Yes

No

4
Are T cells profoundly
reduced?
Yes

No

6
Pursue
combined
immune
deficiency

5
Are levels to antibodies
to vaccination reduced?
Yes

Yes

No

10
Consider
AGAM and
CVID

No

8
Consider
SAD

7
Are B cells
profoundly
reduced?

11
Consider
CVID or
HIGMS

9
Are IgG
subclasses
reduced?

Yes
12
Consider IgG
subclass
deficiency
Yes
14
Consider IgA
deficiency

No
13
Is IgA
reduced?

No
15
Consider
alternative
diagnosis

Fig. 166.3 Algorithm for evaluation of a patient with suspected pri-

mary antibody deficiency. AGAM, Congenital agammaglobulinemia;
CVID, common variable immunodeficiency; HIGMS, hyperIgM syndrome; SAD, specific antibody deficiency. (From Maglione PJ. Primary
antibody deficiency. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds.
Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2021. Fig. 5.1.)

HYPOGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA

1281

The most common types of PIDD are antibody deficiencies characterized by hypogammaglobulinemia and recurrent infections and are
usually present in childhood. Primary hypogammaglobulinemia represents a spectrum of disease, with more severe phenotypes characterized
by profound hypogammaglobulinemia or agammaglobulinemic states,
as was described in the previous section. SAD and CVID are presented
in the following sections, and onset may occur later in childhood and
adolescence. This is in contrast to transient hypogammaglobulinemia
of infancy, which presents in the first few months of life.
The secondary forms are more common in adults and are a result
of decreased production or increased loss. Decreased production can
be drug induced (rituximab, glucocorticoids, and antiepileptics), from
malignancy or premalignant disorders (chronic lymphocytic leukemia,
lymphoma, multiple myeloma, or Waldenström macroglobulinemia),
and from Good syndrome (thymoma with hypogammaglobulinemia).

Infants demonstrate robust antibody responses to protein antigens
through T-­cell–dependent activation. Response to purified polysaccharide vaccines (PPVs) does not involve T-­cell activation, and is only considered to be fully developed by 2 years of age. The response to protein
antigens, including those contained in the protein conjugated vaccines
(PCVs), typically remains intact in patients with SAD. In SAD, some
patients’ lack of response to PPV may represent physiologic immaturity of the immune system, and may resolve over time. In SAD patients
with recurrent infections requiring antibiotics, there is likely an underlying immunologic abnormality. The cause for this delay in maturation
remains unknown. Abnormalities in a specific pathogen-­associated
molecular pathway may be responsible for the variability in which individuals respond to specific protein or polysaccharide antigens despite
normal total immunoglobulin levels. A number of cellular pathways
produce antibodies against purified or conjugate polysaccharides and
are likely to be altered by different defects. The response seen to PPV,
which can occur in patients who lack a response to PCV, demonstrates
how conjugate and purified polysaccharides induce antibodies through
different activation pathways. The variation in phenotypes of SAD also
supports the likelihood of different pathogenic mechanisms resulting
in polysaccharide antibody deficiencies. The use of large-­scale DNA
studies, along with IgM memory and class-­switched memory B cells as
immunologic markers, is expected to provide useful information for
the evaluation and management of patients with SAD in the future.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with SAD present in a manner consistent with those with
defects of humoral immunity. Frequent, severe, or prolonged sinopulmonary infections are most common. Rapid recurrence of infection
on discontinuation of antibiotics, following initial improvement, is
also common. Invasive and life-­threatening infections are not frequent.
Approximately half of children show resolution of SAD in 3 years and
treatment may be temporary. A new diagnosis of SAD during adolescence or adulthood could indicate a previously missed diagnosis or
progression of a mild phenotype. Pathogen susceptibility is not specific and not limited to S. pneumoniae. Other encapsulated bacteria,
(H. influenzae and Moraxella catarrhalis), Staphylococcus aureus and
respiratory viruses cause significant disease in SAD.
SAD patients with allergic disease are among the most challenging
to identify due to increased risk of sinopulmonary infections resulting from persistent inflammation and anatomic dysfunction associated
with asthma and rhinitis. It is important to consider underlying SAD in
this population, as IgE-­mediated sensitization is only present in some
of these patients. Mucociliary or anatomic defects should also be considered in those who have developed high titers in response to natural
infection, but maintain an abnormal pattern of infections.
Although lack of antibody response to polysaccharide antigens
is found frequently in patients without any associated immune deficiency, selective antibody deficiencies are also common in patients
with known PIDDs with normal total immunoglobulin levels such as
ataxia telangiectasia, asplenia, hyper-­IgE syndrome, selective IgA deficiency, IgG subclass deficiencies, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, and partial DiGeorge syndrome. A subset of adolescents and adults with SAD
may progress to more severe forms of PIDD, including other forms of
hypogammaglobulinemia and CVID.

Diagnosis

The gold standard for the diagnosis of SAD involves evaluating
the response to the 23-­
valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV23). In patients immunized with protein conjugated

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1282 Part XII u Immunology
Table 166.3  	 Main Phenotypes of Primary Antibody Deficiencies
PHENOTYPE

MAIN CLINICAL FEATURES

MAIN B-­CELL FEATURES

Agammaglobulinemia

Bacterial infections (in respiratory tract) and
enterovirus infections

Absence of CD19 B cells

Common variable immunodeficiency

Bacterial infections (in respiratory tract and
gut), autoimmunity, cancer, and increased
risk of granuloma

Highly variable; may see decreased memory
B cells

Class switch defects

Bacterial and opportunistic infections

Decreased frequency of memory B cells

Selective IgA deficiency

Most often asymptomatic

Normal

IgG subclass deficiency

Frequent bacterial infections; diagnosis after
age 2 yr

B-­cell subsets normal

Selective polysaccharide antibody deficiency

Bacterial infections (after age 2 yr)

Normal IgG (including IgG2 and IgG4) levels,
normal B-­cell subsets

Table 166.4  	 Antibody Deficiency Disorders with Laboratory Evaluation

SELECTIVE IgA

SPECIFIC
ANTIBODY
DEFICIENCY

COMMON
VARIABLE
IMMUNO­DEFICIENCY

TRANSIENT
HYPOGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA

Decreased

Normal

Normal

Decreased to normal

Decreased

IgA

Decreased

Decreased

Normal

Decreased to normal

Normal

IgM

Decreased

Normal

Normal

Varies

Normal

B CD19+

Decreased to absent

Normal

Normal

Decreased to normal
memory B cells

Normal

T CD4+/CD3+

Normal to increased

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

CD8+/CD3+

Normal to increased

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

NK 16+/56+

Normal to increased

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Protein

Decreased

Normal

Normal

Decreased to normal

Normal

Polysaccharide

Decreased

Normal

Decreased

Decreased to normal

Normal

LABORATORY
VALUES

XLA/AR AGAMMA

IgG

LYMPHOCYTES

SPECIFIC ANTIBODY
TITERS

AR, Autosomal recessive; NK, natural killer; XLA, X-­linked agammaglobulinemia.

pneumococcal vaccines (PCV-­7, PCV-­13, PCV-­10, PCV-15, PCV-20),
the evaluation must be based on the serotypes not present in conjugate
vaccines. In unimmunized patients, a complete absence of protective
titers to all serotypes is unusual, as most individuals would be expected
to have developed some in response to natural infection by 2 years of
age. The standard and reproducible method used for analysis is the
third-­generation World Health Organization enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and the antigens are individual serotype
specific capsular polysaccharides of pneumococci. Antibody titers are
expressed as mg/mL and although titers as low as 0.35 mg/mL have
been considered protective against invasive infections, a titer of 1.3
mg/mL is used as the threshold of response to PPV23 and generally
considered protective against mucosal infections. Four different phenotypes of SAD have been described based on the response to the
available pneumococcal vaccines: mild, moderate, severe, and memory. Although all phenotypes presume an abnormal pattern of infection, severity or susceptibility to infection may or may not correlate
clinically. The severe phenotype is defined as nearly absent protective
titers to ≤2 serotypes following PPV23. The moderate phenotype is
based on age: for those less than 6 years old, less than 50% protective
serotypes and those age 6 years old and greater, less than 70% protective serotypes. Many patients fall in the mild phenotype, which is
less well defined as a failure of response to multiple phenotypes. The

memory phenotype, also dependent on age, is defined as an adequate
initial response and subsequent loss of protective titers within 6
months. The evaluation of specific antibodies against S. pneumoniae
polysaccharides provides guidance in determining the need for additional immunization, antibiotic therapy, or IgG replacement therapy
in SAD patients. Children and adults who have not been immunized
and have not developed protective titers in response to natural infection should be immunized with PCV followed by PPV23, as they have
been shown to respond both clinically and serologically. Patients who
fail to respond to the initial challenge with PPV23 may respond to the
conjugated vaccine, when given ≥1 year after PPV23. Most patients
have an excellent prognosis with appropriate treatment.

COMMON VARIABLE IMMUNODEFICIENCY

CVID is a syndrome characterized by hypogammaglobulinemia after
an initial period of apparent normal immune function. Serum IgG
must be <2 standard deviations below the age-­adjusted norms, with
low IgA and/or IgM levels. CVID patients may appear similar clinically
to those with XLA in the types of infections experienced and bacterial
etiologic agents involved, except that enterovirus meningoencephalitis
is rare in patients with CVID. In contrast to XLA, the sex distribution
in CVID is almost equal, the age at onset is later, and infections may be
less severe. CVID is the most common of the antibody defects.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 166 u B-Cell and Antibody Deficiencies
Genetics and Pathogenesis

CVID is a phenotypic diagnosis with a polygenic inheritance in most
cases. Genes known to produce the CVID phenotype when pathogenic
variants occur include ICOS (inducible co-­
stimulator) deficiency,
SH2DIA (responsible for X-­linked lymphoproliferative disease [XLP]),
CD19, CD20, CD21, CD81, BAFF-­R (B-­cell–activating factor of the
tumor necrosis factor family of receptors), NFKB1 and NFKB2, IKZF1,
ATP6AP1, MOGS, TACI, and TRNT1 (Fig. 166.4). With rare exceptions, management of CVID does not depend on a genetic diagnosis. In
the setting of atypical infections or autoimmunity, pursuing a genetic
diagnosis can be useful because some genetic etiologies can have a
poor prognosis and transplantation should be considered. Targeted
treatment options may also be available to treat some forms of CVID
related to LRBA or CTLA4 pathogenic variants.
Despite normal numbers of circulating B cells in many patients and
the presence of lymphoid cortical follicles, blood B cells from CVID
patients do not differentiate normally into immunoglobulin-­producing
cells. They may have a deficiency of switched memory B cells.

Clinical Manifestations

The serum immunoglobulin and antibody deficiencies in CVID are
associated with recurrent sinopulmonary infections (sinusitis, otitis,
pneumonia). Most patients present before age 20. Close monitoring for
the development of chronic lung disease is needed. Repeated pulmonary infections may produce bronchiectasis; interstitial lung disease is
common (Fig. 166.5). Sepsis and meningitis with encapsulated bacteria
occur more frequently than in the general population. Patients with
recurrent infections as their only manifestation typically have a normal
life expectancy and do well with immunoglobulin replacement. The
presence of autoimmune disease or lymphoproliferation confers a poor
prognosis, as antibody replacement does not improve these conditions.
Patients with CVID often have autoantibody formation and normal-­
sized or enlarged tonsils and lymph nodes; about 25% of patients have
splenomegaly. CVID has also been associated with a spruelike enteropathy with or without nodular lymphoid hyperplasia of the intestine.
Other autoimmune diseases include alopecia areata, hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, gastric atrophy, achlorhydria, and pernicious
anemia. Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia, intestinal lung disease,
pseudolymphoma, B-­cell lymphomas, amyloidosis, and noncaseating
sarcoid-­like granulomas of the lungs (granulomatous and lymphocytic interstitial lung disease [GLILD]), spleen, skin, and liver also

occur. Patients should be monitored closely over time for symptoms
involving multiple tissues.

166.3 Class Switch Defects
Vivian P. Hernandez-­Trujillo and Camile Ortega
The hyper-­IgM syndrome is genetically heterogeneous and characterized by normal or elevated serum IgM levels associated with low or
absent IgG, IgA, and IgE serum levels, indicating a defect in the class
switch recombination (CSR) process. Causative pathogenic variants
have been identified in the CD40 ligand gene on the X chromosome
and three genes on autosomal chromosomes: the activation-­induced
cytidine deaminase (AID) gene, the uracil DNA glycosylase gene
(UNG), and the CD40 gene on chromosome 20. Distinctive clinical
features permit presumptive recognition of the type of pathogenic variants in these patients, thereby aiding proper choice of therapy. All such
patients should undergo molecular analysis to ascertain the affected
gene for purposes of genetic counseling, carrier detection, and decisions regarding definitive therapy.

X-­LINKED HYPER-­IgM CAUSED BY MUTATIONS IN
CD40 LIGAND GENE

X-­linked hyper-­IgM is caused by pathogenic variants in the gene that
encodes the CD40 ligand (CD154, CD40L), which is expressed on
activated T-­helper (Th) cells. Males with this syndrome have very low
serum concentrations of IgG and IgA, with a usually normal or sometimes elevated concentration of polyclonal IgM; may or may not have
small tonsils; usually have no palpable lymph nodes; and often have
profound neutropenia. This disease, unlike the autosomal recessive
forms of hyper-­IgM, affects both B and T cells.

Genetics and Pathogenesis

The B cells are normal in this condition; the defect is in the T cells.
CD40L is the ligand for CD40, which is present on B cells and monocytes. CD40L is upregulated on activated T cells. Mutations result in
an inability to signal B cells to undergo isotype switching, and thus the
B cells produce only IgM. The failure of T cells to interact with B cells
through this receptor-­ligand pair also causes a failure of upregulation
of the B-­cell and monocyte surface molecules CD80 and CD86 that

CTLA4,
6.42%
PIK3CD,
26.74%

Monogenic cause
(estimated 2-10%)

1283

LRBA,
26.74%

Unknown genetic cause
modifier genes (prevalence unknown):
TNFRSF13B (TACI), TNFRSF13C (BAFF-R), MSH5, MSH2,
MLH1, RAD50, FCGR2A, HLA-DQ/DR, ORC4L, CLEC16A, etc.

PRKCD, 2.14%
PLCG2, 2.14%
NFKB2, 5.35%
NFKB1, 1.60%
PIK3R1, 4.81%
VAV1, 0.53%
RAC2, 0.53%
BLK, 0.53%
IKZF1 (IKAROS), 3.21%
IRF2BP2, 0.53%
ICOS, 3.74%
TNFSF12 (TWEAK), 0.53%
CD19, 3.74%
CD81, 0.53%
CR2 (CD21), 1.07%
MS4A1 (CD20), 0.53%
TNFRSF7 (CD27), 4.81%
IL21, 0.53%
IL21R, 3.21%

Fig. 166.4 Known genetic etiology of common variable immunodeficiency (CVID). The majority of cases of CVID do not have a defined genetic cause.

Many of these are likely to be multifactorial, and the genomic duplication and deletion burden in CVID suggests this to be the case; 115 of the
mutations have been identified. The colored pie chart represents their breakdown and relative frequency. (From Bogaert DJ, Dullaers M, Lambrecht
BN, et al. Genes associated with common variable immunodeficiency: One diagnosis to rule them all? J Med Genet. 2016;53[9]:575-­590. Fig 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1284 Part XII u Immunology
B

Lymphoma,
4.8%

60

Fig. 166.5 Chronic lung disease

Bronchiectasis
only, 32.3%
ILD +/– pulmonary
nodules*, 62.9%

40

20

ar

br
on

ch
i

ol

iti

s

at
es

P

in
llic
ul

pr
ed
ro
si
s
fib
ar
y

Fo

rp
l
hy
pe
d
oi
Pu

lm

on

ph
Ly
m

O
BO

(N
as
ia

ul
ra
n

om

S)
O

LI
P

om

as

0

G

in common variable immunodeficiency. A, Lung disease types by
radiographs and/or pathology
reports (n = 124). B, Interstitial
lung disease pathologies (n = 46).
*Thirteen of 65 subjects with ILD
had concurrent bronchiectasis.
BOOP, bronchiolitis obliterans
organizing pneumonia; ILD, interstitial lung disease; LIP, lymphoid
interstitial pneumonia. (From
Ho HE, Cunningham-­Rundles C.
Non-­
infectious complications of
common variable immunodeficiency: Updated clinical spectrum, sequelae, and insights to
pathogenesis. Front Immunol.
2020;11:149. Fig. 1)

Percentage (%)

A

interact with CD28/CTLA4 on T cells, resulting in failure of “crosstalk”
between immune system cells.

whereas in MSH6 deficiency patients may have increased IgM, family
or personal history of cancer, and low switch memory B cells.

Clinical Manifestations

Clinical Manifestations

Treatment

Treatment and Prognosis

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE HYPER-­IgM
Genetics and Pathogenesis

Treatment of Antibody Deficiency

Males with the CD40 ligand defect become symptomatic during the
first or second year of life with recurrent pyogenic infections, including
otitis media, sinusitis, pneumonia, and tonsillitis. They have marked
susceptibility to P. jirovecii pneumonia and can be neutropenic. Lymph
node histology shows only abortive germinal center formation with
severe depletion and phenotypic abnormalities of follicular dendritic
cells. These patients have normal numbers of circulating B lymphocytes, but a decreased frequency of CD27+ memory B cells. Circulating T cells are also present in normal numbers and in vitro responses
to mitogens are normal, but there is decreased antigen-­specific T-­cell
function. In addition to opportunistic infections such as P. jirovecii
pneumonia, there is an increased incidence of extensive verruca vulgaris lesions, Cryptosporidium enteritis, subsequent liver disease, and
an increased risk of malignancy.
Because of the poor prognosis, the treatment of choice is an HLA-­
identical hematopoietic stem cell transplant at an early age. Alternative
treatment for this condition is lifelong infusions of immune globulin.
In patients with severe neutropenia, the use of granulocyte colony-­
stimulating factor has been beneficial.

In contrast to patients with the CD40L defect, B cells from these
patients are not able to switch from IgM-­secreting to IgG-­, IgA-­, or
IgE-­secreting cells, even when co-­cultured with normal T cells. The
defects are all B-­cell intrinsic. The most common autosomal recessive
defect is in a gene that encodes AID. AID deaminates cytosine into
uracil in targeted DNA, which is followed by uracil removal by UNG.
Severely impaired CSR was found in three hyper-­IgM patients reported
to have UNG deficiency. Their clinical characteristics were similar to
those with AID deficiency, with increased susceptibility to bacterial
infections and lymphoid hyperplasia. Histologic examination of the
enlarged lymph nodes reveals the presence of giant germinal centers
(5-­10 times > normal) filled with highly proliferating B cells. Autosomal recessive hyper-­IgM can be caused by defects in CD40. Clinical
manifestations included recurrent sinopulmonary infections, P. jirovecii
pneumonia, and Cryptosporidium parvum infections, very similar to
the manifestations seen in X-­linked hyper-­IgM syndrome. Patients
with INO80 deficiency may present with severe bacterial infections;

Concentrations of serum IgG, IgA, and IgE are very low in AID, UNG,
and CD40 deficiencies. In contrast to the CD40 ligand defect, however,
the serum IgM concentration in patients with AID deficiency is usually
markedly elevated and polyclonal. Patients with AID and UNG mutations have lymphoid hyperplasia, are generally older at age at onset,
do not have susceptibility to P. jirovecii pneumonia, often do have isohemagglutinins, and are much less likely to have neutropenia unless
it occurs on an autoimmune basis. The lymphoid hyperplasia distinguishes these patients from many others with antibody deficiency, particularly agammaglobulinemia, which leads to a paucity of lymphoid
tissue. They have a tendency, however, to develop autoimmune and
inflammatory disorders, including diabetes mellitus, polyarthritis,
autoimmune hepatitis, hemolytic anemia, immune thrombocytopenia,
Crohn disease, and chronic uveitis.
With early diagnosis and antibody replacement, as well as good management of infections with antibiotics, patients with AID and UNG
mutations generally have a more benign course than do those with the
CD40L or CD40 defects. CD40 deficiency is rare but appears to mimic
the manifestations of CD40L quite closely.
Except for the CD40 ligand defect, for which stem cell transplantation is recommended, judicious use of antibiotics to treat documented
infections and regular administration of immunoglobulin are the only
effective treatments for primary B-­cell disorders. The most common
forms of replacement therapy are either intravenous or subcutaneous
immune globulin (IVIG or SCIg). Broad antibody deficiency should
be carefully documented before such therapy is initiated. The rationale
for the use of IVIG or SCIg is to provide missing antibodies, not to
raise the serum IgG or IgG subclass level. The development of safe and
effective immunoglobulin preparations is a major advancement in the
treatment of patients with severe antibody deficiencies, although it is
expensive and there have been national shortages.
Almost all commercial preparations are isolated from normal plasma
by the Cohn alcohol fractionation method or a modification of it. Cohn
fraction II is then further treated to remove aggregated IgG. Additional
stabilizing agents such as sugars, glycine, and albumin are added to
prevent reaggregation and protect the IgG molecule during lyophilization. The ethanol used in preparation of immunoglobulin inactivates

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 166 u B-Cell and Antibody Deficiencies
HIV, and an organic solvent/detergent step inactivates hepatitis B and
C viruses. Some preparations are also nanofiltered to remove infectious
agents. Most commercial lots are produced from plasma pooled from
10,000 to 60,000 donors and therefore contain a broad spectrum of
antibodies. Each pool must contain adequate levels of antibody to antigens in various vaccines, such as tetanus and measles. However, there
is no standardization based on titers of antibodies to more clinically
relevant organisms, such as S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae type b.
The IVIG and SCIg preparations available in the United States have
similar efficacy and safety. Rare transmission of hepatitis C virus has
occurred in the past, but this has been resolved by the additional treatment step. There has been no documented transmission of HIV by any of
these preparations. IVIG or SCIg at a dose of 400-600 mg/kg per month
achieves trough IgG levels close to the normal range. Higher doses are
indicated in patients with chronic or severe respiratory infections. Systemic
reactions may occur, but rarely are these true anaphylactic reactions.
Neutropenia associated with B-­cell defects has responded to granulocyte
colony-­stimulating factor. Treatment of inflammatory bowel disease is
essential in maintaining adequate IgG levels.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

166.4 Isotype Defects
Vivian P. Hernandez-­Trujillo and Camile Ortega

SELECTIVE IgA DEFICIENCY

An isolated absence or near absence (<5 mg/dL) of serum and secretory IgA is the most common well-­defined immunodeficiency disorder, with a disease frequency as high as 0.33% in some populations.
Patients may be asymptomatic or may develop sinopulmonary or gastrointestinal (GI) infections (especially Giardia). IgA deficiency is also
associated with celiac disease and other autoimmune disorders. The
diagnosis cannot be made until about 4 years of age, when IgA levels
should be matured to adult levels.
The basic defect resulting in IgA deficiency is unknown. Phenotypically normal blood B cells are present. In these patients, normal
levels of other isotypes and normal specific antibody levels are seen.
This defect also often occurs in pedigrees containing individuals with
CVID. Indeed, IgA deficiency may evolve into CVID over time. IgA
deficiency is noted in patients treated with the same drugs associated
with producing CVID (phenytoin, d-­penicillamine, gold, and sulfasalazine), suggesting that environmental factors may trigger this disease in a genetically susceptible person.

Clinical Manifestations

Infections occur predominantly in the respiratory, GI, and urogenital
tracts. Bacterial agents responsible are the same as in other antibody
deficiency syndromes. Intestinal giardiasis is common. Serum concentrations of other immunoglobulins are usually normal in patients with
selective IgA deficiency, although IgG2 (and other) subclass deficiency
has been reported.
Serum antibodies to IgA are reported in as many as 44% of patients
with selective IgA deficiency. These antibodies can cause nonhemolytic
transfusion reactions. Washed erythrocytes (frozen blood would have

1285

this done routinely) or blood products from other IgA-­deficient individuals should be administered to patients with IgA deficiency. Many
immune globulin preparations contain sufficient IgA to cause reactions. It is important to note that administration of immune globulin, which is >99% IgG, is not indicated because most IgA-­deficient
patients make IgG antibodies normally.

IgG Subclass Deficiencies

Some patients have deficiencies of one or more of the four subclasses
of IgG despite normal or elevated total IgG serum concentration. Most
patients may be asymptomatic. Some patients with absent or very low
concentrations of IgG2 also have IgA deficiency. They may present
with bacterial infections. Other patients with IgG subclass deficiency
have gone on to develop CVID, suggesting that the presence of IgG
subclass deficiency may be a marker for more generalized immune
dysfunction. The biologic significance of the numerous moderate
deficiencies of IgG subclasses that have been reported is difficult to
assess. IgG subclass measurement is not cost-­effective in evaluating
immune function in the child with recurrent infections. The more relevant issue is a patient’s capacity to make specific antibodies to protein and polysaccharide antigens, because profound deficiencies of
antipolysaccharide antibodies have been noted even in the presence
of normal concentrations of IgG2. For this reason, immune globulin
should not be administered to patients with IgG subclass deficiency
unless they are shown to have a deficiency of antibodies to a broad
array of antigens.

Immunoglobulin Heavy-­and Light-­Chain Deletions

Some completely asymptomatic individuals have been documented
to have a total absence of IgG1, IgG2, IgG4, and/or IgA1 as a result
of gene deletions. These patients illustrate the importance of assessing
specific antibody formation before deciding to initiate immune globulin therapy in IgG subclass–deficient patients. Low or undetectable levels of IgG subclasses alone is, therefore, not an indication for antibody
replacement.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

166.5 Transient Hypogammaglobulinemia of
Infancy
Vivian P. Hernandez-­Trujillo and Camile Ortega
A common laboratory finding in infants, transient hypogammaglobulinemia represents developmental delay in the production of immunoglobulin. It is thought to occur in as many as 1:1,000 children. Most
infants begin to produce IgG in the first 3 months of life, and the quantity produced increases throughout infancy. For reasons incompletely
understood, a small number of infants either begin late or do not
increase their production as expected. This condition will resolve with
no intervention, but represents a source of diagnostic confusion. A key
distinction is that responses to vaccines are usually preserved in this
condition, whereas in the others, including SAD, antibody responses
will be low to absent.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1286 Part XII u Immunology

Chapter 167

Natural Killer Cells
Jessica M. Palmieri*, Vibha A. Szafron*, and
Lisa Forbes Satter
Natural killer (NK) cells are lymphocytes that have a critical role
in the innate immune response to pathogenic challenge and cellular stress. NK cells are capable of rapid target cell killing and can
quickly secrete large amounts of preformed granzymes and perforins in response to viral infections, especially those of the herpesvirus family. They are also crucial in tumor surveillance. NK cells are
found in the circulating blood as approximately 3–15% of lymphocytes and are also found in both primary and secondary lymphoid
tissues where they are in a constant state of surveillance for cellular
abnormalities. NK cells use a detection system composed of a wide
range of germline-­encoded cell surface receptors that contribute
to simultaneous NK activating and inhibitory signals. NK cells are
constantly receiving both activating and inhibitory signals with the
balance of signals tilted toward inactivation until NK cell recognition of a target cell occurs. With target cell recognition, the balance
between inhibitory and activating signals leans in favor of activation and NK cell killing is initiated.
NK cells are defined as innate immune lymphocytes because unlike
B and T lymphocytes, they do utilize recombination-­activating gene
(RAG) proteins required for DNA rearrangement and assemblage
of diverse antigen-­specific receptors in response to antigen exposure. However, they can develop long-­lived and highly antigen-­
specific immunologic memory responses to different antigens
through RAG-­independent adaptive immunity, which provides lifelong immune memory responses. This means that despite a lack of
receptor diversity accrued via DNA rearrangement like B cells and
T cells, NK cells do have characteristics associated with the adaptive immune system; distinguishing healthy from diseased cells,
producing robust antiviral responses, and maintaining a collection
of long-­lived cells that expand during cellular stress responses.

NK CELL MARKERS, SUBSETS, AND MATURATION

Mature NK cells are traditionally defined as non-­T, non-­B lymphocytes that can rapidly produce interferon gamma (IFN-­γ) and can
mediate cellular cytotoxicity. Like all lymphocytes, they express cluster of differentiation (CD) markers that identify their cell type and
stage of development that are also upregulated or downregulated for
cell homing purposes. However, there are no surface markers that
are unique and specific for NK cells. NK cells have been traditionally identified by using flow cytometry to exclude the cellular surface
presence of leukocyte expressing markers specific to other leukocytes,
such as CD3 and CD5 (T cells), CD19 and CD20 (B cells), and CD13
and CD14 (myelomonocytic cells). Further identification of NK cells
follows via their expression of CD56 (neural cell adhesion molecule­1) and/or CD16, their low-­affinity Fc gamma receptor that mediates
antibody-­dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). Neither CD56
nor CD16 is specific or unique to the NK cell lineage; however, these
CD markers are functionally important and thus used to characterize
major subsets of NK cells.
NK cells develop from CD34 hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in
the bone marrow and then undergo maturation in secondary lymphoid tissues. NK cell development occurs through a series of six
functionally distinct developmental stages distinguishable by cellular expression of cell surface markers including CD34, CD117,
CD94/NKG2A (surface inhibitory receptor), NKp80 (surface
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

activating receptor), CD16, and CD57. Once mature, NK cells then
circulate through the peripheral blood (PB) or are found in organ
tissues such as the secondary lymphoid tissues, liver, lungs, uterus,
kidneys, or gut. For example, stage 1 cells found in the bone marrow
are marked by the presence of only CD34, and subsequent stages
occur through the upregulation and downregulation of previously
mentioned cell surface markers; whereas, stage 6 mature NK cells in
the PB express Nkp80, CD16, and CD57 (Fig. 167.1).
NK cells express CD56 at different levels of development. CD56bright
NK cells that express high levels of CD56, without expressing much
CD16, are considered stage 4b and are approximately 3–10% of circulating PB NK cells. Most PB NK cells express CD16 and low levels
of CD56 and are referred to as CD56dim NK cells. Distinguishing cells
as CD56bright and CD56dim refers to the increased fluorescent intensity for CD56+ cells seen in comparison to cells negative for CD56.
CD56bright and CD56dim cells are functionally different. CD56bright
NK cells are considered to be developmentally immature and produce
higher levels of cytokines such as IFN-­γ with less cytotoxic capacity.
They can rapidly produce large amounts of cytokines and chemokines;
however, they contain low levels of perforin and granzymes and have
low or absent CD16, making them poor mediators of direct cytotoxicity and ADCC. In contrast, CD56dim cells are developmentally more
mature, contain high levels of perforin, are cytotoxic, and recognize
antibody-­coated cells through CD16. CD56dim cells are able to produce
large amounts of cytokines but not to the degree of CD56bright cells.
The cell surface marker expression for NK cells in the PB and tissues
are phenotypically distinct due to the influence of each tissue’s unique
microenvironment. Similarly, the ratio of CD56bright and CD56dim NK
subsets in the tissues is not the same as the ratios found in the PB.
In the bone marrow, lung, spleen, subcutaneous adipose tissue, and
breast tissue, CD56dim NK cells predominate, whereas CD56bright NK
cells predominate in the mucosa-­associated lymphoid tissues (MALTs;
e.g., gastric and intestinal mucosa), liver, uterus, visceral adipose tissue,
adrenal gland, and kidney.

NK Cell Functions

NK cells have a critical role in the control of tumor growth and
metastasis and are vital for the innate immune response against
infections, particularly certain viruses. Additionally, there is increasing recognition of the importance of NK cells in immunoregulation,
coordination of immunity, and modulation of autoreactivity.
NK cell activity is a balance between inhibitory and activating
signals. NK cell surfaces contain a wide range of receptors that
affect NK cell expression. Healthy host cells express high amounts
of major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) molecules that
ligate NK cell inhibitory receptors and prevent unwanted killing of
healthy cells. Infected or malignant host cells downregulate their
MHC I expression and express ligands for NK cell activating receptors, which triggers NK cell killing of the diseased cell. The balance
of signals for NK cell inhibition by MHC I expression in healthy
cells and NK cell activation by MHC I downregulation during cellular stress allows NK cells to defend against viruses and tumors
and have protective roles in fungal, extracellular bacterial, intracellular bacterial, and parasitic infections. Many viruses have evolved
to specifically downregulate MHC I in cells they infect to prevent
the host cell from presenting antigenic peptides to virus-­specific
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). Although this strategy does allow
virus-­infected cell evasion from CTLs, it makes the infected cell
more susceptible to recognition by NK cells.
The three main functions of NK cells include cytokine/chemokine
production, contact-­dependent co-­stimulation, and cytotoxicity. Additionally, NK cells are capable of interfacing with the adaptive immune
system through their IgG Fc receptor, CD16, which allows them to
engage in antibody-­dependent killing.

Cytokine/Chemokine Production

Activated NK cells secrete a wide variety of cytokines and chemokines in response to stimulation by interleukin (IL)-­12, IL-­15,
and IL-­18. IFN-­γ is one of the most potent cytokines released by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 167 u Natural Killer Cells

1287

HSC
Bone Marrow

CD34+
CD45RA
Stage 1

Stage 2

Stage 3

CD34+

CD34+
CD117+

CD34–
CD117+

Secondary Lymphoid
Tissue

Late CD56dim
Stage 6

Early CD56dim
Stage 5

CD56bright
Stage 4b

Stage 4a

Peripheral
blood
CD117–
CD94/NKG2A+
NKp80+
CD16+
CD57+
Perforin+

CD117+/–
CD94/NKG2A+
NKp80+
CD16+
Perforin+

CD117+/–
CD94/NKG2A+
NKp80+

CD117+
CD94/NKG2A+

Fig. 167.1 Stages of NK cell development. HSC, Hematopoietic stem cell.

NK cells. It is crucial for the antiviral, antibacterial, and antitumor
activity of NK cells through modulating death ligand expression
of caspase, FasL, and TRAIL. NK cells are thus able to target cells
for death through expression of these death ligands. Death ligand
killing is not as rapid as lytic granule killing. Additional NK cell–
released cytokines include TNF-­α, IL-­10, IL-­5, and IL-­13. NK cells
also produce chemokines (chemotactic agents) such as MIP-­1α,
MIP-­1β, IL-­8, and RANTES. It is important to note that cytokines
and chemokines in NK cells are compartmentalized separately from
the lytic granules allowing them to be accessed separately from
their cytotoxicity function.

Contact-­Dependent Co-­Stimulation

NK cells can promote and regulate immunity through direct receptor-­
ligand interactions with other cells, or contact-­
dependent co-­
stimulation. NK cells express or can be induced to express a variety
of co-­stimulatory and inhibitory ligands including the CD40 ligand,
CD28, and PD-­1, which can then interact with other types of immune
cells to alter immune responses.

NK CELL SPONTANEOUS CYTOTOXICITY

Similar to cytotoxic T cells, NK cells secrete specialized lysosome-­
related organelles known as lytic granules. However, unlike CTLs,
the lytic granules inside NK cells are preformed and abundant while
the cell is at rest, which allows for their rapid killing response on recognition of cellular distress/disease. Lytic granule contents include
perforin (pore-­forming molecule) and pro-­apoptotic enzymes such
as granzymes. Once an NK cell recognizes an activation signal from
a distressed cell, the NK cell will polarize its lytic granules toward
the portion of the NK cell membrane in contact with the target cell
where the lytic granules will then dock. This is followed by fusion
of the secretory lysosome with the plasma membrane of the target
cells. The site of NK cell connection with the target cell is called the
lytic immunologic synapse.

Once a stable connection is formed at the lytic immunologic synapse, cellular killing by the lytic granules will be completed in less than
2 hours. Perforin will insert into the target cell membrane, which will
allow for pro-­apoptotic granzymes to travel to the target cell and initiate cellular killing.

NK CELL ANTIBODY-­DEPENDENT KILLING

NK cells are also able to kill target cells via ADCC. NK cells have
an IgG Fc receptor, CD16, expressed on their cell surfaces that
allows them to recognize IgG-­opsonized targets to promote killing
without priming via lysing of the target cell. ADCC also causes NK
cell secretion of cytokines like INF-­γ for recruitment of adaptive
immune cells.

Etiologies of NK Cell Deficiency

NK cells are lymphocytes that are critical for the immune response to
viral infections. Patients with recurrent severe and refractory cutaneous viral and herpes viral infections should be evaluated for NK cell
deficiency (NKD) with both enumeration and functional studies.
However, ultimate evaluation should be completed with immunogenetic analysis as patients with diagnosed NKD may benefit from antiviral prophylaxis and eventual HSC transplant.
NKD accounts for a small subset of primary immunodeficiencies
(PIDs) that often present as clinical and diagnostic challenges. In
general, NKD is suspected in patients who appear to have increased
susceptibility to herpesvirus infections as well as select other viral
pathogens such a human papillomavirus (HPV).
NK cells can be decreased in number or function for many reasons. More commonly, severe illness and emotional stress can cause
decreases of these cells. In addition, immunosuppressive medications such as corticosteroids, mycophenolate, cyclosporine, azathioprine, and 6-­mercaptopurine can depress NK cells. Given many
factors are known to affect the stability of NK cells, repetition of the
test is required to document true deficiency. If a patient is found
to have abnormal NK cell studies 3 times, drawn at least 1 month

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1288 Part XII u Immunology
apart, inborn errors in immunity should be also considered, as
described next.
More than 50 PIDs include abnormalities in NK cells as part of their
immunophenotypes. This occurs secondary to disruption in maturation, proliferation, or survival of NK cells. Forms of severe combined
immune deficiency (SCID) including IL2RG, JAK3, and AK2 deficiency are known to present with low or absent NK cell numbers. In
addition, given the importance of lytic granule secretion to NK cytotoxicity, conditions with abnormal granule secretion, such as primary
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, or abnormal cytoskeletal
function, such as Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, also can lead to NK cell
aberrations.
NKDs are classified as classical or functional. In classical NKD,
there is a significantly decreased or absent number of CD3-­CD56+ cells,
making up less than 1% of the total peripheral lymphocytes. Alternatively, although the number of NK cells can be normal in functional
NKD, these cells are functionally impaired.

Classical NK Cell Deficiency

Classical NKDs include pathogenic variants in MCM4, MCM10,
GINS1, GATA2, RTEL1, and IRF8.

MCM4 and MCM10

MCM (mini-­chromosome maintenance complex member) 4 and 10
are a part of the MCM replisome progression complex important
for DNA replication. MCM4 is part of the Cdc45-­MCM2-­7-­GINS1
(CMG) helicase complex and MCM10 is a replication factor associated with this complex. In times of cellular stress, variant complexes have resulted in abnormal DNA breakage (Fig. 167.2). These
patients have a decreased number of NK cells, specifically CD56dim
NK cells. CD56dim NK cells are mature NK cells that express CD16
(Fc receptor) and are important for ADCC. It is possible that
CD56dim NK cells are particularly reliant on the MCM complex
for survival. Alternatively, the pathogenic variant may cause an
interruption along development before mature NK cell expansion.
Patients with biallelic pathogenic variants in MCM4 have Epstein-­
Barr virus (EBV)-­driven lymphoproliferation and viral pneumonitis. As MCM4 is widely expressed in many cells, these patients
can also have adrenal insufficiency, short stature, and development
delay.
MCM10-­deficient patients have a similar immunologic phenotype related to their NK cell abnormalities and the patients reported
were found to have severe cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection.

GINS1

Go-­Ichi-­Ni-­San complex subunit 1 (GINS1) is a protein involved
in the CMG helicase complex that is important for DNA replication. Biallelic pathogenic variants in GINS have been seen to cause
growth retardation, neutropenia, and NKD. It is important to note

G

IN

M

S1

MC
MC

M1

6
0

2
5
3

Cdc

45
4 P

7

that both CD56dim and CD56bright cells are affected in this disorder.
MCM4, MCM10, and GINS1 defects causing classical NKD suggests
that chromosomal maintenance is critical to NK cell development
and function.

GATA2

Pathogenic variants in GATA2 (GATA-­binding protein-­2), inherited
in an autosomal dominant manner, can cause immune aberrations
affecting many different cell lines. The pathogenic variant prevents
appropriate NK cell development with specific deficiency of immature
CD56bright NK cells causing an absence of the CD56bright population,
leaving a functionally impaired CD56dim population. These patients are
known to have refractory HPV infections, among other cutaneous viral
infections, myelodysplasias, cytopenias, and a risk of acute and chronic
myeloid leukemias.

RTEL1

Biallelic pathogenic variants in regulator of telomerase elongation
(RTEL1), a DNA helicase, cause a form of dyskeratosis congenita,
bone marrow failure, and immunodeficiency known as Hoyeraal-­
Hreidarsson syndrome. One patient reported with a history of disseminated varicella infection was found to have abnormal NK cells in
number and function.

IRF8

Interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF8) is a transcription factor
involved in B-­cell, dendritic cell, granulocyte, monocyte, and NK
cell production. IRF8 is vital for the NK cell response to viral infections and patients have been found to have severe EBV infections.
Terminal NK cell maturation is disrupted and CD56dim cells are
decreased in patients with biallelic IRF8 pathogenic variants.

FUNCTIONAL NK CELL DEFICIENCY (FNKCD)
CD16 Deficiency

Patients with CD16 deficiency have severe infections with herpes
viral pathogens such as varicella-­zoster virus (VZV), herpes simplex
virus (HSV) and EBV. One patient was reported to have EBV-­driven
Castleman disease. The deficiency is caused by a homozygous pathogenic variant in the FCGR3A gene, which encodes CD16. CD16 is
the Fc receptor on NK cells required for ADCC. As CD16 deficiency
is an FNKCD, patients have normal levels of NK cells, but abnormal
function. Although CD16’s main function is to facilitate ADCC,
patients with CD16 deficiency have been found to have abnormal
spontaneous cytotoxicity with normal antibody-­dependent cytotoxicity (Fig. 167.3). Further analysis helped uncover a new function of the CD16 protein related to spontaneous cytotoxicity, which
clarifies this unexpected finding. The variant sequence in CD16
deficiency encodes for the distal B73.1 domain of the CD16 molecule. Studies from patients with this pathogenic variant revealed
that this region is needed for co-­activation of the NK cell CD2 stimulatory receptor, which is required for spontaneous cytotoxicity.
Alternatively, immunoglobulin binding, which is integral to ADCC,
occurs at the proximal 3G8 domain of CD16, which is not affected
by the variant. For diagnostic purposes, two anti-­CD16 monoclonal
antibodies are utilized against the distal B73.1 and proximal 3G8
domains. Therefore patients with CD16 deficiency will have absent
B73.1 expression and normal 3G8 expression. These diagnostic
tests can help identify patients with CD16 deficiency in addition to
genetic analysis of FCGR3A.

ELF4
Fig. 167.2 Cell division cycle complex pathogenic variants associated

with NK cell deficiency: MCM4, MCM10, and GINS1. Schematic illustration of the cell division cycle complex including the CMG (Cdc45,
mini-­chromosome maintenance [MCM 2-­7], GINS1) helicase complex
and MCM10.

E74-like ETS transcription factor 4 (ELF4) is a protein involved in
transactivation of gene promoters through DNA binding. Perforin
expression, an important component of NK cell activity, has been
shown to be dependent on ELF4-regulated promoters. Pathogenic
variants in ELF4 can result in poor terminal NK cell maturation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 167 u Natural Killer Cells

Fig. 167.3 Functional natural killer (NK) cell

deficiency secondary to CD16 pathologic
variants. Schematic of the CD16 (Fc) NK cell
receptor. The proximal domain of the CD16
receptor, 3G8, binds the Fc portion of immunoglobulin, which is important for antibody-­
depending cytotoxicity. The distal domain of
the CD16 receptor, B73.1, co-­
localizes with
the CD2 stimulatory receptor facilitating spontaneous cytotoxicity. In CD16 deficiency, the
B73.1 domain of the CD16 receptor is not adequately expressed causing impaired spontaneous cytotoxicity.

8
3G

1

3.

B7

1289

NK Cell

from CD56bright to CD56dim (cytotoxic) NK cells. A rare, hemizygous variant in ELF4, located on the X chromosome, has been
described as a novel cause of NK cell deficiency. Patients with this
variant can present with recurrent sinopulmonary and varicella zoster infections, as well as lymphoproliferative and malignant disease.
Laboratory analysis has shown decreased number and function of
NK cells, specifically with an abnormal immature NK cell CD56bright
to mature CD56dim NK cell ratio. Because these patients also can
present with decreased B cells and hypogammaglobinemia, further
work is needed to elucidate the role of ELF4 in B cell development
and function.

NK Cell Diagnostic Tests

When evaluating for possible NK cell defects, it is important to examine the total NK cell count and percentage, the distribution of NK cell
subsets, and NK cell function.

NK Cell Count and Percentage

The absolute NK cell count and NK cell percentage of total lymphocytes is often calculated using a lymphocyte subset analysis or enumeration assay. This test is performed using flow cytometry and will
identify the CD16 and CD56 markers of NK cells. The majority of
lymphocyte enumeration assays use a combined CD56/16 antibody
and cannot distinguish between CD56bright and CD56dim NK cells. Further delineation of NK cell subsets (CD56dim, CD56bright, etc.) can be
obtained with further flow cytometry for additional NK cell markers.
Evaluation of NK cell phenotypes and ratios such as the CD56 bright
to dim ratio becomes important in evaluating for NK cell defects such
as GATA2 deficiency.

FUNCTIONAL ASSAYS AVAILABLE FOR CLINICAL
EVALUATION
NK Cell Cytotoxicity Assay

NK cytotoxic killing ability can be evaluated using a flow cytometry–based assay to quantify NK cell cytotoxic activity or a chromium
release (51CR) cytotoxicity assay. The 51CR is technician dependent and
requires the use of radioactive material. Many laboratories are doing
the flow cytometry-­based assay.
Individual clinical laboratories have normal ranges that are particular
to their specific assay; however, the values for this assay are dependent

2

CD

CD16

on the percentage of NK cells present in the sample. A peripheral blood
mononuclear cell (PBMC) sample with lower numbers of NK cells may
not identify as much NK cell cytotoxicity as a sample with higher levels
of NK cells, thus it is essential to take the percentage of NK cells into
account when interpreting these assays.

CD107a Degranulation

Lysosomal-­associated membrane protein-­1 (LAMP-­1) or CD107a is
contained in NK cell lytic granules. CD107a is significantly upregulated
on the surface of NK cells following lytic granule fusion with the NK
cell membrane after activation by MHC I downregulated target cells.
CD107a is thus often used as a way to evaluate activation-­induced NK
cell degranulation. In this test, NK cells are stimulated and the upregulation of CD107a is measured using flow cytometry.
CD107a degranulation has advantages and disadvantages when
compared to the NK cell cytotoxicity assay. The main advantage is
that CD107a degranulation can be measured in individual cells and is
therefore independent of the NK cells percentage. The disadvantage is
that it does not directly measure NK cell killing ability. NK cell killing
can be impaired despite appropriate degranulation for reasons such as
abnormal lytic effector molecules. Ten to 30% of resting NK cells can
be induced to degranulate when measured by flow cytometry, and in
normal individuals CD107a degranulation reasonably correlates with
killing ability.

NK CELL DEFICIENCY TREATMENT

Primarily, treatment of NKD targets the infectious complications
that occur in these patients. Specifically, HSV infections should
be treated with antiviral therapy such as acyclovir. Long-term prophylaxis should be considered after completion of treatment. HPV
infections can be significant and recurrent, and patients should be
referred to dermatology for medical and surgical management.
Additional therapies such as immunoglobulin replacement and anti-­
mycobacterial prophylaxis can be utilized depending on the genetic
cause of NKD. The only curative therapy for classical NKDs at this time
is HSC transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1290 Part XII u Immunology

Section 3

The Phagocytic System
Chapter 168

Neutrophils
Thomas D. Coates
THE PHAGOCYTIC INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE

The phagocyte system includes both granulocytes (neutrophils,
eosinophils, and basophils) and mononuclear phagocytes (monocytes and tissue macrophages). Neutrophils and mononuclear
phagocytes share primary functions, including the defining properties of large-­particle ingestion and microbial killing. Phagocytes
participate primarily in the innate immune response but also help
initiate acquired immunity.
Neutrophils provide the rapid effector arm of the innate immune
system. They circulate in the bloodstream for only about 6 hours (Table
168.1), but on encountering specific chemotactic signals, they adhere
to the vascular endothelium and transmigrate into tissues. There they
ingest and kill microbes and release chemotactic signals to recruit
more neutrophils and to attract dendritic cells and other initiators of
the acquired immune response.

HEMATOPOIESIS

The hematopoietic progenitor system can be viewed as a continuum
of functional compartments, with the most primitive compartment
composed of very rare pluripotential stem cells, which have high self-­
renewal capacity and give rise to more mature stem cells, including
cells that are committed to either lymphoid or myeloid development
Table 168.1  Neutrophil and Monocyte Kinetics
NEUTROPHILS
Average time in mitosis
(myeloblast to myelocyte)

7-­9 days

Average time in postmitosis and
storage (metamyelocyte to
neutrophil)

3-­7 days

Average half-­life in the
circulation

6 hr

Average total body pool

6.5 × 108 cells/kg

Average circulating pool

3.2 × 108 cells/kg

Average marginating pool

3.3 × 108 cells/kg

Average daily turnover rate

1.8 × 108 cells/kg

MONONUCLEAR PHAGOCYTES
Average time in mitosis
30-­48 hr
Average half-­life in the
circulation

36-­104 hr

Average circulating pool
(monocytes)

1.8 × 107 cells/kg

Average daily turnover rate

1.8 × 109 cells/kg

Average survival in tissues
(macrophages)

Months

From Boxer LA. Function of neutrophils and mononuclear phagocytes. In: Bennett JC,
Plum F, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1996.

(Fig. 168.1). Common lymphoid progenitor cells give rise to T-­and
B-­cell precursors and their mature progeny. Common myeloid progenitor cells eventually give rise to committed single-­lineage progenitors
of the recognizable precursors through a random process of lineage
restriction in a stepwise process (see Chapter 495). The capacity of
lineage-­specific committed progenitors to proliferate and differentiate in response to demand provides the hematopoietic system with a
remarkable range of response to changing requirements for mature
blood cell production.
The proliferation, differentiation, and survival of immature hematopoietic progenitor cells are governed by hematopoietic growth factors,
a family of glycoproteins (see Chapter 495). Along with regulating proliferation and differentiation of progenitors, these factors influence the
survival and function of mature blood cells. During granulopoiesis and
monopoiesis, multiple cytokines regulate the cells at each stage of differentiation from pluripotent stem cells to nondividing, terminally differentiated cells (monocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils).
As cells mature, they lose receptors for most cytokines, especially those
that influence early cell development; however, they retain receptors
for cytokines that affect their mobilization and function, such as granulocyte and macrophage colony-­stimulating factors. Mature phagocytes
also express receptors for chemokines, which help direct the cells to
sites of inflammation. Chemokine receptors such as CXCR4 and its
ligand SDF-­1 play a key role in retention of developing myeloid cells
within bone marrow.

NEUTROPHIL MATURATION AND KINETICS

The process of intramedullary granulocyte maturation involves
changes in nuclear configuration and accumulation of specific intracytoplasmic granules. The bone marrow microenvironment supports
the normal steady-­
state renewal of peripheral blood neutrophils
through the generation of growth and differentiation factors by stromal cells. Growth factors such as granulocyte colony-­stimulating
factor (G-­CSF) and granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor (GM-­CSF) not only stimulate cell division, but also induce the
expression of transcription factors that regulate the biosynthesis of
functional components of the neutrophil, such as granule proteins.
The transcription factor PU.1 is essential for myelopoiesis, both as
a positive regulatory element and as a suppressor of GATA1, a transcription factor that directs nonmyeloid differentiation. Other transcription factors, such as Runx1 (AML1), c-­myb, CDP, C/EBPα, C/
EBPγ, and MEF, are expressed in the myeloblast and promyelocyte,
and some of these are required for azurophil granule protein expression. As cells enter the myelocyte stage, Runx1 and myb are downregulated, whereas PU.1 and C/EBPε expression rise to initiate terminal
differentiation.
Granulocytes survive for only 6-­12 hours in the circulation; therefore daily production of 2 × 104 granulocytes/μL of blood is required
to maintain a level of circulating granulocytes of 5 × 103/μL (see
Table 168.1). The relatively small peripheral blood pool includes the
rapidly interchanging circulating and marginating pools; the latter
provides entrance into the tissue phase, where neutrophils may survive for hours or days. The circulating pool is fed and buffered by a
much larger marrow population of mature neutrophils and myeloid
precursors, representing the marrow reserve and proliferating pools,
respectively. Proliferation of myeloid cells, encompassing approximately five mitotic divisions, takes place only during the first three
stages of neutrophil development, in myeloblasts, promyelocytes,
and myelocytes. After the myelocyte stage, the cells terminally differentiate into nondividing, maturing metamyelocytes, bands, and
neutrophils.
Neutrophil maturation is associated with nuclear condensation and
lobulation and the sequential production of characteristic granule populations. A myeloblast is a relatively undifferentiated cell with a large
oval nucleus, a sizable nucleolus, and a deficiency of granules. Promyelocytes acquire peroxidase-­positive azurophilic (primary) granules,
and then myelocytes and metamyelocytes acquire specific (secondary) granules; tertiary granules and secretory vesicles develop in the
final stage of neutrophil maturation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 168 u Neutrophils 1291

Stem Cell
Growth
Factors

Wnt
Jagged
Angiopoietin-like 2/3
BMP
Osteopontin

LTRHSC

Runx-1
Scl/Tal-1
Lmo-2
Mll
Gfi-1
Tel
Bmi-1
GATA2

Stem Cell
Transcription
Factors

MPP
Early-acting
Hematopoietic
Growth Factors

MLP

?

SCF
IL-3
GM-CSF
Flt3 Ligand
IL-11
IL-6
IL-1
Tpo

CLP

CMP

PU.1
Ikaros
E2A
EBF
Pax-5
Bcl11a

MEP

GMP
GATA1
GATA2
FOG-1

GATA1
FOG-1
Gfi-1b BFU-E
EKLF

Epo
LineageSpecific
Hematopoietic
Growth Factors

CFU-E

Notch-1
TCF-1
GATA3

CFUMEG

CFUG

GATA1
Gfi-1b

Tpo

PU.1
C/EBP

C/EBP
CFUM

C/EBP
Gfi-1

G-CSF

CFUb
GATA1

M-CSF

CFUEo

PreB Cell

PreNK

PreT Cell

B Cell

NK Cell

T Cell

C/EBP
GATA1

IL-5

Epo

erythrocyte

platelet

polymorphonuclear
leukocyte

monocyte/
macrophage

basophil

IL-1

eosinophil

endothelial cell

IL-3
GM-CSF
IL-5

TNF
and fibroblast

SCF GM-CSF
IL-6
G-CSF
IL-11 M-CSF

Fig. 168.1 Major cytokine sources and actions and transcription factor requirements for hematopoietic cells. Cells of the bone marrow microen-

vironment, such as macrophages, endothelial cells, and reticular fibroblastoid cells, produce macrophage, granulocyte-­macrophage, and granulocyte colony-­stimulating factors (M-­CSF, GM-­CSF, G-­CSF), interleukin-­6 (IL-­6), and probably stem cell factor (SCF) (cellular sources not precisely
determined) after induction with endotoxin (macrophage) or IL-­1/tumor necrosis factor (TNF) (endothelial cells and fibroblasts). T cells produce IL-­3,
GM-­CSF, and IL-­5 in response to antigenic and IL-­1 stimulation. These cytokines have overlapping actions during hematopoietic differentiation, as
indicated, and for all lineages, optimal development requires a combination of early-­acting and late-­acting factors. Transcription factors important
for survival or self-­renewal of stem cells are shown in red at the top, whereas stages of hematopoiesis blocked after the depletion of indicated
transcription factors are shown in red for multipotent and committed progenitors. (From Sieff CA, Daley GQ, Zon LI. Anatomy and physiology of
hematopoiesis. In: Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015. Fig 1.7.)

NEUTROPHIL FUNCTION

Neutrophil responses are initiated as circulating neutrophils flowing through the postcapillary venules detect low levels of chemokines and other chemotactic substances released from a site of
infection. The sequence of events as the neutrophil moves from circulating in the blood to the encounter and destruction of bacteria
is carefully orchestrated by a series of biochemical events, defects

of which are associated with genetic disorders of neutrophil function (Fig. 168.2). In fact, these disorders of neutrophil function lead
to our understanding of the cell biology of phagocyte function. A
subset of circulating neutrophils loosely adheres to the endothelium
through low-­affinity receptors called selectins and rolls along the
endothelium, forming the marginated pool. Soluble effectors of
inflammation trigger subtle changes in surface adhesion molecules

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1292 Part XII u Immunology

Sialyl Lewis
carbohydrates

Integrin receptor

Selectins

ICAM-1, 2

Chemotactic
receptor

PECAM-1

Chemotactic
agent
Impaired integrin adhesion
Leukocyte adhesion defect I
Endothelium

Phagocytic defect
Leukocyte adhesion defect I
Actin polymerization defect
Chediak-Higashi syndrome

Impaired E-selectin adhesion
(absent sialyl Lewis)
Leukocyte adhesion defect II

Chemotactic defect
Leukocyte adhesion defect I
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Hyper-IgE (Job) syndrome
Actin polymerization defect
Neonatal neutrophils
Localized juvenile periodontitis
Antibody
Fc receptor
Complement
Bacteria
NADPH oxidase

Bacterial killing defects
Chronic granulomatous disease
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Specific granule deficiency
Neutrophil G6PD deficiency

Specific granules

Fig. 168.2 The neutrophil-­mediated inflammatory response and associated neutrophil dysfunction syndromes. Circulating neutrophils loosely at-

tach to endothelium via selectins and roll along the vessel wall until they arrive at the site of infection. Inflammatory monokines, interleukin-­1 (IL-­1),
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) activate endothelial cells to express E-­and P-­selectins. E-­and P-­selectins serve as counter-­receptors for neutrophils
sialyl Lewis X and Lewis X to cause low-­avidity neutrophil rolling. Activated endothelial cells express intracellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-­1, which
serves as a counter-­receptor for neutrophil β2-­integrin molecules, leading to high-­avidity leukocyte spreading and the start of transendothelial
migration at the infection site. Neutrophils invade through the vascular basement membrane with the release of proteases and reactive oxidative
intermediates, causing local destruction of surrounding tissue at sites of high concentrations of chemotactic factors, and migrate to the site of infection, where they ingest and kill the bacteria. NADPH, Nicotinamide-­adenine dinucleotide phosphate; PECAM, platelet endothelial cell adhesion
molecule. (Modified from Kyono W, Coates TD. A practical approach to neutrophil disorders. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2002;49:929.)

on endothelial cells at the site of infection. The rolling of neutrophils allows more intense exposure of neutrophils to activating factors such as tumor necrosis factor or interleukin-­1 (see Fig. 168.2).
Exposure of neutrophils to these same activating factors induces
qualitative and quantitative changes in the family of β2-­integrin
adhesion receptors (the CD11/CD18 group of surface molecules),
leading to tight adhesion between neutrophils and endothelial cells
at the site of inflammation and ultimately to transmigration of the
neutrophil into the tissue.
Once through the endothelium, the neutrophil senses the gradient of chemokines or other chemoattractants and migrates to sites
of infection. Neutrophil migration is a complex process involving
rounds of receptor engagement, signal transduction, and remodeling
of the actin microfilaments composing in part the cytoskeleton. Actin
polymerization-­depolymerization occurs in approximately 8-­second
cycles and drives cyclic extension and retraction of the actin-­rich
lamella at the front of the neutrophil. Receptors at the leading edge of
the lamella detect the gradient of attractant and follow microorganisms,

then ingest and destroy them. When the neutrophil reaches the site of
infection, it recognizes pathogens by means of Fc immunoglobulin and
complement receptors, toll-­like receptors, fibronectin receptors, and
other adhesion molecules.
The neutrophil ingests microbes that are coated by opsonins, serum
proteins such as immunoglobulin and complement component C3.
The pathogens are engulfed into a closed vacuole, the phagosome
(Fig. 168.3), where two cellular responses essential for optimal microbicidal activity occur concomitantly: degranulation and activation of
nicotinamide-­adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)–dependent
oxidase. Fusion of neutrophil granule membranes with the phagosome
membrane delivers potent antimicrobial proteins and small peptides
into the phagosome.
Assembly and activation of NADPH oxidase occur at the phagosome membrane as well (see Fig. 168.3), generating large amounts of
superoxide (O2−) from molecular oxygen, which in turn decomposes
to produce hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and singlet oxygen. Myeloperoxidase, a major azurophil granule component, catalyzes the reaction

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 169 u Eosinophils

1293

Chapter 169
Plasma
membrane

Eosinophils

Fungus

Benjamin L. Wright and Brian P. Vickery

Bacteria
HOCl
MPO
Phagosome
Cl
H2O2
H2O  O2
Fe3 Fe2 CAT
SOD
O2
O
2
OH•

Cytoplasm

Rac 2

gp91phox

p22phox

p67phox

NADPH

p47phox

p40phox

P

P P

RAC 2

P

P

NADP

p67phox
p40phox
p47phox

Fig. 168.3 Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)

oxidase components and activation. On activation of phagocytic cells,
the 3 cytosolic components (red) of the NADPH oxidase (p67phox, p47phox,
and p40phox), plus the small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) protein Rac2, are translocated to the membrane of the phagocytic vacuole.
The p47phox subunit binds to the flavocytochromeb558 membrane component (blue-­green) of the NADPH oxidase (gp91phox plus p22phox). The
NADPH oxidase catalyzes the formation of superoxide by transferring
an electron from NADPH to molecular oxygen (O2), thereby forming the
superoxide free radical. The unstable superoxide anion is converted to
hydrogen peroxide, either spontaneously or by superoxide dismutase
(SOD). H2O2 can follow different metabolic pathways into more potent
reactive oxidants, such as OH• or HOCl) or degradation to H2O + O2.
(Adapted from Stiehm ER, Ochs HD, Winkelstein JA. Immunologic Disorders in Infants and Children, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2004,
p. 622.)

of H2O2 with ubiquitously present chloride ions to create hypochlorous
acid (HOCl) in the phagosome. H2O2 and HOCl are potent microbicidal agents that break down and clear pathogens from sites of infection.
In addition, neutrophils secrete a wide variety of cytokines and chemokines that recruit more neutrophils to fight the infection, attract
monocytes and macrophages that possess both microbicidal and scavenger functions, and promote antigen presentation to help initiate the
adaptive immune response. Also, the reactive oxidants can inactivate
chemotactic factors and may serve to terminate the process of neutrophil influx, thereby attenuating the inflammatory process. Finally,
the release of reactive oxygen species, granule proteins, and cytokines
can also damage local tissues, leading to the classic signs of inflammation or to more permanent impairment of tissue integrity and function. In addition to the role of neutrophils in tissue damage, they are
now known to play a significant role in regulation of inflammation and
promoting tissue repair. Turning off inflammation and removing tissue
debris is an important role and, like seeking and destroying bacteria,
this process is highly regulated as well.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Eosinophils are nondividing, fully differentiated cells with a diameter of approximately 8 μm and a bilobed nucleus that are distinguished from other leukocytes by their morphology, constituent
products, and association with specific diseases. Their characteristic membrane-­bound specific granules stain bright pink with eosin
and are cytotoxic for the larval stages of helminthic parasites and
are also thought to contribute to much of the inflammation associated with chronic allergic diseases such as asthma (see Chapter
185). Eosinophil granule proteins including major basic protein,
eosinophil cationic protein, eosinophil-­
derived neurotoxin, and
eosinophil peroxidase are thought to inflict epithelial cell damage,
although recent studies indicate their role may be more nuanced and
not purely destructive. Eosinophil granule contents activate other
proinflammatory cells, including mast cells, basophils, neutrophils,
and platelets and have the capacity to generate large amounts of the
lipid mediators, which can cause vasoconstriction, smooth muscle
contraction, and mucus hypersecretion (Fig. 169.1). Eosinophils are
a source of several proinflammatory cytokines and have also been
shown to influence T-­cell recruitment and immune polarization in
inflammatory settings. Thus eosinophils have considerable potential to initiate and sustain the inflammatory response of the innate
and acquired immune systems.
Eosinophil migration from the vasculature into the extracellular tissue is mediated by the binding of leukocyte adhesion receptors (e.g.,
VLA-­4) to their ligands or counterstructures (VCAM-­1) on the postcapillary endothelium. Eosinophils are recruited to tissues in inflammatory states by a group of chemokines known as eotaxins (eotaxin
1, 2, and 3). These unique pathways account for selective accumulation of eosinophils in allergic and inflammatory disorders. Eosinophils
normally dwell primarily in tissues, especially tissues with an epithelial
interface with the environment, including the respiratory, gastrointestinal (GI), and lower genitourinary tracts. The life span of eosinophils
may extend for weeks within tissues.
Interleukin (IL)-­5 selectively enhances eosinophil production,
adhesion to endothelial cells, and function. Considerable evidence
shows that IL-­5 has a pivotal role in promoting eosinophilopoiesis. It
is the predominant cytokine in allergen-­induced pulmonary late-­phase
reaction, and antibodies against IL-­5 (mepolizumab, reslizumab, benralizumab) decrease sputum eosinophils and reduce exacerbations in a
subset of patients with asthma. Eosinophils also bear unique receptors
for several chemokines, including RANTES (regulated on activation,
normal T-­cell expressed and secreted), eotaxin, and monocyte chemotactic proteins 3 and 4. These chemokines appear to be key mediators
in the induction of tissue eosinophilia.

DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH EOSINOPHILIA

The absolute eosinophil count (AEC) is used to quantify peripheral
blood eosinophilia. Calculated as the white blood cell (WBC) count/μL
× percentage of eosinophils, it is usually <450 cells/μL and varies diurnally, with eosinophil numbers higher in the early morning and diminishing as endogenous glucocorticoid levels rise.
Many diseases with allergic, infectious, hematologic, autoimmune,
or idiopathic origins are associated with moderate (AEC 1,500-­5,000
cells/μL) or severe (AEC >5,000 cells/μL) eosinophilia in peripheral
blood (Table 169.1). These disorders may range from mild and transient to chronic and life-­threatening. Importantly, blood eosinophil
numbers do not always reflect the extent of eosinophil involvement in
tissues and degranulation products may more accurately reflect disease
activity. Because prolonged eosinophilia is associated with end-­organ

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1294 Part XII u Immunology
Triggers
Allergens
Helminths
Tissue injury
Viral infection
Eotaxin-3
CCR3

Dendritic cell
activation
Th2 polarization

EDN

MBP
Mast cell
activation

MHC II
B7.2

Antigen
presentation

IL-5
IL-5R

Secreted
Cytokines
IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8
IL-12, IFN-J, GM-CSF, TNF-,
TGF-/
Chemokines
Eotaxin
RANTES
MIP1-
Cytotoxic proteins
ECP, EDN, EPX, MBP
Lipid mediators
Leukotrienes
PAF
Neuromediators
Substance P
VIP

Mitochondrial DNA
defense

damage, especially involving the heart, patients with persistently elevated AECs should undergo a thorough evaluation to search for an
underlying cause.

Allergic Diseases

Allergy is the most common cause of eosinophilia in children in the
United States. Patients with allergic asthma typically have eosinophils in
the blood, sputum, and/or lung tissue. Hypersensitivity drug reactions
can elicit eosinophilia, and when associated with organ dysfunction (e.g.,
DRESS [drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms]), these
reactions can be serious (see Chapter 193). If a drug is suspected of triggering eosinophilia, biochemical evidence of organ dysfunction should
be sought, and if found, the drug should be discontinued. Various skin
diseases have also been associated with eosinophilia, including atopic
dermatitis/eczema, pemphigus, urticaria, and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases (EGIDs) are important
emerging allergic causes of eosinophilia in tissue and, in some cases,
peripheral blood (see Chapter 383). In these conditions, eosinophils
are recruited to the esophagus, stomach, and/or intestine, where they
may cause tissue inflammation and clinical symptoms such as dysphagia, food aversion, abdominal pain, vomiting, or diarrhea. Eosinophilic
esophagitis is the most common EGID. Treatment options include proton pump inhibitors, allergen elimination diets, topical corticosteroids,
and biologics (e.g. dupilumab). Patients with nonesophageal EGIDs
often require treatment with systemic steroids.

Infectious Diseases

Eosinophilia is often associated with invasive infection with multicellular helminthic parasites, which are the most common cause in developing countries. Table 169.1 includes examples of specific organisms.
The level of eosinophilia tends to parallel the magnitude and extent of
tissue invasion, especially by larvae such as visceral larva migrans (see
Chapter 344). Eosinophilia often does not occur in established parasitic
infections that are well contained within tissues or are solely intraluminal in the GI tract, such as Giardia lamblia and Enterobius vermicularis
infection.
In evaluating patients with unexplained eosinophilia, the dietary
history and geographic or travel history may indicate potential exposures to helminthic parasites. It is frequently necessary to examine the
stool for ova and larvae at least three times. Additionally, the diagnostic parasite stages of many of the helminthic parasites that cause

Fig. 169.1 Schematic diagram of an eosinophil
and its diverse properties. Eosinophils are bilobed
granulocytes that respond to diverse stimuli, including allergens, helminths, viral infections, allografts, and nonspecific tissue injury. Eosinophils
express the receptor for interleukin (IL)-­5, a critical
eosinophil growth and differentiation factor, as well
as the receptor for eotaxin and related chemokines
(CCR3). The secondary granules contain four primary cationic proteins designated eosinophil peroxidase (EPX), major basic protein (MBP), eosinophil cationic protein (ECP), and eosinophil-­derived
neurotoxin (EDN). All four proteins are cytotoxic
molecules; also, ECP and EDN are ribonucleases.
In addition to releasing their preformed cationic
proteins, eosinophils can release a variety of cytokines, chemokines, and neuromediators and
generate large amounts of leukotriene C4 (LTC4).
Last, eosinophils can be induced to express major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II and
co-­stimulatory molecules and may be involved in
propagating immune responses by presenting antigen to T cells. PAF, platelet activating factor; VIP,
vasoactive intestinal peptide. (From Leung YM,
Szefler SJ, Bomilla FA, Akdis CA, Sampson HA.
Pediatric Allergy: Principles and practice. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016. p. 42.)

eosinophilia never appear in feces. Thus normal results of stool examinations do not absolutely preclude a helminthic cause of eosinophilia;
diagnostic blood tests or tissue biopsy may be needed. Toxocara causes
visceral larva migrans usually in toddlers with pica (see Chapter 344).
Most young children are asymptomatic, but some develop fever, pneumonitis, hepatomegaly, and hypergammaglobulinemia accompanied
by severe eosinophilia. Isohemagglutinins are frequently elevated, and
serology can establish the diagnosis.
Two fungal diseases may be associated with eosinophilia: aspergillosis in the form of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (see
Chapter 283) and coccidioidomycosis (see Chapter 286) following
primary infection, especially in conjunction with erythema nodosum.
HIV infection can also be associated with peripheral eosinophilia.

Hypereosinophilic Syndrome

The idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome is a heterogeneous group
of disorders characterized by sustained overproduction of eosinophils.
The three diagnostic criteria for this disorder are (1) AEC >1,500
cells/μL persisting for 6 months or longer or at least on two occasions
or with evidence of tissue eosinophilia; (2) absence of another diagnosis to explain the eosinophilia; and (3) signs and symptoms of organ
involvement. The clinical signs and symptoms of hypereosinophilic
syndrome can be heterogeneous because of the diversity of potential
organ (pulmonary, cutaneous, neurologic, serosal, GI) involvement.
Organ-­specific signs and symptoms direct the diagnostic evaluation,
but common initial tests used to evaluate hypereosinophilia and potential end-­organ complications include a comprehensive metabolic panel,
inflammatory markers, troponin level, urinalysis, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, immunoglobulin levels, vitamin B12 level, tryptase level, stool examination for ova and parasites, parasite serologies,
HIV testing, and a chest x-­ray. Eosinophilic endomyocardial disease,
one of the most serious and life-­threatening complications, can cause
heart failure from endomyocardial thrombosis and fibrosis. Screening for cardiac involvement should also include an electrocardiogram,
an echocardiogram, and in some cases a cardiac MRI. Evaluation of
the hypereosinophilic syndrome requires morphologic review of the
blood and marrow, cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ hybridization,
immunophenotyping by flow cytometry, and T-­cell clonality assessment to detect histopathologic or clonal evidence for hematolymphoid
neoplasm. Eosinophilic leukemia, a clonal myeloproliferative variant,
may be distinguished from idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 169 u Eosinophils

1295

Table 169.1  Causes of Eosinophilia
ALLERGIC DISORDERS
Allergic rhinitis
Asthma
Acute and chronic urticaria
Atopic dermatitis
Angioedema
Hypersensitivity drug reactions (drug rash with eosinophilia and
systemic symptoms [DRESS])
Eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders
Interstitial nephritis
Mastocytosis
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Tissue-­Invasive Helminth Infections and Other Infections
Trichinosis
Toxocariasis
Strongyloidiasis
Ascariasis
Filariasis
Schistosomiasis
Echinococcosis
Amebiasis
Malaria
Scabies
Toxoplasmosis
Pneumocystis jirovecii
Scarlet fever
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA)
Coccidioidomycosis
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
MALIGNANT DISORDERS
Hodgkin disease and T-­cell lymphoma
Acute myelogenous leukemia
Myeloproliferative disorders
Eosinophilic leukemia
Brain tumors

by demonstrating a clonal interstitial deletion on chromosome 4q12
that fuses the platelet-­derived growth factor receptor-­α (PDGFRA)
and FIP1-­like-­1 (FIP1L1) genes; this disorder is treated with imatinib
mesylate, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, which helps target the fusion
oncoprotein (Fig. 169.2).
Therapy is aimed at suppressing eosinophilia and is initiated with
corticosteroids. Patients with possible exposure to Strongyloides should
receive concomitant empiric treatment with ivermectin to prevent
corticosteroid-­associated hyperinfection syndrome. Imatinib mesylate
may be effective in FIP1L1-­PDGFRA–negative patients. Hydroxyurea
or interferon-­alfa may be beneficial in patients unresponsive to corticosteroids. Specific anti–IL-­5 monoclonal antibodies (mepolizumab)
target this cytokine, which has a central role in eosinophil differentiation, mobilization, and activity. With therapy, the eosinophil count
declines and corticosteroid doses may be reduced. For patients with
prominent organ involvement who fail to respond to therapy, the mortality is about 75% after 3 years.

GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Inflammatory bowel disease
Peritoneal dialysis
Chronic active hepatitis
Eosinophilic Gastrointestinal Disorders
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Eosinophilic gastritis
Eosinophilic enteritis
Eosinophilic colitis
RHEUMATOLOGIC DISEASE
Rheumatoid arthritis
Eosinophilic fasciitis
Scleroderma
Dermatomyositis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
IgG4-­related disease
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-­Strauss vasculitis)
IMMUNODEFICIENCY/IMMUNE DYSREGULATION DISEASE
Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndromes
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Graft-­versus-­host disease
Omenn syndrome
Severe congenital neutropenia
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndromes (ALPS)
Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, X-­linked (IPEX) and
IPEX-­like syndrome
Transplant rejection (solid organ)
MISCELLANEOUS
Thrombocytopenia with absent radii
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Adrenal insufficiency
Postirradiation of abdomen
Histiocytosis with cutaneous involvement
Hypereosinophilic syndromes
Cytokine infusion
Pemphigoid

Miscellaneous Diseases

Eosinophilia is observed in many patients with primary immunodeficiency syndromes, especially hyper-­IgE syndrome, Wiskott-­Aldrich
syndrome, and Omenn syndrome (see Chapter 165). Eosinophilia is
also frequently present in the syndrome of thrombocytopenia with
absent radii and in familial reticuloendotheliosis with eosinophilia.
Eosinophilia can be found in patients with Hodgkin disease, as well
as in acute lymphoid and myeloid leukemia. Other considerations
include GI disorders such as ulcerative colitis, Crohn disease during
symptomatic phases, chronic hepatitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis
with polyangiitis (Churg-­Strauss vasculitis), mastocytosis, and adrenal
insufficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1296 Part XII u Immunology
Hypereosinophilic syndromes (HESs)

Myeloproliferative
forms

Lymphocytic
forms
Populations of T
cells secreting
eosinophil
hematopoietins

Myeloproliferative
HES
Features of
myeloproliferative
disease without
proof of clonality

CEL
Clonal
eosinophilia
including
FIP1L1/
PDGFRA
positive CEL

Overlap

Undefined

Organ restricted
eosinophilic
disorders

Clonal
T cells

No T cell
clone

T cells often
exhibit an
abnormal
immunophenotype

Aberrant
immunophenotype or
evidence of
marked T
cell
activation

Associated

Familial

Eosinophilia in
association with a
defined diagnosis,
such as IBD or
CSS

Family
history of
documented
persistent
eosinophilia
of unknown
cause

Benign

Episodic

Other

Asymptomatic
with no
evidence of
organ
involvement

Cyclic
angioedema
and
eosinophilia

Symptomatic
without features of
myeloproliferative
or lymphocytic
forms

Fig. 169.2 Revised classification of hypereosinophilic syndromes. Changes from the previous classification are indicated in red. Dashed arrows
identify hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) forms for which at least some patients have T-­cell–driven disease. Classification of myeloproliferative
forms has been simplified, and patients with HES and eosinophil hematopoietin–producing T cells in the absence of a T-­cell clone are included in
the lymphocytic forms of HES. CEL, Chronic eosinophilic leukemia; CSS, Churg-­Strauss syndrome; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease. (From Simon
HU, Rothenberg ME, Bochner BS, et al. Refining the definition of hypereosinophilic syndrome. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010;126:45-­49.)

Chapter 170

Disorders of Phagocyte
Function
Thomas D. Coates
Neutrophils are the first line of defense against microbial invasion.
They arrive at the site of inflammation during the critical 2-­4 hours
after microbial invasion to contain the infection and prevent hematogenous dissemination. Much of our knowledge about neutrophil
function derives from studies done in patients with genetic errors in
neutrophil function. These critical functions and their associated disorders are depicted in Figure 168.2. Children with phagocytic dysfunction present at a young age with recurrent infections that often involve
unusual organisms and are poorly responsive to treatment.
Primary defects of phagocytic function comprise <20% of immunodeficiencies, and there is significant overlap in the presenting signs and
symptoms between phagocytic disorders and lymphocyte and humeral
disorders. Children with phagocytic defects present with deep tissue
infection, pneumonia, adenitis, cutaneous lesions, or osteomyelitis
rather than bloodstream infections (Tables 170.1 and 170.2; Fig. 170.1).
In the past, diagnosis of these disorders relied on very specialized

biologic assays. Because the genes for most of these disorders have
been identified, the first step in diagnosis for all of these disorders is to
obtain DNA analysis through commercially available genetic panels for
immunodeficiency.
Chemotaxis, the direct migration of cells into sites of infection,
involves a complex series of events (see Chapter 168). Disorders of
adhesion or granule abnormalities can have intermediate or profound
motility defects, and the propensity to infections is related to a combination of these functional deficits. One family with recessively inherited
neutrophil actin dysfunction demonstrated that a pure severe chemotactic defect can result in fatal recurrent infection. Defective in vitro
chemotaxis of neutrophils can be detected in children with various
clinical conditions. However, unless chemotaxis is essentially absent, it
is difficult to establish whether frequent infections arise from a primary
chemotactic abnormality or occur as secondary medical complications
of the underlying disorder. Dental infection with Capnocytophaga is
associated with a clear neutrophil motility defect that resolves when
the infection is eliminated.
Motility defects present with significant skin and mucosal infections.
Tender cutaneous nodular lesions may also be present and characteristically do not contain neutrophils. In fact, the presence of a true abscess
makes the diagnosis of a significant chemotactic defect less likely.
Laboratory tests of chemotaxis are biologic assays and have high
variability except in the most experienced hands. The assays must
be done on freshly obtained blood and are affected by many factors
related to the blood sampling. It is best to assay other features of the
suspected disorder, such as surface marker expression, to establish a
specific diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 170 u Disorders of Phagocyte Function

1297

Table 170.1  Infections and White Blood Cell Defects: Features That Can Be Seen in Phagocyte Disorders
SEVERE INFECTIONS

RECURRENT INFECTIONS

TYPE OF
INFECTION

DIAGNOSIS
TO CONSIDER

SITE OF
INFECTION

Cellulitis

Neutropenia,
LAD, CGD,
HIES

Cutaneous

Colitis

Neutropenia,
CGD

Osteomyelitis

CGD, MSMD
pathway
defects

MICRO­
ORGANISM

DIAGNOSIS
TO CONSIDER

SITE OF
INFECTION

Neutropenia,
CGD, LAD,
HIES

Staphylococcus
epidermidis

Neutropenia,
LAD

Umbilical cord

LAD

Gums

LAD, neutrophil
motility
disorders

Serratia
marcescens,
Nocardia,
Burkholderia
cepacia

CGD

Liver abscess

CGD

Upper and
lower
respiratory
tract
Gastrointestinal
tract

Neutropenia,
HIES, functional
neutrophil
disorders
CGD, MSMD
pathway
defects
(salmonella)
CGD, MSMD
pathway
defects
(mycobacteria)
CGD, MSMD

Aspergillus

Neutropenia,
CGD, HIES

Gums

LAD, neutrophil
motility
disorders

Nontuberculous
mycobacteria,
BCG

MSMD pathway
defects, SCID,
CGD

Candida

Neutropenia,
CGD, MPO

Lymph nodes

Osteomyelitis

DIAGNOSIS TO
CONSIDER

UNUSUALLY LOCATED
INFECTIONS

SPECIFIC INFECTIONS

DIAGNOSIS
TO CONSIDER

BCG, Bacille Calmette-­Guérin; CGD, chronic granulomatous disease; HIES, hyper-­IgE syndrome; LAD, leukocyte adhesion deficiency; MPO, myeloperoxidase; MSMD, mendelian
susceptibility to mycobacterial disease; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency.
From Leung DYM. Pediatric Allergy: Principles and Practice. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2010. p. 134.

Table 170.2  Clinical Disorders of Neutrophil Function
DISORDER

ETIOLOGY

DEGRANULATION ABNORMALITIES
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome
Autosomal recessive; disordered
(CHS)
coalescence of lysosomal granules;
responsible gene is CHSI/LYST, which
encodes a protein hypothesized to
regulate granule fusion
Specific granule deficiency

ADHESION ABNORMALITIES
Leukocyte adhesion
deficiency 1 (LAD-­1)

Leukocyte adhesion
deficiency 2 (LAD-­2)

Leukocyte adhesion
deficiency 3 (LAD-­1 variant
syndrome)

IMPAIRED FUNCTION

CLINICAL CONSEQUENCE

Decreased neutrophil chemotaxis,
degranulation, and bactericidal
activity; platelet storage pool defect;
impaired NK function, failure to
disperse melanosomes

Neutropenia; recurrent
pyogenic infections;
propensity to develop
marked hepatosplenomegaly
as a manifestation of
hemophagocytic syndrome
Recurrent deep-­seated
abscesses

Autosomal recessive; functional loss of
myeloid transcription factor arising
from a pathogenic variant or arising
from reduced expression of Gfi-­1
or C/EBPε, which regulates specific
granule formation

Impaired chemotaxis and bactericidal
activity; bilobed nuclei in
neutrophils; defensins, gelatinase,
collagenase, vitamin B12–binding
protein, and lactoferrin

Autosomal recessive; absence of
CD11/CD18 surface adhesive
glycoproteins (β2-­integrins) on
leukocyte membranes most commonly
arising from failure to express CD18
messenger RNA
Autosomal recessive; loss of
fucosylation of ligands for selectins
and other glycol conjugates arising
from pathogenic variants of GDP-­
fucose transporter
Autosomal recessive; impaired integrin
function arising from pathogenic
variants of FERMT3, which encodes
kindlin-­3 in hematopoietic cells;
kindlin-­3 binds to β-­integrin and
thereby transmits integrin activation

Decreased binding of iC3b to
neutrophils and impaired adhesion
to ICAM-­1 and ICAM-­2

Neutrophilia; recurrent bacterial
infection associated with a
lack of pus formation

Decreased adhesion to activated
endothelium expressing ELAM

Neutrophilia; recurrent bacterial
infection without pus

Impaired neutrophil adhesion and
platelet activation

Neutrophilia, recurrent
infections, bleeding
tendency

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1298 Part XII u Immunology
Table 170.2  Clinical Disorders of Neutrophil Function—cont’d
DISORDER

ETIOLOGY

DISORDERS OF CELL MOTILITY
Enhanced motile responses;
Autosomal recessive gene responsible
FMF
for FMF on chromosome 16, which
encodes for a protein called pyrin;
pyrin regulates caspase-­1 and
thereby IL-­1β secretion; mutated
pyrin may lead to heightened
sensitivity to endotoxin, excessive
IL-­1β production, and impaired
monocyte apoptosis
DEPRESSED MOTILE RESPONSES
Defects in the generation of
IgG deficiencies; C3 and properdin
chemotactic signals
deficiency can arise from genetic
or acquired abnormalities;
mannose-­binding protein deficiency
predominantly in neonates
Intrinsic defects of the
In the neonatal neutrophil there is
neutrophil, e.g., LAD, CHS,
diminished ability to express β2-­
specific granule deficiency,
integrins, and there is a qualitative
neutrophil actin dysfunction,
impairment in β2-­integrin function
neonatal neutrophils
Direct inhibition of neutrophil
Ethanol, glucocorticoids, cyclic AMP
mobility, e.g., drugs

Immune complexes

Hyper-­IgE syndrome

Hyper-­IgE syndrome–AR

MICROBICIDAL ACTIVITY
Chronic granulomatous disease
(CGD)

G6PD deficiency
Myeloperoxidase deficiency
Rac2 deficiency
Deficiencies of glutathione
reductase and glutathione
synthetase

IMPAIRED FUNCTION

CLINICAL CONSEQUENCE

Excessive accumulation of
neutrophils at inflamed sites,
possibly the result of excessive
IL-­1β production

Recurrent fever, peritonitis,
pleuritis, arthritis,
amyloidosis

Deficiency of serum chemotaxis and
opsonic activities

Recurrent pyogenic infections

Diminished chemotaxis

Propensity to develop
pyogenic infections

Impaired locomotion and ingestion;
impaired adherence

Possible cause for frequent
infections; neutrophilia seen
with epinephrine arises from
cyclic AMP release from
endothelium
Recurrent pyogenic infections

Bind to Fc receptors on neutrophils in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic lupus erythematosus, and
other inflammatory states
Autosomal dominant; responsible
gene is STAT3

Impaired chemotaxis

Impaired chemotaxis at times;
impaired regulation of cytokine
production

Recurrent skin and
sinopulmonary infections,
eczema, mucocutaneous
candidiasis,
eosinophilia, retained primary
teeth, minimal trauma
fractures, scoliosis, and
characteristic facies

Autosomal recessive; more than one
gene likely contributes to its etiology

High IgE levels, impaired
lymphocyte activation to
staphylococcal antigens

Recurrent pneumonia without
pneumatoceles sepsis,
enzyme, boils, mucocutaneous
candidiasis, neurologic
symptoms, eosinophilia

X-­linked and AR; failure to express
functional gp91phox in the phagocyte
membrane in p22phox (AR)
Other AR forms of CGD arise from
failure to express protein p47phox or
p67phox
<5% of normal activity of G6PD

Failure to activate neutrophil
respiratory burst, leading to failure
to kill catalase-­positive microbes

Recurrent pyogenic infections
with catalase-­positive
microorganisms

Failure to activate NADPH-­
dependent oxidase; hemolytic
anemia
H2O2-­dependent antimicrobial
activity not potentiated by
myeloperoxidase
Failure of membrane receptor–­
mediated O2− generation and
chemotaxis
Excessive formation of H2O2

Infections with catalase-­
positive microorganisms

Autosomal recessive; failure to process
modified precursor protein arising
from missense variant
Autosomal dominant; dominant
negative inhibition by variant protein
of Rac2-­mediated functions
AR; failure to detoxify H2O2

None
Neutrophilia, recurrent
bacterial infections
Minimal problems with recurrent
pyogenic infections

AMP, Adenosine monophosphate; AR, autosomal recessive; C, complement; CD, cluster of differentiation; ELAM, endothelial-­leukocyte adhesion molecule; FMF, familial Mediterranean fever; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; ICAM, intracellular adhesion molecule; IL-­1, interleukin-­1; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate; NK, natural killer.
Adapted from Curnutte JT, Boxer LA. Clinically significant phagocytic cell defects. In: Remington JS, Swartz MN, eds. Current Clinical Topics in Infectious Disease. 6th ed. New York:
McGraw-­Hill; 1985. p. 144.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Infections

• Recurrent deep tissue infection
(e.g., lymphadenitis, pneumonia,
osteomyelitis, liver abscess)
• Unusual or resistant infection
(S. aureus, Pseudomonas,
Klebsiella, Serratia, Candida,
Aspergillus, Nocardia)
• Periodontal disease or tooth loss
• Omphalitis

Initial evaluation
• CBC, ESR, r/o lymphopenia
• Quantitative immunoglobulins
• lgE
• Immunoglobulin subsets
• T+B cell quantitation and subsets
• PHA stimulation
• Response to tetanus immunization
• HIV

History and physical

Unusual frequency
or type of infection

Chapter 170 u Disorders of Phagocyte Function

• Family history of recurrent infection
• Gingivitis
• Chronic diarrhea
• Infections with absence of
neutrophilic infiltration
• nCRP/ESR
• Splenomegaly or hepatomegaly
• Moderate lymphadenopathy
• Inflammatory anemia

Neutrophil evaluation
• CBC
• NBT slide test or DHR by FACS
• CD18/CD11b by FACS
• CD15a by FACS
• Bombay blood group
• (Chemotaxis)

1299

Fig. 170.1 Algorithm for clinical evaluation of patients with recurrent infections. Shown are the evaluations that can be done in a routine clinical

laboratory. The complete blood count (CBC) can detect marked leukocytosis in leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) and giant granules of Chédiak-­
Higashi syndrome may be seen on the smear. Chemotaxis and all other neutrophil function assays require highly specialized research laboratories.
CD, Cluster of differentiation; CRP, C-­reactive protein; DHR, dihydrorhodamine; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; FACS, fluorescence-­activated
cell sorter; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; IgE, immunoglobulin E; NBT, nitroblue tetrazolium; PHA, phytohemagglutinin. (Adapted from
Dinauer, MC, Coates TD: Disorders of neutrophil function. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al., eds. Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice.
6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012.)

LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY

Leukocyte adhesion deficiency types 1 (LAD-­1), 2 (LAD-­2), and 3
(LAD-­3) are rare autosomal recessive disorders of leukocyte function.
LAD-­1 affects about 1 per 10 million individuals and is characterized
by recurrent bacterial and fungal infections and depressed inflammatory responses despite striking blood neutrophilia (Table 170.3).

Genetics and Pathogenesis

LAD-­1 results from pathogenic variants of the gene on chromosome 21q22.3 encoding CD18, the 95-­
kDa β2-­leukocyte transmembrane integrin subunit. Normal neutrophils express four
heterodimeric adhesion molecules: LFA-­1 (CD11a/CD18), Mac-­1
(CD11b/CD18, also known as CR3 or iC3b receptor), p150,95
(CD11c/CD18), and α1β2 (CD11d/CD18). These four transmembrane adhesion molecules are composed of unique extracellular α1
encoded on chromosome 16, and they share a common β2 subunit
(CD18) that links them to the membrane and connects them to
intracellular signal transduction machinery. This group of leukocyte integrins is responsible for the tight adhesion of neutrophils to
the endothelial cell surface, egress from the circulation, and adhesion to iC3b-­coated microorganisms, which promotes phagocytosis
and particulate activation of the phagocyte nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase. Some pathogenic variants of CD11/CD18 allow a low level of assembly and activity of
integrin molecules, resulting in retention of some neutrophil integrin adhesion function and a moderate phenotype.
Because of their inability to adhere firmly to intercellular adhesion molecules 1 (ICAM-­1) and 2 (ICAM-­2) expressed on inflamed
endothelial cells (see Chapter 168), neutrophils cannot transmigrate
through the vessel wall and move to the site infection. Furthermore,
neutrophils that do arrive at inflammatory sites fail to recognize microorganisms opsonized with complement fragment iC3b, an important
stable opsonin formed by the cleavage of C3b. Therefore other neutrophil functions such as degranulation and oxidative metabolism
normally triggered by iC3b binding are also greatly compromised in
LAD-­1 neutrophils, resulting in impaired phagocytic function and
high risk for serious and recurrent bacterial infections.
Monocyte function is also impaired, with poor fibrinogen-­binding
function, an activity that is promoted by the CD11/CD18 complex. Consequently, such cells are unable to participate effectively in wound healing.

Children with LAD-­2 share the clinical features of LAD-­1 but have
normal CD11/CD18 integrins. Features unique to LAD-­2 include neurologic defects, cranial facial dysmorphism, and absence of the erythrocyte ABO blood group antigen (Bombay phenotype). LAD-­2 (also
known as congenital disorder of glycosylation IIc (CDG-­IIc) derives
from pathogenic variants in the gene encoding a specific guanosine
diphosphate (GDP)-­l-­fucose transporter of the Golgi apparatus. This
abnormality prevents the incorporation of fucose into various cell surface glycoproteins, including the carbohydrate structure sialyl Lewis X
that is critical for low-­affinity rolling adhesion of neutrophils to vascular endothelium. This is an important initial step necessary for subsequent integrin-­mediated activation, spreading, and transendothelial
migration. Infections in LAD-­2 are milder than that in LAD-­1.
LAD-­
3 is characterized by a Glanzmann thrombasthenia–like
bleeding disorder, delayed separation of the umbilical cord, and serious skin and soft tissue infections similar to those seen in LAD-­1, and
failure of leukocytes to undergo β2-­ and β1-­integrin–mediated adhesion and migration. Pathogenic variants in KINDLIN3 affect integrin
activation.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with the severe clinical form of LAD-­1 express <0.3% of the
normal amount of the β2-­integrin molecules, whereas patients with
the moderate phenotype may express 2–7% of the normal amount.
Children with severe forms of LAD present in infancy with recurrent,
indolent bacterial infections of the skin, mouth, respiratory tract, lower
intestinal tract, and genital mucosa. Significant neutrophilic leukocytosis, often >25,0000/mm3, is a prominent feature. They may have a history of delayed separation of the umbilical cord, usually with associated
infection of the cord stump. The presence of significant omphalitis is an
important feature that distinguishes these rare patients from the 10%
of healthy infants who can have cord separation at age 3 weeks or later.
Skin infection may progress to large chronic ulcers with polymicrobial
infection, including anaerobic organisms (Fig. 170.2). The ulcers heal
slowly, need months of antibiotic treatment, and often require plastic
surgery grafting. Severe gingivitis can lead to early loss of primary and
secondary teeth (Fig. 170.3). Infected areas characteristically have very
little neutrophilic infiltration (absent pus).
The pathogens infecting patients with LAD-­1 are similar to those
affecting patients with severe neutropenia (see Chapter 171) and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1300 Part XII u Immunology
Table 170.3  Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency Syndromes
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION
DEFICIENCY (LAD)

TYPE 1 (LAD-­1)

TYPE 2 (LAD-­2 OR
CDG-­IIc)

TYPE 3 (LAD-­3)

E-­SELECTIN
DEFICIENCY

Rac2 DEFICIENCY

OMIM

116920

266265

612840

131210

602049

Inheritance pattern

Autosomal
recessive

Autosomal recessive

Autosomal recessive

Unknown

Autosomal dominant

Affected protein(s)

β2-­Integrin common
chain (CD18)

Fucosylated proteins
(e.g., sialyl-­Lewis X,
CD15s)

Kindlin 3

Endothelial
E-­selectin
expression

Rac2

Neutrophil function
affected

Chemotaxis, tight
adherence

Rolling, tethering

Chemotaxis, adhesion,
superoxide production

Rolling, tethering

Chemotaxis, super­
oxide production

Delayed umbilical cord
separation

Yes (severe
phenotype only)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Leukocytosis/neutrophilia

Yes

Yes

Yes

No (mild
neutropenia)

Yes

CDG-­IIc, Congenital disorder of glycosylation IIc, OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
From Leung DYM. Pediatric Allergy: Principles and Practice. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2010. p. 139.

include Staphylococcus aureus and enteric gram-­negative organisms
such as Escherichia coli. These patients are also susceptible to opportunistic infection by fungi such as Candida and Aspergillus. Typical
signs of inflammation, such as swelling, erythema, and warmth, may
be absent. Pus does not form, and few neutrophils are identified microscopically in biopsy specimens of infected tissues. Despite the paucity
of neutrophils within the affected tissue, the circulating neutrophil
count during infection typically exceeds 30,000/μL and can surpass
100,000/μL. During intervals between infections, the peripheral blood
neutrophil count may chronically exceed 12,000/μL. LAD-­1 genotypes
with only moderate, rather than absent, amounts of functional integrins at the surface of the neutrophil have significantly reduced severity
and frequency of infections compared with children with the severe
form, although gingival disease is still a prominent feature.

Laboratory Findings
Fig. 170.2 Skin infection of a patient with leukocyte adhesion defi-

ciency type 1. Failure to form pus, inability to demarcate the fibrotic
skin debris, and limited inflammation. Enterococcus gallinarium was
cultured from the wound. (From Rich RR. Clinical Immunology: Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013, p. 273.)

The diagnosis of LAD-­1 is established most readily by flow cytometric
measurements of surface CD11b/CD18 in stimulated and unstimulated neutrophils. Neutrophil and monocyte adherence, aggregation,
chemotaxis, and iC3b-­
mediated phagocytosis demonstrate striking abnormalities. However, these assays are not clinically available.
Delayed-­type hypersensitivity reactions are normal, and most individuals have normal specific antibody synthesis, although some patients
have impaired T-­lymphocyte–dependent antibody responses. The diagnosis of LAD-­2 is established by flow cytometric measurement of sialyl
Lewis X (CD15) on neutrophils. It is important to note that the flow
cytometric assays are not done the same as the more common lymphocyte subset analysis and require specialized approaches to detect levels
of surface expression, especially to detect milder phenotypes.

Treatment

Fig. 170.3 Oral pathology in a patient with leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 1 (LAD-­1). Gingivitis and severe periodontitis are hallmarks
of LAD-­1. (From Rich RR. Clinical Immunology: Principles and Practice.
4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013, p. 273.)

Treatment of LAD-­1 depends on the phenotype, as determined by the
level of expression of functional CD11/CD18 integrins. Early allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the treatment of choice
for severe LAD-­1 (and LAD-­3). One patient was successfully treated
with ustekinumab, an inhibitor of interleukins 12 and 23. Other treatment is largely supportive. Patients can be maintained on prophylactic
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) and should have close surveillance for early identification of infections and initiation of empirical
treatment with broad-­spectrum antibiotics. Specific determination of the
etiologic agent by culture or biopsy is important because of the prolonged
antibiotic treatment required in the absence of neutrophil function.
Some LAD-­2 patients have responded to fucose supplementation,
which induced a rapid reduction in the circulating leukocyte count and
appearance of the sialyl Lewis X molecules, accompanied by marked
improvement in leukocyte adhesion.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 170 u Disorders of Phagocyte Function
Prognosis

The severity of infectious complications correlates with the degree
of β2-­integrin deficiency. Patients with severe deficiency may die in
infancy, and those surviving infancy have a susceptibility to severe
life-­threatening systemic infections. Patients with moderate deficiency
have infrequent life-­threatening infections and relatively long survival.

CHÉDIAK-­HIGASHI SYNDROME

Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome (CHS) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by increased susceptibility to infection
caused by defective degranulation of neutrophils, a mild bleeding
diathesis, partial oculocutaneous albinism, progressive peripheral
neuropathy, and a tendency to develop a life-­threatening form of
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (see Chapter 556.2). CHS
is caused by a fundamental defect in granule morphogenesis that
results in abnormally large granules in multiple tissues. Pigmentary dilution involving the hair, skin, and ocular fundi results from
pathologic aggregation of melanosomes. Neurologic deficits are
associated with a failure of decussation of the optic and auditory
nerves. Patients exhibit an increased susceptibility to infection that
can be explained only in part by defects in neutrophil function. The
patients have progressive neutropenia as well as abnormalities in
natural killer (NK) function, again related to granule dysfunction.

Genetics and Pathogenesis

LYST (for lysosomal traffic regulator), the gene variant in CHS, is
located at chromosome 1q2-­q44. The LYST/CHS protein is thought
to regulate vesicle transport by mediating protein-­protein interaction and protein-­membrane associations. Loss of function may
lead to indiscriminate interactions with lysosomal surface proteins,
yielding giant granules through uncontrolled fusion of lysosomes
with each other.
Almost all cells of patients with CHS show some oversized and dysmorphic lysosomes, storage granules, or related vesicular structures.
Melanosomes are oversized, and delivery to the keratinocytes and hair
follicles is compromised, resulting in hair shafts devoid of pigment
granules. This abnormality in melanosomes leads to the macroscopic
impression of hair and skin that is lighter than expected from parental
coloration. The same abnormality in melanocytes leads to the partial
ocular albinism associated with light sensitivity.
Beginning early in neutrophil development, spontaneous fusion
of giant primary granules with each other or with cytoplasmic membrane components results in huge secondary lysosomes with reduced
contents of hydrolytic enzymes, including proteinases, elastase, and
cathepsin G. This deficiency of proteolytic enzymes may be responsible
for the impaired killing of microorganisms by CHS neutrophils.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with CHS have light skin and silvery hair and frequently complain of solar sensitivity and photophobia that is associated with rotary
nystagmus. Other signs and symptoms vary considerably, but frequent
infections and neuropathy are common. The infections involve mucous
membranes, skin, and respiratory tract. Affected children are susceptible
to gram-­positive bacteria, gram-­negative bacteria, and fungi, with S.
aureus being the most common offending organism. The neuropathy
may be sensory or motor in type, and ataxia may be a prominent feature. Neuropathy often begins in the teenage years and becomes the most
prominent problem.
Patients with CHS have prolonged bleeding times with normal platelet counts, resulting from impaired platelet aggregation associated with
a deficiency of the dense granules containing adenosine diphosphate
and serotonin.
The most life-­threatening complication of CHS is the development of an accelerated phase characterized by pancytopenia, high
fever, and lymphohistiocytic infiltration of liver, spleen, and lymph
nodes. The onset of the accelerated phase, which can occur at any
age, is now recognized to be a genetic form of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. This occurs in 85% of patients and usually results
in death.

1301

Laboratory Findings

The diagnosis of CHS is established by finding large inclusions in all
nucleated blood cells. These can be seen on Wright-­stained blood
films and are accentuated by a peroxidase stain. Because of impaired
egress from the bone marrow, cells containing the large inclusions may
be missed on peripheral blood smear but readily identified on bone
marrow examination. The patients have progressive neutropenia and
abnormal platelet, neutrophil, and NK function.

Treatment

High-­dose ascorbic acid (200 mg/day for infants; 2,000 mg/day for
adults) may improve the clinical status of some children in the stable
phase. Although controversy surrounds the efficacy of ascorbic acid,
given the safety of the vitamin, it is reasonable to administer ascorbic
acid to all patients.
The only curative therapy to prevent the accelerated phase is HSCT.
Normal stem cells reconstitute hematopoietic and immunologic function, correct the NK cell deficiency, and prevent conversion to the
accelerated phase, but cannot correct or prevent the neuropathy. If the
patient is in the accelerated phase with active hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, HSCT often fails to prevent death. While HSCT can cure
the neutrophil defect and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, it does
nothing for neurologic complications.

MYELOPEROXIDASE DEFICIENCY

Myeloperoxidase (MPO) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder
of oxidative metabolism and is one of the most common inherited disorders of phagocytes, occurring at a frequency approaching 1 per 2,000
individuals. MPO is a green heme protein located in the azurophilic
lysosomes of neutrophils and monocytes and is the basis for the greenish tinge to pus accumulated at a site of infection.

Clinical Manifestations

MPO deficiency is usually clinically silent. Rarely, patients may have
disseminated candidiasis, usually in conjunction with diabetes mellitus. Acquired partial MPO deficiency can develop in acute myelogenous leukemia and in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Laboratory Findings

Deficiency of neutrophil and monocyte MPO can be identified by histochemical analysis. Severe MPO deficiency can cause the dihydrorhodamine (DHR) flow cytometric assay for chronic granulomatous
disease (CGD) to be falsely positive. Unlike CGD, eosinophils in severe
MPO deficiency will still reduce DHR and yield a normal reaction.

Treatment

There is no specific therapy for MPO deficiency. Aggressive treatment
with antifungal agents should be provided for candidal infections. The
prognosis is usually excellent.

CHRONIC GRANULOMATOUS DISEASE

CGD is characterized by neutrophils and monocytes capable of normal
chemotaxis, ingestion, and degranulation, but unable to kill catalase-­
positive microorganisms because of a defect in the generation of
microbicidal oxygen metabolites. CGD is a rare disease, affecting 4-­5
per 1 million individuals; it is caused by four genes: one X-­linked and
three autosomal recessive inheritance (Table 170.4).

Genetics and Pathogenesis

Activation of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase requires stimulation of the
neutrophils and involves assembly from cytoplasmic and integral membrane subunits (see Fig. 168.3). Oxidase activation initiates with phosphorylation of a cationic cytoplasmic protein, p47phox (47-­kDa phagocyte
oxidase protein). Phosphorylated p47phox, together with two other cytoplasmic components of the oxidase, p67phox and the low-­molecular-­weight
guanosine triphosphatase Rac2, translocates to the membrane, where they
combine with the cytoplasmic domains of the transmembrane flavocytochrome b558 to form the active oxidase complex. The flavocytochrome is
a heterodimer composed of p22phox and highly glycosylated gp91phox. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1302 Part XII u Immunology
Table 170.4  Classification of Chronic Granulomatous Disease
COMPONENT
AFFECTED

NBT SCORE
(% POSITIVE)

INCIDENCE
(% OF CASES)

0

0

60

X91−

Low

80-­100 (weak)

5

X91−

Low

5-­10

<1

X91+

0

0

1

A220

0

0

4

A22+

N

0

<1
25

INHERITANCE

SUBTYPE*

X

X910

gp91phox

p22phox

A

FLAVOCYTOCHROME b
SPECTRUM

p47phox

A

A470

N

0†

p67phox

A

A670

N

0

5

A67+

N

0

<1

A40−

N

100

<1

p40phox

A

*In this nomenclature, the first letter represents the mode of inheritance (X-­linked [X] or autosomal recessive [A]), whereas the number indicates the phox component that is genetically
affected. The superscript symbols indicate whether the level of protein of the affected component is undetectable (0), diminished (−), or normal (+), as measured by immunoblot
analysis.
†Can be weakly positive.
NBT, Nitroblue tetrazolium.
From Dinauer MC, Newburger PE, Borregaard N. Phagocyte system and disorders of granulopoiesis and granulocyte function. In: Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and
Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015. Table 22.12, p. 833.

gp91phox glycoprotein catalyzes electron transport through its NADPH-­
binding, flavin-­binding, and heme-­binding domains. Defects in any of
these NADPH oxidase components can lead to CGD.
Approximately 65% of patients with CGD are males who inherit their
disorder as a result of pathogenic variants in CYBB, an X-­chromosome
gene encoding gp91phox. Approximately 35% of patients inherit CGD
in an autosomal recessive fashion resulting from pathogenic variants
in the NCF1 gene on chromosome 7, encoding p47phox. Defects in the
genes encoding p67phox (NCF2 on chromosome 1) and p22phox (CYBA
on chromosome 16) are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner
and account for approximately 5% of cases of CGD.
The CGD phagocytic vacuoles lack microbicidal reactive oxygen
species and remain acidic, so bacteria are not killed or digested properly (Fig. 170.4). Hematoxylin-­eosin–stained sections from patients’
tissues show multiple granulomas that give CGD its descriptive name.

Clinical Manifestations

Although the clinical presentation is variable, several features suggest the
diagnosis of CGD. These include any patient with recurrent pneumonia,
lymphadenitis, hepatic, subcutaneous, or other abscesses, osteomyelitis
at multiple sites, family history of recurrent infections, or any infection
with an unusual catalase-­positive organism requires evaluation (Fig.
170.5). Other clinical features include chronic colitis or enteritis, gastric
outlet or ureteral obstruction from granulomas, or bloodstream infection caused by Salmonella, Burkholderia cepacia, or Candida.
The onset of clinical signs and symptoms usually occurs in early
infancy, although a few patients with very rare CGD subtypes have
presented later in life. The attack rate and severity of infections are
exceedingly variable; however, the infection incidence decreases in
the second decade, coincident with maturation of the lymphocyte and
humoral immunity. The most common pathogen is S. aureus, but any
catalase-­positive microorganism may be involved. Other organisms
frequently causing infections include Serratia marcescens, B. cepacia,
Aspergillus, Candida albicans, Nocardia, and Salmonella. There may
also be increased susceptibility to mycobacteria, including the bacille
Calmette-­
Guérin vaccine. Pneumonia, lymphadenitis, osteomyelitis, and skin infections are the most common illnesses encountered.
Bacteremia or fungemia occurs but is much less common than focal
infections and usually only occurs when local infections have been
inappropriately treated for long periods. Patients may have sequelae of
chronic infection, including anemia of chronic disease, poor growth,

Fig. 170.4 Pathogenesis of chronic granulomatous disease (CGD).

The manner in which the metabolic deficiency of the CGD neutrophil
predisposes the host to infection is shown schematically. Normal neutrophils stimulate hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in the phagosome containing ingested Escherichia coli. Myeloperoxidase is delivered to the
phagosome by degranulation, as indicated by the closed circles. In this
setting, H2O2 acts as a substrate for myeloperoxidase to oxidize halide
to hypochlorous acid and chloramines that kill the microbes. The quantity of H2O2 produced by the normal neutrophil is sufficient to exceed
the capacity of catalase, an H2O2-­catabolizing enzyme of many aerobic
microorganisms, including Staphylococcus aureus, most gram-­negative
enteric bacteria, Candida albicans, and Aspergillus. When organisms
such as E. coli gain entry into CGD neutrophils, they are not exposed to
H2O2 because the neutrophils do not produce it, and the H2O2 generated by microorganisms themselves is destroyed by their own catalase.
When CGD neutrophils ingest streptococci, which lack catalase, the organisms generate enough H2O2 to result in a microbicidal effect. As indicated (middle), catalase-­positive microbes such as E. coli can survive
within the phagosome of the CGD neutrophil. (Adapted from Boxer LA.
Quantitative abnormalities of granulocytes. In: Beutler E, Lichtman MA,
Coller BS, et al., eds. Williams Hematology. 6th ed. New York: McGraw-­
Hill; 2001. p. 845.)

lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, chronic purulent dermatitis,
restrictive lung disease, gingivitis, hydronephrosis, esophageal dysmotility, and pyloric outlet narrowing. Perirectal abscesses and recurrent skin infections, including folliculitis, cutaneous granulomas, and
discoid lupus erythematosus, also suggest CGD.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 170 u Disorders of Phagocyte Function

Fig. 170.5 Chest radiograph of a 10-­year-­old boy with chronic granu-

lomatous disease shows a left-­sided pulmonary infiltrate and cavitary
lung lesion. Biopsy revealed an Aspergillus fumigatus infection. (From
Chinn IK, Chinen J, Shearer WT. Primary immunodeficiency diseases.
In Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, et al., eds. Feigin and Cherry’s
Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019. Fig. 67.6, p. 652.)

Granuloma formation and inflammatory processes are a hallmark
of CGD and may be the presenting symptoms that prompt testing for
CGD if they cause pyloric outlet obstruction, bladder outlet or ureter obstruction, or rectal fistulas and granulomatous colitis simulating
Crohn disease. More than 80% of CGD patients have positive serology
for Crohn disease. Persistent fever, especially with splenomegaly and
cytopenia, warrants an evaluation for secondary macrophage activation syndrome. This has been seen in CGD and may require treatment
with corticosteroids and discontinuation of interferon-­γ treatment.

Laboratory Findings

The diagnosis is most often made by performing flow cytometry using
DHR to measure oxidant production through its increased fluorescence
when oxidized by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). The nitroblue tetrazolium
dye test is frequently cited in the literature but is only rarely used clinically. The X-­linked carrier state is usually easily diagnosed in the mother
by DHR fluorescence through a bimodal response to stimulation. It is
important to test the mother as some extremely lyonized carriers with <5%
positive cells may have chronic clinical problems as well. Ideally, at least the
first patient in a kindred should have DNA analysis to facilitate prenatal
diagnosis and for genetic counseling purposes.
A few individuals have been described with apparent CGD caused by
severe glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, leading to insufficient NADPH substrate for the phagocyte oxidase. The erythrocytes of
these patients also lack the enzyme, leading to chronic hemolysis.

Treatment

HSCT is the only known cure for CGD, although gene therapy has
been transiently successful in a few patients and is the topic of active
research. HSCT transplant for all patients with CGD is strongly recommended if a suitable sibling or unrelated donor can be identified. The
long-­term outcome for survival late into adulthood is not good, even in
the hands of experienced CGD physicians. Curative therapy at an early
age is strongly recommended by many experts.
Patients with CGD should be given daily oral TMP/SMX because it
reduces the number of bacterial infections. A placebo-­controlled study
found that interferon-­γ 50 μg/m2 three times per week significantly
reduces the number of hospitalizations and serious infections, although
the mechanism of action is unclear. Itraconazole (200 mg/day for patients
weighing >50 kg and 100 mg/day for patients <50 kg and ≤5 years old)
administered prophylactically reduces the frequency of fungal infections.
Management of infection is dramatically different than in normal children. CGD patients are always at risk for deep-­seated, indolent bacterial
infections that can become widespread if not treated properly. They also

1303

develop the same kinds of infections that occur in normal children, so
determination of the appropriate treatment can be difficult. The ESR can
be quite helpful. If the child does not have a deep-­seated infection, the ESR
will be normal or will normalize within several days with standard management. If it does not, however, a search for deep tissues is warranted,
as is consideration of empirical antibiotics. Cultures should be obtained,
but are usually negative. Because all neutrophil functions in CGD except
killing are normal, there is often an exuberant inflammatory reaction to a
very small number of organisms. Thus blood cultures and direct cultures
of biopsy samples are usually negative unless there are many organisms.
Most abscesses require surgical drainage for therapeutic and diagnostic
purposes. Prolonged use of antibiotics is required even for common bacterial infections. A simple pneumonia may require 6-­8 weeks or more of
parenteral antibiotics. Infections should be treated for at least 1 week past
normalization of ESR to prevent recurrence. Severe pneumonias can be
cleared completely but may require many months of parenteral antibiotics.
Especially because cultures are often not helpful, many support an “antibiotic sensitivity by sedimentation rate response” approach to treatment.
The ESRs are often 40-­80 mm/hr or more with severe infection and will
decrease monotonically over a week or so after starting antibacterial drugs.
It is important to check the ESR daily or every other day because of moderate variability in this test, and changes in treatment need to be based on
trends rather than individual values. If there is a clear downward trend
over 3-­10 days, continue with antibacterials alone. If this is not the case,
parenteral voriconazole should be added to cover Aspergillus. Failure of
the ESR to decrease suggests another antimicrobial approach needs to be
tried. This sequential addition of antimicrobials offers some insight into
the nature of the infection. If both antibacterials and antifungal are started
at the same time, one cannot know what caused a response.
Because of the rarity of this disorder, it is critical to seek counsel from
someone with significant direct experience with management of several
CGD patients. Granulocyte transfusions have been used, but their benefit is unclear. The ESR should be regularly monitored in well patients and
whenever they appear ill. A high ESR itself is usually not enough to trigger
treatment. However, in the presence of symptoms, one should search for
sources at least by contrast CT of the sinus, chest, and abdomen. If the
patient is unstable or has very high fevers, B. cepacia should be considered
and empirically covered. This organism can cause septic shock quickly,
unlike the usual smoldering infections seen in CGD. The patient can be
treated with antibiotics until the ESR is normal and radiographic evidence
of infection has been cleared, if possible. The overall incidence of infection
decreases in the second decade of life as nonneutrophil immunity matures,
but increased risk of infection is lifelong.
Corticosteroids may be useful for the treatment of children with antral
and urethral obstruction or severe granulomatous colitis. Corticosteroids
can also be helpful in pneumonia to shrink granulomas in the lung and
promote drainage. Short (4-­6 days) pulses of 1-­2 mg/kg of prednisone are
recommended, with rapid taper to avoid long-­term side effects and risk
of fungus. Pulses can be repeated if clinical effect has not been achieved.

Genetic Counseling

Identifying a patient’s specific genetic subgroup by DNA analysis
is useful primarily for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis. In
X-­linked CGD, all possibly affected females should be tested by DHR
to exclude carrier state. Diagnosis by DNA is strongly recommended
in suspected carriers with normal DHR who are related to a known
proband, because rarely DHR testing is normal in obligate carriers
and may indicate that the patient has a spontaneous mutation and the
mother may not be a carrier at all. Counseling is best done by a physician who has direct knowledge of the clinical manifestations of CGD.

Prognosis

The overall mortality rate for CGD is about two patient deaths per year
per 100 cases, with the highest mortality among young children. The
development of effective infection prophylaxis regimens, close surveillance for signs of infections, and aggressive surgical and medical interventions have improved the prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1304 Part XII u Immunology

Chapter 171

Leukopenia
Thomas F. Michniacki and
Kelly J. Walkovich
Leukopenia refers to an abnormally low number of white blood cells
(WBCs) in the circulating blood secondary to a paucity of lymphocytes, granulocytes, or both. Because there are marked developmental changes in normal values for WBC counts during childhood,
normal ranges must be considered in the context of age. For newborns, the mean WBC count at birth is high, followed by a rapid fall
beginning at 12 hours through the first week of life. Thereafter, values
are stable until 1 year of age, after which a slow, steady decline in the
WBC count continues throughout childhood until adult values are
reached during adolescence. Evaluation of patients with leukopenia
begins with a thorough history, physical examination, and at least one
confirmatory complete blood count with differential. Further evaluation then depends on whether the leukopenia represents a decreased
number of neutrophils, lymphocytes, or both cell populations (Table
171.1). Treatment depends on the etiology and clinical manifestations of the leukopenia.

NEUTROPENIA

Neutropenia is defined as a decrease in the absolute number of circulating segmented neutrophils and bands in the peripheral blood.
The absolute neutrophil count (ANC) is determined by multiplying the total WBC count by the percentage of segmented neutrophils plus bands. Normal neutrophil counts must be stratified for
age and race. Neutrophils predominate at birth but rapidly decrease
in the first few days of life. During infancy, neutrophils constitute
20–30% of circulating leukocyte populations. Near-­equal numbers
of neutrophils and lymphocytes are found in the peripheral circulation at 5 years of age, and the characteristic 70% predominance
of neutrophils that occurs in adulthood is usually attained during
puberty. For White children >12 months old, the lower limit of normal for the ANC is 1,500/μL; for Black children >12 months old, the
lower limit of normal is 1,200/μL. The relatively lower limit of normal in Black individuals likely reflects the prevalence of the Duffy
negative (Fy−/−) blood group, which is enriched in populations in
the malarial belt of Africa and is associated with ANCs 200-­600/μL
less than those who are Duffy positive.
Neutropenia may be characterized as mild (ANC 1,000-­1,500/μL),
moderate (ANC 500-­1,000/μL), or severe (ANC <500/μL). ANC
<200 is also termed agranulocytosis. This stratification aids in
predicting the risk of pyogenic infection in patients who have neutropenia resulting from disorders of bone marrow production,
because only patients with severe neutropenia have a significantly
increased susceptibility to life-­threatening infections. Neutropenia
associated with monocytopenia, lymphocytopenia, or hypogammaglobulinemia increases the risk for infection compared with
isolated neutropenia. Patients with neutropenia caused by increased
destruction (e.g., autoimmune) may tolerate very low ANCs without
increased frequency of infection, because of their often robust ability
to generate additional neutrophils from their functioning marrow
when needed.
Acute neutropenia evolves over a few days and is often a result
of rapid neutrophil use and compromised neutrophil production.
Chronic neutropenia by definition lasts longer than 3 months
and arises from reduced production, increased destruction, or
excessive splenic sequestration of neutrophils. The etiology of

neutropenia can be classified as either an acquired disorder or
extrinsic insult (Table 171.2) or more rarely an inherited, intrinsic
defect (Table 171.3).

Clinical Manifestations of Neutropenia

Individuals with neutrophil counts <500/μL are at substantial risk
for developing infections, primarily from their endogenous flora
as well as from nosocomial organisms. However, some patients
with isolated chronic neutropenia may not experience many serious infections, probably because the remainder of the immune
system remains intact or because neutrophil delivery to tissues is
preserved, as in autoimmune neutropenias (AINs). In contrast,
children whose neutropenia is secondary to acquired disorders of
production, as occurs with cytotoxic therapy, immunosuppressive
drugs, or radiation therapy, are likely to develop serious bacterial
infections because many arms of the immune system are markedly
compromised and the ability of the marrow to robustly generate
new phagocytes is impaired. Neutropenia associated with additional monocytopenia or lymphocytopenia is more highly associated with serious infection than neutropenia alone. The integrity
of skin and mucous membranes, the vascular supply to tissues, and
nutritional status also influence the risk of infection.
The most common clinical presentation of profound neutropenia includes fever, frequent infections, aphthous stomatitis,
and gingivitis. Infections frequently associated with neutropenia
include cellulitis, furunculosis, perirectal inflammation, colitis,
sinusitis, warts, and otitis media, as well as more serious infections such as pneumonia, deep tissue abscess, and sepsis. The most
common pathogens causing infections in neutropenic patients are
Staphylococcus aureus and gram-­negative bacteria. Isolated neutropenia does not heighten a patient’s susceptibility to parasitic or
viral infections or to bacterial meningitis but does increase the risk
of fungal pathogens causing disease. The usual signs and symptoms of local infection and inflammation (e.g., exudate, fluctuance,
regional lymphadenopathy) may be diminished in the absence
of neutrophils because of the inability to form pus, but patients
with agranulocytosis still experience fever and feel pain at sites of
inflammation.

Laboratory Findings

Isolated absolute neutropenia has a limited number of causes (see
Tables 171.2 to 171.6). The duration and severity of the neutropenia
greatly influence the extent of laboratory evaluation. Patients with
chronic neutropenia since infancy and a history of recurrent fevers
and chronic gingivitis should have WBC counts and differential
counts determined 3 times a week for 6-­8 weeks to evaluate for periodicity suggestive of cyclic neutropenia. Bone marrow aspiration
and biopsy should be performed on select patients to assess cellularity and myeloid maturation. Additional marrow studies, such as
cytogenetic analysis and flow cytometry for detecting leukemia and
other malignant disorders, should be obtained for patients with suspected intrinsic defects in the myeloid progenitors and for patients
with suspected malignancy. Children of African or Arabic descent
with mild to moderate neutropenia should have Duffy null, Fy(a-b-)
variant, screening completed. Selection of further laboratory tests is
determined by the duration and severity of the neutropenia and the
associated findings on physical examination (see Table 171.1).

Acquired Neutropenia
Infection-­Related Neutropenia

Transient neutropenia often accompanies or follows viral infections and is the most frequent cause of neutropenia in childhood
(Table 171.4). Viruses causing acute neutropenia include influenzas A and B, SARS-CoV-2, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus,
enteroviruses, human herpesvirus 6, measles, rubella, and varicella.
Parvovirus B19 and hepatitis A or B may also cause neutropenia,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 171 u Leukopenia

1305

Table 171.1  Diagnostic Approach for Patients with Leukopenia
EVALUATION

ASSOCIATED CLINICAL DIAGNOSES

INITIAL EVALUATION
History of acute or chronic leukopenia
General medical history including prior serious, recurrent or
unusual infections and malignancy
Physical examination: stomatitis, gingivitis, dental defects, warts,
lymphedema, congenital anomalies

Congenital syndromes (severe congenital neutropenia, cyclic neutropenia,
Shwachman-­Diamond, Wiskott-­Aldrich, Fanconi anemia, dyskeratosis
congenita, glycogen storage disease type Ib, disorders of vesicular
transport, GATA2 haploinsufficiency, and primary immunodeficiencies)

Spleen size

Hypersplenism

History of drug exposure

Drug-­associated neutropenia

Complete blood count with differential and reticulocyte counts

Neutropenia, aplastic anemia, autoimmune cytopenias

IF ANC <1,000/μL
Evaluation of Acute-­Onset Neutropenia
Repeat blood counts in 3-­4 wk

Transient myelosuppression (e.g., viral)

Serology and cultures for infectious agents

Active or chronic infection with viruses (e.g., EBV, CMV), bacteria,
mycobacteria, rickettsia

Discontinue drug(s) associated with neutropenia

Drug-­associated neutropenia

Test for antineutrophil antibodies

Autoimmune neutropenia

Measure quantitative immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE),
lymphocyte subsets

Neutropenia associated with disorders of immune function

IF ANC <500/μL ON THREE SEPARATE TESTS
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, with cytogenetics

Severe congenital neutropenia, cyclic neutropenia, Shwachman-­Diamond
syndrome, myelokathexis; chronic benign or idiopathic neutropenia;
reticular dysgenesis

Glucocorticoid stimulation test

Chronic benign or idiopathic neutropenia, some autoimmune neutropenias

Serial CBCs (3/wk for 6 wk)

Cyclic neutropenia

Exocrine pancreatic function

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome

Skeletal radiographs

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome, cartilage-­hair hypoplasia, Fanconi anemia

IF ALC <1,000/μL
Repeat blood counts in 3-­4 wk

Transient leukopenia (e.g., viral)

IF ALC <1,000/μL THREE SEPARATE TESTS
HIV antibody or RNA test

HIV infection, AIDS

Quantitative immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE), vaccine titers,
lymphocyte subsets; qualitative lymphocyte proliferation to
mitogens/antigens

Congenital or acquired disorders of immune function

IF THERE IS PANCYTOPENIA
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy

Bone marrow replacement by malignancy, fibrosis, granulomata, storage
cells; aplastic anemia

Bone marrow cytogenetics and flow cytometry

Myelodysplasia, leukemia

Copper, vitamin B12 and folate levels

Vitamin deficiencies

ALC, Absolute lymphocyte count; ANC, absolute neutrophil count; CBC, complete blood count; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus.

but are more often associated with pure red cell aplasia or multiple
cytopenias, respectively. Viral-­associated acute neutropenia often
occurs during the first 24-­48 hours of illness and usually persists
for 3-­8 days, which generally corresponds to the period of viremia.
The neutropenia is related to virus-­induced redistribution of neutrophils from the circulating to the marginating pool. In addition,
neutrophil sequestration may occur after virus-­induced tissue damage or splenomegaly.

Significant neutropenia also may be associated with severe bacterial,
protozoal, rickettsial, or fungal infections (see Table 171.4). Bacterial
sepsis is a particularly serious cause of neutropenia, especially among
younger infants and children. Premature neonates are especially prone
to exhausting their marrow reserve and rapidly succumbing to bacterial sepsis.
Chronic neutropenia often accompanies infection with Epstein-­
Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, or HIV and certain immunodeficiencies

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1306 Part XII u Immunology
Table 171.2  Causes of Neutropenia Extrinsic to Marrow Myeloid Cells
CAUSE

ETIOLOGIC FACTORS/AGENTS

Infection

Viruses, bacteria, protozoa, rickettsia,
fungi

Clinical features and laboratory findings of the infectious agent

ASSOCIATED FINDINGS

Drug induced

Phenothiazines, sulfonamides,
anticonvulsants, penicillins,
aminopyrine

Usually none; occasional hypersensitivity reaction (fever,
lymphadenopathy, rash, hepatitis, nephritis, pneumonitis,
aplastic anemia) or antineutrophil antibody

Immune neutropenia

Alloimmune, autoimmune

Myeloid hyperplasia with left shift in bone marrow (may appear
to be “arrested” at metamyelocyte or band stage)

Reticuloendothelial sequestration

Hypersplenism

Anemia, thrombocytopenia

Bone marrow replacement

Myelofibrosis, malignancy (leukemia,
lymphoma, metastatic solid tumor, etc.)

Anemia, thrombocytopenia, marrow fibrosis, malignant cells in
bone marrow sites of extramedullary hematopoiesis

Cancer chemotherapy or radiation
therapy

Suppression of myeloid cell production

Anemia, thrombocytopenia, bone marrow hypoplasia

Table 171.3  Acquired Disorders of Myeloid Cells
CAUSE

ETIOLOGIC FACTORS/AGENTS

ASSOCIATED FINDINGS

Aplastic anemia

Stem cell destruction and depletion

Pancytopenia

Vitamin B12, copper, or folate deficiency

Malnutrition; congenital deficiency of B12
absorption, transport, and storage; vitamin
avoidance

Megaloblastic anemia, hyper-­segmented
neutrophils

Acute leukemia, chronic myelogenous
leukemia

Bone marrow replacement with malignant cells

Pancytopenia, leukocytosis

Myelodysplasia

Dysplastic maturation of stem cells

Bone marrow hypoplasia with megaloblastoid
red cell precursors, thrombocytopenia

Prematurity with birthweight <2 kg

Impaired regulation of myeloid proliferation and
reduced size of postmitotic pool

Maternal preeclampsia

Chronic idiopathic neutropenia

Impaired myeloid proliferation and/or maturation

None

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria

Acquired stem cell defect secondary to PIGA gene
variant

Pancytopenia, thrombosis (hepatic vein
thrombosis)

Table 171.4  Infections Associated with Neutropenia
Viral

Cytomegalovirus, dengue, Epstein-­Barr virus,
hepatitis viruses, HIV, influenza, measles, parvovirus
B19, rubella, varicella, HHV-­6, SARS-CoV-2

Bacterial

Brucella, paratyphoid, pertussis, tuberculosis
(disseminated), tularemia, Shigella, typhoid; any
form of sepsis

Fungal

Histoplasmosis (disseminated)

Protozoan

Malaria, leishmaniasis (kala-­azar)

Rickettsial

Anaplasma (formerly Ehrlichia) phagocytophilum,
psittacosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, typhus,
rickettsialpox

HHV-­6, Human herpesvirus-­6.

such as X-­linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), hyper-­IgM syndrome
and AIDS. The neutropenia associated with AIDS likely arises from
a combination of viral bone marrow suppression, antibody-­mediated
destruction of neutrophils, and effects of antiretroviral or other
drugs.

Drug-­Induced Neutropenia

Drugs constitute a common cause of neutropenia (Table 171.5). The
incidence of drug-­induced neutropenia increases dramatically with
age; only 10% of cases occur among children and young adults. The
majority of cases occur among adults >65 years, likely reflecting the
more frequent use of multiple medications in that age-­group. Almost
any drug can cause neutropenia. The most common offending drug
classes are antimicrobial agents, antithyroid drugs, antipsychotics,
antiepileptics, antipyretics, and antirheumatics. Drug-­induced neutropenia has several underlying mechanisms (immune-­
mediated,
toxic, idiosyncratic, hypersensitivity, idiopathic) that are distinct from
the severe neutropenia that predictably occurs after administration of
antineoplastic drugs or radiotherapy.
Drug-­induced neutropenia from immune mechanisms usually
develops abruptly, is accompanied by fever, and lasts for about 1
week after the discontinuation of the drug. The process likely arises
from effects of drugs such as propylthiouracil or penicillin that act
as haptens to stimulate antibody formation, or drugs such as quinine that induce immune complex formation. Other drugs, including the antipsychotic drugs such as the phenothiazines, can cause
neutropenia when given in toxic amounts, but some individuals,
such as those with preexisting neutropenia, may be susceptible to
levels at the high end of the usual therapeutic range. Late-­onset neutropenia can occur after rituximab therapy. Idiosyncratic reactions,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 171 u Leukopenia

1307

Table 171.5  Forms of Drug-­Induced Neutropenia
IMMUNOLOGIC

TOXIC

HYPERSENSITIVITY

Paradigm drugs

Aminopyrine, propylthiouracil, penicillins

Phenothiazines, clozapine

Phenytoin, phenobarbital

Time to onset

Days to weeks

Weeks to months

Weeks to months

Clinical appearance

Acute, often explosive symptoms

Often asymptomatic or insidious
onset

May be associated with fever,
rash, nephritis, pneumonitis, or
aplastic anemia

Rechallenge

Prompt recurrence with small test dose

Latent period; high doses required

Latent period; high doses required

Laboratory findings

Antineutrophil antibody may be positive;
bone marrow myeloid hyperplasia

Bone marrow myeloid hypoplasia

Bone marrow myeloid hypoplasia

for example to chloramphenicol, are unpredictable with regard to
dose or duration of use. Hypersensitivity reactions are rare and may
involve arene oxide metabolites of aromatic anticonvulsants. Fever,
rash, lymphadenopathy, hepatitis, nephritis, pneumonitis, and
aplastic anemia are often associated with hypersensitivity-­induced
neutropenia. Acute hypersensitivity reactions such as those caused
by phenytoin or phenobarbital may last for only a few days if the
offending drug is discontinued. Chronic hypersensitivity may last
for months to years.
Once neutropenia occurs, the most effective therapeutic measure
is withdrawal of nonessential drugs, particularly drugs most commonly associated with neutropenia. Usually, the neutropenia will
resolve soon after withdrawal of the offending drug. If the neutropenia fails to improve with drug withdrawal and the patient is symptomatic with infection or stomatitis, subcutaneous administration
of recombinant human granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (G-­
CSF; filgrastim, 5 μg/kg/day) should be considered. Drug-­induced
neutropenia may be asymptomatic and noted only as an incidental
finding or because of regular monitoring of WBC counts during
drug therapy. For patients who are asymptomatic, continuation of
the suspected offending drug depends on the relative risks of neutropenia vs discontinuation of a possibly essential drug. If the drug
is continued, blood counts should be monitored for possible progression to agranulocytosis.
Neutropenia usually and predictably follows the use of anticancer
drugs or radiation therapy, especially radiation directed at the pelvis or vertebrae, secondary to cytotoxic effects on rapidly replicating
myeloid precursors. A decline in the WBC count typically occurs 7-­10
days after administration of the anticancer drug and may persist for
1-­2 weeks. The neutropenia accompanying malignancy or following
cancer chemotherapy is frequently associated with compromised cellular immunity and barrier compromise secondary to central venous
lines and mucositis, thereby predisposing patients to a much greater
risk of infection than found in disorders associated with isolated
neutropenia. Patients with chemotherapy/radiation-­related neutropenia and fever must be treated aggressively with broad-­spectrum
antibiotics.

Nutrition-­Related Neutropenia

Poor nutrition can contribute to neutropenia. Ineffective myelopoiesis may result in neutropenia caused by acquired dietary copper,
vitamin B12, or folic acid deficiency. In addition, megaloblastic
pancytopenia also can result from extended use of antibiotics such
as trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole that inhibit folic acid metabolism and from the use of phenytoin, which may impair folate absorption in the small intestine, or from surgical resection of the small
intestine. Neutropenia also occurs with starvation and marasmus
in infants, with anorexia nervosa, and occasionally among patients
receiving prolonged parenteral nutrition without vitamin supplementation. Patients receiving prolonged parenteral nutrition and
supplemental lipids are additionally at risk for neutropenia given
hepatosplenomegaly-­related sequestration and marrow infiltration

by abnormal macrophages filled with blue-­staining pigment granules and atypical lipid vacuoles; these cells are termed sea-­blue
histiocytes.

Immune-­Mediated Neutropenia

Immune-­mediated neutropenia is usually associated with the presence
of circulating antineutrophil antibodies, which may mediate neutrophil destruction by complement-­mediated lysis or splenic phagocytosis
of opsonized neutrophils, or by accelerated apoptosis of mature neutrophils or myeloid precursors.
Alloimmune neonatal neutropenia occurs after transplacental
transfer of maternal alloantibodies directed against antigens on the
infant’s neutrophils, analogous to Rh-­hemolytic disease. Prenatal sensitization induces maternal IgG antibodies to neutrophil antigens on
fetal cells. The neutropenia is often severe and infants may present
within the first 2 weeks of life with skin or umbilical infections, fever,
and pneumonia caused by the usual microbes that cause neonatal disease. By 7 weeks of age, the neutrophil count usually returns to normal,
reflecting the decay of maternal antibodies in the infant’s circulation.
Treatment consists of supportive care and appropriate antibiotics for
clinical infections, plus G-­CSF for severe infections without neutrophil
recovery.
Mothers with autoimmune disease may give birth to infants who
develop transient neutropenia, known as neonatal passive AIN. The
duration of the neutropenia depends on the time required for the
infant to clear the maternally transferred circulating IgG antibody. It
persists in most cases for a few weeks to a few months. Neonates almost
always remain asymptomatic.
AIN of infancy is a benign condition with an annual incidence
of approximately 1 per 100,000 among children between infancy
and 10 years of age. Antineutrophil antibodies are inappropriately
created by the child during an inflammatory episode, most commonly a mild viral infection. Patients usually have severe neutropenia on presentation, with ANC <500/μL, but the total WBC
count is generally within normal limits. Monocytosis or eosinophilia may occur but does not impact the low rate of infection.
The median age of presentation is 8-­11 months, with a range of
2-­54 months. The diagnosis is often evident when a blood count
incidentally reveals neutropenia in a child with a minor infection
or when a routine complete blood count is obtained at the 12-­
month well-­child visit. Occasionally, children may present with
more severe infections, including abscesses, pneumonia, or sepsis.
The diagnosis may be supported by the presence of antineutrophil
antibodies in serum; however, the test has frequent false-­negative
and false-­p ositive results, so the absence of detectable antineutrophil antibodies does not exclude the diagnosis, and a positive
result does not exclude other conditions. Therefore the diagnosis
is best made clinically based on a benign course and, if obtained,
a normal or hyperplastic myeloid maturation in the bone marrow. There is considerable overlap between AIN of infancy and
“chronic benign neutropenia.”

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1308 Part XII u Immunology
Treatment is not generally necessary because the disease is only
rarely associated with severe infection and usually remits spontaneously. Low-­dose G-­CSF may be useful for severe infections, to promote wound healing following surgery, or to avert emergency room
visits or hospitalizations for febrile illnesses. Longitudinal studies of
infants with AIN demonstrate median duration of disease ranging
from 7-­30 months. Affected children generally have no evidence or
risk of other autoimmune diseases.
AIN in older children can occur as an isolated process, as a manifestation of other autoimmune diseases, or as a secondary complication
of infection, drugs, or malignancy. In primary AIN, low circulating
neutrophil counts are the only hematologic finding, and associated
diseases or other factors that cause neutropenia are absent. Secondary
AIN associated with immune dysregulation or other factors is more
often identified in older children and is less likely to remit spontaneously. AIN is distinguished from other forms of neutropenia by the
demonstration of antineutrophil antibodies (with caveats previously
discussed) and myeloid hyperplasia on bone marrow examination. The
most common antineutrophil antibody targets are human neutrophil
antigens 1a, 1b, and 2.
Treatment of AIN relies on management of any underlying disorders. In addition, judicious use of appropriate antibiotics for
bacterial infections is generally beneficial, as is family and primary
care provider education. Regular dental hygiene, always strongly
recommended, is even more important. Infections tend to be less
frequent in AIN than with the corresponding degree of neutropenia
from other causes, probably because tissue delivery of neutrophils
is greater than that in conditions resulting from impaired production. Prophylactic antibiotics may be helpful for the management
of recurrent minor infections. For patients with serious or recurrent infections, G-­CSF is generally effective at raising the ANC and
preventing infection. Very low doses (<1-­2 μg/kg/day) are usually
effective, and administration of standard doses can lead to severe
bone pain from marrow expansion.

Neutropenia Secondary to Bone Marrow
­ eplacement
R

Various acquired bone marrow disorders lead to neutropenia, usually accompanied by anemia and thrombocytopenia. Hematologic
malignancies, including leukemia, lymphoma, and metastatic solid
tumors, suppress myelopoiesis by infiltrating the bone marrow
with tumor cells. Neutropenia may also accompany aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic disorders, or preleukemic syndromes, which
are characterized by multiple cytopenias and often macrocytosis.
Treatment requires management of the underlying disease.

Neutropenia Secondary to Reticuloendothelial
­ equestration
S

Splenic enlargement resulting from intrinsic splenic disease (storage disease), portal hypertension, or systemic causes of splenic
hyperplasia (inflammation or neoplasia) can lead to neutropenia.
Most often the neutropenia is mild to moderate and is accompanied
by corresponding degrees of thrombocytopenia and anemia. The
reduced neutrophil survival corresponds to the size of the spleen,
and the extent of the neutropenia is inversely proportional to bone
marrow compensatory mechanisms. Usually, the neutropenia can be
corrected by successfully treating the underlying disease. In select
cases, splenectomy may be necessary to restore the neutrophil count
to normal, but results in increased risk of infections by encapsulated bacterial organisms. Patients undergoing splenectomy should
receive appropriate preoperative immunizations and may benefit
from antibiotic prophylaxis after splenectomy to help mitigate the
risk of sepsis. Splenectomy should be avoided in patients with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), autoimmune lymphoproliferative disease, and other immunodeficiency syndromes because
of the higher risk of sepsis.

Inherited Neutropenia

Intrinsic disorders of proliferation or maturation of myeloid precursor
cells are rare. Table 171.6 presents a classification based on genetics
(Fig. 171.1) and molecular mechanisms; other organ involvement or
physical features may suggest an etiology (Table 171.7).

Primary Disorders of Granulopoiesis

Cyclic neutropenia is an autosomal dominant congenital granulopoietic disorder occurring with an estimated incidence of 0.5-­1 cases per
1 million population. The disorder is characterized by regular, periodic
oscillations, with the ANC ranging from normal to <200/μL, mirrored
by reciprocal cycling of monocytes. Cyclic neutropenia is sometimes
termed cyclic hematopoiesis because of the secondary cycling of other
blood cells, such as platelets and reticulocytes. The mean oscillatory
period of the cycle is 21 days (±4 days). During the neutropenic nadir,
many patients develop malaise, fever, oral and genital ulcers, gingivitis,
periodontitis, or pharyngitis, and occasionally lymph node enlargement. More serious infections occasionally occur, including pneumonia, mastoiditis, and intestinal perforation with peritonitis leading
to life-­threatening clostridial sepsis. Before the availability of G-­CSF,
approximately 10% of patients developed fatal clostridial or gram-­
negative infections. Cyclic neutropenia arises from a regulatory abnormality involving early hematopoietic precursor cells and is almost
invariably associated with pathologic variants in the neutrophil elastase
gene, ELANE, that lead to accelerated apoptosis as a result of abnormal protein folding. Many patients experience abatement of symptoms
with age. The cycles tend to become less noticeable in older patients,
and the hematologic picture often begins to resemble that of chronic
idiopathic neutropenia.
Cyclic neutropenia is diagnosed by obtaining blood counts 3 times
a week for 6-­8 weeks. The requirement for repeated blood counts is
necessary because some of the elastase variants overlap with those
in patients who have severe congenital neutropenia (SCN). Demonstrating oscillation or a lack thereof in the blood counts helps to
identify patients’ risks for progression to myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS)/acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), a risk that is only associated with SCN. The diagnosis can be confirmed with genetic studies
demonstrating a pathologic variant in ELANE. Affected patients with
neutrophil nadirs <200/μL are treated with G-­CSF, and their cycle of
profound neutropenia changes from a 21-­day period with at least 3-­5
days of profound neutropenia to 9-­11 days with 1 day of less profound
neutropenia. The dose needed to maintain nadirs >500/μL is usually
2-­4 μg/kg/day administered daily or every other day.
SCN is a rare, genetically heterogeneous, congenital granulopoietic
disorder with an estimated incidence of 1-­2 cases per 1 million population. The disorder is characterized by an arrest in myeloid maturation
at the promyelocyte stage in the bone marrow, resulting in ANCs consistently <200/μL and may occur sporadically, with autosomal dominant or recessive inheritance. The dominant form is caused most often
by pathologic variants in ELANE, which accounts for 60–80% of SCN
cases, whereas recessive forms arise from variants in HAX1 (the form
also known as Kostmann disease) or G6PC3 (encoding a myeloid-­
specific isoform of glucose-­
6-­
phosphatase). Pathologic alterations
in GFI1, CSF3R, and JAGN1 additionally may lead to the condition.
HAX1 variants may be associated with neurologic deficits, and G6PC3
with heart defects, urogenital abnormalities, and venous angiectasia.
In addition to severe neutropenia, peripheral blood counts generally
show monocytosis and many also exhibit eosinophilia; chronic inflammation may lead to secondary anemia and thrombocytosis. Patients
who have SCN experience frequent episodes of fever, skin infections
(including omphalitis), oral ulcers, gingivitis, pneumonia, and perirectal abscesses, typically appearing in the first few months of life. Infections often disseminate to the blood, meninges, and peritoneum and
are usually caused by S. aureus, Escherichia coli, and Pseudomonas species. Without filgrastim therapy, most patients die of infectious complications within the first 1-­2 years of life despite prophylactic antibiotics.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 171 u Leukopenia

1309

Table 171.6  Intrinsic Disorders of Myeloid Precursor Cells
SYNDROME

INHERITANCE (GENE)

CLINICAL FEATURES (INCLUDING STATIC NEUTROPENIA
UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED)

PRIMARY DISORDERS OF MYELOPOIESIS
Cyclic neutropenia
AD (ELANE)

Periodic oscillation (21-­day cycles) in ANC

Severe congenital neutropenia

AD (primarily ELANE, also GFI1 and others)

Risk of MDS/AML

AR (G6PC3, HAX1, JAGN1, CSF3R)
(HAX1 = Kostmann syndrome)

G6PC3: cardiac and urogenital anomalies, venous angioectasias;
HAX1: neurologic abnormalities, risk of MDS/AML

XL (WAS)

Neutropenic variant of Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome

DISORDERS OF MOLECULAR PROCESSING
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome
Ribosomal defect: AR (SBDS, DNAJC21,
EFL1, SRP54)
Telomere biology disorders/
dyskeratosis congenita

Telomere length abnormality: XL (DKC1),
AD or AR (ACD, RTEL1, TERC, TERT), AD
(NAF1, TINF2), AR (CTC1, NHP2, NOP10,
PARN, STN1, WRAP53)

DISORDERS OF VESICULAR TRAFFICKING
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome
AR (LYST)

Pancreatic insufficiency, metaphyseal dysostosis, bone marrow
failure, MDS/AML
Nail dystrophy, leukoplakia, abnormal and carious teeth,
lacey reticulated hyperpigmentation of the skin, bone
marrow failure, various malignancies, Coats plus syndrome
(CTC1 and STN1)
Partial albinism, giant granules in myeloid cells, platelet
storage pool defect, impaired NK cell function, HLH

Griscelli syndrome, type II

AR (RAB27a)

Partial albinism, impaired NK cell function, neurologic
impairment, HLH

Cohen syndrome

AR (COH1)

Partial albinism, pigmentary retinopathy, developmental
delay, facial dysmorphism

Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome,
type II

AR (AP3B1)

Cyclic neutropenia, partial albinism, HLH

p14 deficiency

AR (MAPBPIP)

Partial albinism, coarse facial features, decreased B and T
cells

VPS45 defects

AR (VPS45)

Neutrophil dysfunction, bone marrow fibrosis, nephromegaly

DISORDERS OF METABOLISM
Glycogen storage disease, type 1b

AR (G6PT1)

Hepatic enlargement, growth retardation, impaired neutrophil
motility

Methylmalonic/propionic acidemia/
aciduria

AR (CLPB)
Mutase or cobalamin transporters/
propionyl coenzyme A carboxylase

Ketoacidosis, metabolic stroke, depressed consciousness,
megaloblastic anemia

3-­Methylglutaconic aciduria

AR (CLPB)

Nonspecific finding indicative of mitochondrial dysfunction
or associated with known syndromes

Barth syndrome

XL (TAZ)

Episodic neutropenia, dilated cardiomyopathy, methylglutaconic
aciduria

Pearson syndrome

Mitochondrial (DNA deletions)

Episodic neutropenia, pancytopenia; defects in exocrine
pancreas, liver, and kidneys

NEUTROPENIA IN DISORDERS OF IMMUNE FUNCTION
Common variable
Familial, sporadic (TNFRSF13B)
immunodeficiency

Hypogammaglobulinemia, other immune system defects

IgA deficiency

Unknown (Unknown or TNFRSF13B)

Decreased IgA

Severe combined
immunodeficiency

AR, XL (multiple loci)

Absent humoral and cellular immune function

Hyper-­IgM syndrome

XL (HIGM1)

Absent IgG, elevated IgM, autoimmune cytopenias

WHIM syndrome

AD (CXCR4)

Warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, myelokathexis

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia

AR (RMRP)

Lymphopenia, short-­limbed dwarfism, metaphyseal
chondrodysplasia, fine sparse hair

Schimke immunoosseous dysplasia

AR (SMARCAL1)

Lymphopenia, pancytopenia, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia,
growth retardation, renal failure

X-­linked agammaglobulinemia

XL (Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK))

Agammaglobulinemia, neutropenia in ∼25%

GATA2 haploinsufficiency

AD (GATA2)

Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, lymphedema,
monocytopenia, decreased B and NK cells, risk for severe
fungal/mycobacterial/viral infections, susceptibility to
leukemia/MDS, MonoMAC syndrome

AD, Autosomal dominant; AML, acute myelogenous leukemia; ANC, absolute neutrophil count; AR, autosomal recessive; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; MDS, myelodysplastic
syndrome; NK, natural killer; XL, X-­linked.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1310 Part XII u Immunology
TCIRG1 2%
VPS13B 2%
WAS 2%

CXCR4 2%
Other variants*
6%

TAZ 4%
G6PT 12%

ELANE 45%

SBDS 14%

Digenic/
multiple 2%

HAX1 7%
G6PC3 2%

More than 95% of SCN patients respond to filgrastim (G-­CSF)
treatment with an increase in the ANC and a decrease in infections. Doses required to achieve an ANC >1,000/μL vary greatly. A
starting dose of filgrastim at 5 μg/kg/day is recommended; the dose
should be gradually increased, if necessary, to as high as 100 μg/kg/
day to attain an ANC of 1,000-­2,000/μL. The 5% of patients who do
not respond to filgrastim or who require high doses (>8 μg/kg/day)
should be considered for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT). Along with infections, patients with SCN are at risk for
developing MDS associated with monosomy 7 and AML. For this
reason, regular monitoring with blood counts and yearly bone marrow surveillance, including karyotyping and fluorescence in situ
hybridization, should be performed on all SCN patients. Although
clonal cytogenetic abnormalities may spontaneously remit, their
appearance should be considered a strong indication for HSCT,
which is much more likely to be successful before progression to
MDS/AML.

Disorders of Molecular Processing

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome (SDS) is an autosomal recessive
disorder classically characterized by neutropenia, pancreatic insufficiency, and short stature with skeletal abnormalities. SDS is most
commonly caused by pro-­apoptotic pathologic variants of the SBDS
gene, which encodes a protein that plays a role in ribosome biogenesis and RNA processing. The initial symptoms are usually steatorrhea and failure to thrive because of malabsorption secondary
to pancreatic insufficiency, which usually develops by 4 months of
age, although the gastrointestinal symptoms may be subtle in some
patients and go unrecognized. Patients have also been reported to
have respiratory problems with frequent otitis media, pneumonia,
and eczema. Virtually all patients with SDS have neutropenia, with
the ANC periodically <1,000/μL. Some children have hypogammaglobulinemia, defects in chemotaxis, or a reduction in the number
or function of B, T, and natural killer (NK) cells that may contribute to the increased susceptibility to pyogenic infection. The diagnosis of SDS is based on clinical phenotype; approximately 90% of
patients have pathologic variants identified in SBDS with additional
disease-­
causing variants now recently discovered in DNAJC21,
EFL1, and SRP54. SDS may progress to bone marrow hypoplasia
or MDS/AML; identification of increasing TP53 variants or cytogenetic abnormalities, particularly isochromosome i(7q) and del(20q),
often precede conversion to MDS, so routine bone marrow monitoring is warranted. Treatment includes pancreatic enzyme replacement, plus G-­CSF in patients with severe neutropenia.
Telomere biology disorders (TBDs), including dyskeratosis
congenita, are disorders of telomere length that most often present

Fig. 171.1 Genes with germline variants associated
with severe congenital neutropenia. Data based on 650
patients with severe congenital neutropenia registered in
the European and North American Branches of the Severe
Chronic Neutropenia International Registry. *Pathogenic
variants in JAGN1, LAMTOR2, GFI1, LYST, USB1, or mitochondrial DNA. (From Skokowa J, Dale DC, Touw IP, Zeidler C, Welte K. Severe congenital neutropenias. Nat Rev
Dis Primers. 2017;3:17032. Fig. 3.)

as bone marrow failure rather than isolated neutropenia. Various
pathologic variants have now been identified to cause such conditions (see Table 171.6), including alterations in ACD, PARN, DKC1,
RTEL1, TERC, and TERT. Moreover, the classic phenotype includes
nail dystrophy, leukoplakia, malformed teeth, and reticulated
hyperpigmentation of the skin, although many patients, particularly
young ones, do not exhibit these clinical features. Pulmonary and
hepatic fibrosis is also a concern in individuals with TBDs. Patients
are at risk for not only hematologic dysplasia/malignancy but additionally neoplasms involving the gastrointestinal tract, skin, and
head and neck. Early and routine screening for these malignancies
can be lifesaving.

Vesicular Trafficking Disorders

This group of rare primary immunodeficiency syndromes (see Table
171.6) derives from autosomal recessive defects in the biogenesis or
trafficking of lysosomes and related endosomal organelles. The syndromes share phenotypic characteristics, including defects in melanosomes contributing to partial albinism, abnormal platelet function, and
immunologic defects involving not only neutrophil number, but also
the function of neutrophils, B lymphocytes, NK cells, and cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. The syndromes share a high risk of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) as a result of defects in T and NK cells.
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome has characteristic giant cytoplasmic
granules in neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes, and is a disorder of subcellular vesicular dysfunction caused by pathologic variants
in the LYST gene, with resultant giant granules in all granule-­bearing
cells. Patients have increased susceptibility to infections, mild bleeding diathesis, progressive peripheral neuropathy, and predisposition to
life-­threatening HLH. The only curative treatment is HSCT, but transplant does not treat all aspects of the disorder.
Griscelli syndrome type II also features neutropenia, partial albinism, and a high risk of HLH, but peripheral blood granulocytes do
not show giant granules. Patients often have hypogammaglobulinemia.
The disorder is caused by alterations in RAB27a, which encodes a small
guanosine triphosphatase that regulates granule secretory pathways.
The only curative treatment is HSCT.

Disorders of Metabolism

Recurrent infections with neutropenia are a distinctive feature of glycogen storage disease (GSD) type Ib. As in classic von Gierke disease
(GSDIa), glycogen storage in GSDIb causes massive hepatomegaly and
severe growth retardation. Pathologic variants in glucose-­6-­phosphate
transporter 1, G6PT1, inhibit glucose transport in GSDIb, resulting in
both defective neutrophil motility and increased apoptosis associated
with neutropenia and recurrent bacterial infections. Treatment with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 171 u Leukopenia

1311

Table 171.7  Main Organ Associated Features and Genetic Subtypes of Congenital Neutropenia
HEMATOLOGIC OR ASSOCIATED
FEATURES

SYSTEM
Blood/bone marrow
maturation

DISEASE

GENE

Maturation arrest

Severe congenital neutropenia
Severe congenital neutropenia
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Neutropenia G6PC3
G-­CSF receptor

ELANE
HAX1
WAS
G6PC3
Extracellular domain of CSF3R

No maturation arrest

GSDIb
WHIM
Shwachman Diamond disease
Cohen disease
Hermansky-­Pudlak type 2

G6PT1
CXCR4
SBDS
VPS13B
AP3B1

Myelokathexis

WHIM

CXCR4

Pancreas

External pancreatic insufficiency

Shwachman Diamond disease

SBDS

Eyes

Congenital cataract

Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth

Dynamin 2

Retinochoroidal dystrophy

Cohen disease

VPS13B

Heart: arrhythmias

Neutropenia G6PC3

G6PC3

Dilated cardiomyopathy

Barth diseases

TAZ

Cardiomyopathy

Shwachman Diamond disease

SBDS

Various cardiac abnormalities

Shwachman Diamond disease
WHIM
Neutropenia G6PC3

SBDS
CXCR4
G6PC3

Skin xerosis eczema

Shwachman Diamond disease

SBDS

Skin: prominent superficial veins

Neutropenia G6PC3

G6PC3

Skin poikiloderma

SCN with poikiloderma type Clericuzio

16ORF57

Skin: Partial or complete albinism

Hermansky-­Pudlak type 2
AP14 defect
Chédiak Higashi disease
Griscelli disease

AP3B1
AP14
LYST
RAB27A

Hair: fine, sparse, and light-­colored

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia

RMRP

Metaphyseal dysplasia

Shwachman Diamond disease
Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia

SBDS
RMRP

Facial dysmorphia

Cohen disease

VPS13B

Central nervous
system

Mental retardation

Kostmann disease
Shwachman Diamond disease
Cohen disease

HAX1
SBDS
VPS13B

Muscle

Weakness

Neutropenia G6PC3
Axonal Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease

G6PC3
Dynamin 2

Metabolic pathway

Fasting intolerance and glycogenosis

Glycogen storage disease type Ib

SLC37A4

Inner ear

Inner ear defect

GFI 1/severe chronic neutropenia
Reticular dysgenesia

GFI1
AK2

Urogenital tract

Uropathy

Neutropenia G6PC3

G6PC3

Cryptorchidism

Cohen disease
Neutropenia G6PC3

VPS13B
G6PC3

Heart

Skin

Bone

G-­CSF, Granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor; SCN, severe congenital neutropenia; WHIM, warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, myelokathexis.
From Donadieu J, Fenneteau O, Beaupain B, Mahlaoui N, Chantelot CB. Congenital neutropenia: diagnosis, molecular bases and patient management. Orphanet J Rare Dis.
2011;6:26. Table 2.

G-­CSF can correct the neutropenia but does not correct the underlying
functional neutrophil defects.

haploinsufficiency, and a number of even rarer immunodeficiency disorders (see Table 171.6).

Neutropenia in Disorders of Immune Dysfunction

Unclassified Neutropenic Disorders

Congenital immunologic disorders that have severe neutropenia as a
clinical feature include XLA, CVID, the severe combined immunodeficiencies (SCIDs), autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome,
hyperimmunoglobulin M syndrome, WHIM (warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, myelokathexis) syndrome, GATA2

Chronic benign neutropenia of childhood represents a common
group of disorders characterized by mild to moderate neutropenia that
does not lead to an increased risk of pyogenic infections. Spontaneous remissions are often reported, although these may represent misdiagnosis of AIN of infancy, in which remissions often occur during

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1312 Part XII u Immunology
Table 171.8  Causes of Lymphocytopenia
ACQUIRED
Infectious diseases

AIDS, hepatitis, influenza, sepsis,
tuberculosis, typhoid, COVID-­19

Iatrogenic

Corticosteroids, cytotoxic
chemotherapy, high-­dose PUVA,
immunosuppressive therapy,
radiation, thoracic duct drainage/
chylothorax

Systemic diseases

Hodgkin disease, lupus
erythematosus, myasthenia gravis,
protein-­losing enteropathy, renal
failure, sarcoidosis

Other

Aplastic anemia, dietary deficiencies,
thermal injury

INHERITED
Aplasia of lymphopoietic
stem cells

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia, ataxia-­
telangiectasia, SCID, thymoma,
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome

PUVA, Psoralen and ultraviolet A irradiation; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency.

childhood. Chronic benign neutropenia may be sporadic or inherited
in either dominant or recessive form. Because of the relatively low risk
of serious infection, patients usually do not require any therapy.
Idiopathic chronic neutropenia is characterized by the onset of
neutropenia after 2 years of age, with no identifiable etiology. Patients
with an ANC persistently <500/μL may have recurrent pyogenic infections involving the skin, mucous membranes, lungs, and lymph nodes.
Bone marrow examination reveals variable patterns of myeloid formation with arrest generally occurring between the myelocyte and band
forms. The diagnosis overlaps with chronic benign and AINs.

Treatment

The management of acquired transient neutropenia associated with
malignancies, myelosuppressive chemotherapy, or immunosuppressive chemotherapy differs from that of congenital or chronic forms of
neutropenia. In the former situation, infections sometimes are heralded only by fever, and sepsis is a major cause of death. Early recognition and treatment of infections may be lifesaving. Therapy of severe
chronic neutropenia is dictated by the clinical manifestations. Patients
with benign neutropenia and no evidence of repeated bacterial infections or chronic gingivitis require no specific therapy. Superficial infections in children with mild to moderate neutropenia may be treated
with appropriate oral antibiotics. In patients who have invasive or life-­
threatening infections, broad-­spectrum intravenous antibiotics should
be started promptly.
Subcutaneously administered G-­CSF can provide effective treatment
of severe chronic neutropenia, including SCN, cyclic neutropenia, and
chronic symptomatic idiopathic neutropenias. Treatment leads to dramatic increases in neutrophil counts, resulting in marked attenuation of
infection and inflammation. Doses range from 2-­5 μg/kg/day for cyclic,
idiopathic, and AINs, to 5-­100 μg/kg/day for SCN. The long-­term effects
of G-­CSF therapy include a propensity for the development of moderate
splenomegaly, reduced bone density, thrombocytopenia, and rarely vasculitis; only patients with SCN are at risk for MDS/AML.

Patients with SCN or SDS who develop MDS or AML respond only
to HSCT; chemotherapy is ineffective. HSCT is also the treatment of
choice for aplastic anemia or familial HLH.

LYMPHOPENIA

The definition of lymphopenia, as with neutropenia, is age dependent
and can have acquired or inherited causes. The absolute lymphocyte
count (ALC) is determined by multiplying the total WBC count by the
percentage of total lymphocytes. For children <12 months old, lymphopenia is defined as an ALC <3,000 cells/μL. For older children and
adults, an ALC <1,000 cells/μL is considered lymphopenia. In isolation, mild to moderate lymphopenia is generally a benign condition
often detected only in the evaluation of other illnesses. However, severe
lymphopenia can result in serious, life-­threatening illness. Lymphocyte
subpopulations can be measured by flow cytometry, which uses the
pattern of lymphocyte antigen expression to quantitate and classify T,
B, and NK cells.

Acquired Lymphopenia

Acute lymphopenia is most often a result of infection and/or is iatrogenic from lymphocyte-­toxic medications and treatments (Table
171.8). Microbial causes include viruses (e.g., respiratory syncytial
virus, cytomegalovirus, influenza, measles, hepatitis, COVID-­19), bacterial infections (e.g., tuberculosis, typhoid fever, histoplasmosis, brucellosis), and malaria. The mechanisms behind infection-­associated
lymphopenia are not fully elucidated but probably include lymphocyte
redistribution and accelerated apoptosis. Corticosteroids are a common cause of medication-­induced lymphopenia, as are lymphocyte-­
specific immunosuppressive agents (e.g., antilymphocyte globulin,
alemtuzumab, rituximab), chemotherapy drugs, and radiation. In
most cases, infectious and iatrogenic causes of acute lymphopenia
are reversible, although full lymphocyte recovery from chemotherapy
and lymphocyte-­specific immunosuppressive agents may take several
months to years. Prolonged lymphopenia (see Table 171.8) may be
caused by recurrent infection, persistent infections (mostly notably
HIV), malnutrition, mechanical loss of lymphocytes through protein-­
losing enteropathy or thoracic duct leaks, or systemic diseases such as
lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, renal failure,
lymphoma, and aplastic anemia.

Inherited Lymphopenia

Primary immunodeficiencies and bone marrow failure syndromes
are the main cause of inherited lymphopenia in children (see Table
171.8). Primary immunodeficiency may result in a severe quantitative
defect, as in XLA and SCID, or a qualitative or progressive defect, as
in Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome and CVID. XLA is characterized by a
near-­absence of mature B cells because of a pathologic alteration in
BTK that results in a dysfunctional tyrosine kinase. SCIDs are a genetically heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by abnormalities
of thymopoiesis and T-­cell maturation. Newborn screening for severe
T-­cell deficiency, by analysis of T-­cell receptor excision circles (TRECs)
from dried blood spot Guthrie cards, aids in the rapid identification
and treatment of infants with SCID and other T-­cell disorders. Quantitative defects in lymphocytes can also be appreciated in select forms of
inherited bone marrow failure such as reticular dysgenesis, SCN secondary to GFI1 variants, and dyskeratosis congenita.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 172 u Leukocytosis 1313

Chapter 172

Leukocytosis
Thomas F. Michniacki and
Kelly J. Walkovich
Leukocytosis is an elevation in the total leukocyte or white blood cell
(WBC) count that is 2 standard deviations (SDs) above the mean for
age. It is most often caused by elevated numbers of neutrophils (i.e.,
neutrophilia), although marked increases in monocytes, eosinophils,
basophils, and lymphocytes can be seen. Before extensive evaluation, it
is important to assess for spurious elevations in the WBC count caused
by platelet clumping (secondary to insufficient sample anticoagulation
or the presence of EDTA-­dependent agglutinins), high numbers of circulating nucleated red blood cells (RBCs), and the presence of cryoglobulins by review of the peripheral smear.
Malignancy, namely leukemia and lymphoma, is a primary concern
for patients with leukocytosis. For discussion of WBC elevation caused
by immature leukocytes in acute and chronic leukemias, see Chapter
544. Nonmalignant WBC counts exceeding 50,000/μL have historically been termed a leukemoid reaction. Unlike leukemia, leukemoid
reactions show relatively small proportions of immature myeloid cells,
consisting largely of band forms, occasional metamyelocytes, and progressively rarer myelocytes, promyelocytes, and blasts. Leukemoid
reactions are most often neutrophilic and are frequently associated
with severe bacterial infections, including shigellosis, salmonellosis,
and meningococcemia; physiologic stressors; and certain medications.
The presence of a left shift, defined as having >5% immature neutrophils in the peripheral blood, is consistent with marrow stress.
Higher degrees of left shift with more immature neutrophil precursors
are indicative of serious bacterial infections and may be a dire sign of
depletion of the bone marrow reserve pool of neutrophils. Marked left
shift may occasionally be encountered with trauma, burns, surgery,
acute hemolysis, or hemorrhage.

NEUTROPHILIA

Neutrophilia is an increase in the total number of blood neutrophils
that is 2 SD above the mean count for age. Elevated absolute neutrophil counts represent disturbances of the normal equilibrium involving bone marrow neutrophil production, migration out of the marrow
compartments into the circulation, and neutrophil destruction. Neutrophilia may arise either alone or in combination with enhanced
mobilization into the circulating pool from either the bone marrow
storage compartment or the peripheral blood marginating pool, by
impaired neutrophil egress into tissues, or by expansion of the circulating neutrophil pool secondary to increased granulopoiesis. Myelocytes
are not released to the blood except under extreme circumstances.

Acute Acquired Neutrophilia

Neutrophilia is usually an acquired, secondary finding associated
with inflammation, infection, injury, or an acute physical or emotional stressor (Table 172.1). Bacterial infections, trauma (especially
with hemorrhage), and surgery are among the most common causes
encountered in clinical practice. Neutrophilia may also be associated
with heat stroke, burns, diabetic ketoacidosis, vaccines, pregnancy, or
cigarette use.
Drugs commonly associated with neutrophilia include epinephrine,
corticosteroids, and recombinant growth factors such as recombinant
human granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (G-­CSF) and recombinant human granulocyte-­
macrophage colony-­
stimulating factor
(GM-­CSF). Epinephrine causes release into the circulation of a sequestered pool of neutrophils that normally marginate along the vascular
endothelium. Corticosteroids accelerate the release of neutrophils and
bands from a large storage pool within the bone marrow and impair

the migration of neutrophils from the circulation into tissues. G-­CSF
and GM-­CSF cause acute and chronic neutrophilia by mobilizing cells
from the marrow reserves and stimulating neutrophil production.
Acute neutrophilia in response to inflammation and infections
occurs because of release of neutrophils from the marrow storage pool.
The postmitotic marrow neutrophil pools are approximately 10 times
the size of the blood neutrophil pool, and about half of these cells are
bands and segmented neutrophils. Exposure of blood to foreign substances such as hemodialysis membrane activates the complement
system and causes transient neutropenia, followed by neutrophilia secondary to release of bone marrow neutrophils. Reactive neutrophils
often have toxic granulation and Döhle bodies present.

Chronic Acquired Neutrophilia

Chronic acquired neutrophilia is usually associated with continued
stimulation of neutrophil production resulting from persistent inflammatory reactions or chronic infections (e.g., tuberculosis), vasculitis,
postsplenectomy states, Hodgkin disease, chronic myelogenous leukemia, chronic blood loss, sickle cell disease, some chronic hemolytic
anemias, and prolonged administration of corticosteroids (see Table
172.1). Chronic neutrophilia can arise after expansion of cell production secondary to stimulation of cell divisions within the mitotic
precursor pool, which consists of promyelocytes and myelocytes. Subsequently, the size of the postmitotic pool increases. These changes
lead to an increase in the marrow reserve pool, which can be readily
mobilized for release of neutrophils into the circulation. The neutrophil production rate can increase greatly in response to exogenously
administered hematopoietic growth factors, such as G-­CSF, with a
maximum response taking at least 1 week to develop.

Lifelong Neutrophilia

Congenital or acquired asplenia is associated with lifelong neutrophilia. Some patients with trisomy 21 also have neutrophilia. Uncommon genetic disorders that present with neutrophilia include leukocyte
function disorders such as leukocyte adhesion deficiency and Rac2
deficiency (see Chapter 170) and systemic disorders such as familial
cold urticaria, periodic fever syndromes, and familial myeloproliferative disease (see Table 172.1). Rare patients with an autosomal dominant hereditary neutrophilia have been reported.
Evaluation of persistent neutrophilia requires a careful history,
physical examination, and laboratory studies to search for infectious,
inflammatory, and neoplastic conditions. The leukocyte alkaline
phosphatase score of circulating neutrophils can differentiate chronic
myelogenous leukemia, in which the level is uniformly almost zero,
from reactive or secondary neutrophilia, which features normal to
elevated levels.

ADDITIONAL FORMS OF LEUKOCYTOSIS
Monocytosis

The average absolute blood monocyte count varies with age, which
must be considered in the assessment of monocytosis. Given the role of
monocytes in antigen presentation and cytokine secretion and as effectors of ingestion of invading organisms, it is not surprising that many
clinical disorders give rise to monocytosis (Table 172.2). Typically,
monocytosis occurs in patients recovering from myelosuppressive chemotherapy and is a harbinger of the return of the neutrophil count to
normal. Monocytosis is occasionally a sign of an acute bacterial, viral,
protozoal, or rickettsial infection and may also occur in some forms of
chronic neutropenia and postsplenectomy states. Chronic inflammatory conditions can stimulate sustained monocytosis, as can preleukemia, chronic myelogenous leukemia, and lymphomas.

Eosinophilia

Eosinophilia is defined as an absolute eosinophil count >1500 cells/μL.
The majority of eosinophilic conditions are reactive, including infections (especially parasitic diseases), connective tissue disorders, allergic
and hyperinflammatory diseases, pulmonary disorders, and dermatologic conditions (see Chapter 169). Drug reaction with eosinophilia
and systemic symptoms (DRESS) is a particularly important condition

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1314 Part XII u Immunology
Table 172.1  Causes of Neutrophilia
TYPE

CAUSE

Acute acquired

EXAMPLE

Bacterial infections
Neutrophil disorder

Leukocyte adhesion defects

Surgery

Chronic acquired

Lifelong

Acute stress

Burns, diabetic ketoacidosis, heat stroke, postneutropenia rebound,
exercise

Drugs

Corticosteroids, epinephrine, hematopoietic growth factors, lithium

Chronic inflammation

Inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis, vasculitis, cigarette
exposure

Persistent infection

Tuberculosis

Persistent stress

Chronic blood loss, hypoxia, sickle cell and other chronic hemolytic
anemias

Drugs

Corticosteroids, lithium; rarely ranitidine, quinidine

Other

Postsplenectomy, tumors, Hodgkin disease, pregnancy, Sweet syndrome

Congenital asplenia
Hereditary disorders

Table 172.2  Causes of Monocytosis
CAUSE

EXAMPLE

Infections
Bacterial

Brucellosis, subacute bacterial
endocarditis, syphilis,
tuberculosis, typhoid

Nonbacterial

Fungal infections, kala-­azar,
malaria, Rocky Mountain
spotted fever, typhus

Hematologic disorders

Congenital and acquired
neutropenias, hemolytic
anemias

Malignant disorders

Acute myelogenous leukemia,
chronic myelogenous leukemia,
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia,
Hodgkin disease, non-­Hodgkin
lymphomas, preleukemia

Chronic inflammatory diseases

Inflammatory bowel disease,
polyarteritis nodosa, rheumatoid
arthritis, sarcoidosis, systemic
lupus erythematosus

Miscellaneous

Cirrhosis, drug reaction,
postsplenectomy, recovery from
bone marrow suppression

Familial cold urticaria, hereditary neutrophilia, leukocyte adhesion
deficiencies, periodic fever syndromes

to consider in those with prominent eosinophilia as severe cases are
associated with significant morbidity and mortality (see Chapter
686.2). Hypereosinophilic syndrome and systemic mastocytosis are
additional important causes of an elevated eosinophil count. However,
persistent eosinophilia can also herald a malignancy such as leukemia,
lymphoma, or carcinoma.

Basophilia

Basophilia is defined as an absolute basophil count >120 cells/μL. Basophilia is a nonspecific sign of a wide variety of disorders and is usually
of limited diagnostic importance. Basophilia is most often present in
hypersensitivity reactions and frequently accompanies the leukocytosis
of chronic myeloid leukemia.

Lymphocytosis

The most common cause of lymphocytosis is an acute viral illness, as
part of the normal T-­cell response to the infection. In infectious mononucleosis, the B cells are infected with the Epstein-­Barr virus, and the T
cells react to the viral antigens present in the B cells, resulting in atypical
lymphocytes with characteristic large, vacuolated morphology. Other
viral infections classically associated with lymphocytosis are cytomegalovirus and viral hepatitis. Chronic bacterial infections such as tuberculosis and brucellosis may lead to a sustained lymphocytosis. Pertussis is
accompanied by marked lymphocytosis in approximately 25% of infants
infected before 6 months of age. Thyrotoxicosis and Addison disease are
endocrine disorders associated with lymphocytosis. Persistent or pronounced lymphocytosis suggests acute lymphocytic leukemia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 173 u Complement System

Section 4

Complement
System
Chapter 173

Complement System
Anete Sevciovic Grumach
173.1 Complement Components, Pathways,
and Evaluation
Anete Sevciovic Grumach
The complement system (CS) forms a network of soluble and cell surface–bound components, pattern-­recognition proteins (PRPs), proteases, receptors, effectors, and regulators to perform multiple sensor
and effector functions as part of the innate immune system (Tables
173.1 and 173.2). It represents an essential part of immunity, having a
major role in host defense against pathogens, homeostasis, and inflammation, such as promoting phagocytic removal of senescent cells,
molecular debris, and weak or superfluous synapses during brain formation. Complement acts not only in the extracellular space but also
within cells and subcellular compartments, where it is involved in the
regulation of basic processes of the cell, suggesting that complement
directs both innate and adaptive immune responses. Cells are generally
protected from amplification and effector insult by a group of complement regulators, which are expressed on their surface or mobilized
from the circulation. However, if the equilibrium between complement
activation and regulation is disturbed, complement can harm the host
and precipitate or worsen adverse processes that result in diseases.
Circulating complement proteases are zymogens and, once activated, they initiate an amplification cascade through cleavage of specific targets and/or interaction with other proteins. Depending on the
activating surface, the CS can be triggered by the classical (CP), lectin (LP), and alternative (AP) pathways. Each pathway is triggered
by different interactions. The CP is initiated by immune complexes
through binding of complement protein C1q to immune complexes
containing IgM or IgG, in solution or bound to antigens on the cell
surface. Certain bacteria, RNA viruses, and the lipid A component
of bacterial endotoxin as pathogen-­associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) on microbial surfaces can activate C1q directly and trigger
the full complement cascade. The LP is activated when mannose-­
binding lectin (MBL), or ficolins, recognize unique carbohydrate

Table 173.1  Nomenclature for Complement Components
EXAMPLES

1315

structures present on the surface of pathogens or altered glycosylation
patterns (DAMPs, danger-associated molecular patterns) on abnormal
host cells. The mannose-­binding lectin-­associated serine proteases
(MASPs) cleave C2 and C4, following the same sequence as CP.
The AP is rapidly activated after contact with pathogens, independent
of antibody; however, antibody will accelerate the rate of activation. The
fluid phase C3 convertase complex C3(H2O)Bb is generated with the
spontaneous hydrolysis of C3, referred to as “tick over.” An amplification loop leads to rapid opsonization stabilized by properdin. Therefore
each of these pathways converge toward the cleavage of the abundant
plasma protein C3 by a C3 convertase, followed by the formation of a
C5 convertase, which cleaves C5 into C5a and C5b, and induces the activation of the common lytic effector terminal pathway (TP). The interaction among C5b, C6, C7, C8, and C9 is nonenzymatic and depends
on changes in molecular configuration. The subsequent insertion of TP
components into the cell wall leads to lysis via the membrane attack
complex (MAC), which is composed of complement proteins C5b to C9.
Cell membrane receptors bind complement components or fragments
to mediate complement activity, and a large array of serum and membrane regulatory proteins control the activation of CS (Fig. 173.1). The
circulating components and regulators together comprise approximately
15% of the globulin fraction and 4% of the total serum proteins. The
normal concentrations of serum complement components vary by age;
newborn infants have mild to moderate deficiencies of all components.

CLASSICAL AND LECTIN PATHWAYS

The CP sequence begins with fixation of C1, by way of C1q, to the Fc non–
antigen-­binding part of the antibody molecule after antigen-­antibody
interaction. On binding, the C1 complex changes conformation, activating the C1r and C1s protease subunits; the C1s subcomponent becomes
an active enzyme, C1 esterase. The activation leads to cleavage of C2 and
C4 and the formation of the CP C3 convertase (C4bC2a).
As part of the innate immune response, broadly reactive “natural” antibodies and C-­reactive protein (CRP), which react with carbohydrates from microorganisms and with dying cells, can substitute
for specific antibodies in the fixation of C1q and initiate reaction of
the entire sequence. Endogenous substances, including uric acid
crystals, amyloid deposits, DNA, and components of damaged cells,
such as apoptotic blebs and mitochondrial membranes, can activate
C1q directly. In this case, however, the ligand-­C1q complex interacts
strongly with the inhibitor’s C4-­binding protein and factor H, allowing
some C3-­mediated opsonization and phagocytosis but limiting the
full inflammatory response typically triggered by microbes.
Table 173.2  Components of Complement System
SERUM COMPONENTS THAT ARE THE CORE OF THE
COMPLEMENT SYSTEM
Classical pathway: C1q, C1r, C1s, C4, C2, C3
Alternative pathway: factor B, factor D
Lectin pathway: Mannose-­binding lectin (MBL), ficolins 1/2/3, MBL-­
associated serine proteases (MASPs) 1/2/3
Membrane attack complex: C5, C6, C7, C8, C9
Regulatory protein, enhancing: properdin
Regulatory proteins, downregulating: C1 inhibitor (C1-­INH), C4-­
binding protein (C4-­bp), factor H, factor I, vitronectin, clusterin,
carboxypeptidase N (anaphylatoxin inactivator)

Classical pathway components are labeled
with a C and a number

C1, C2, C4

Alternative pathway components are lettered

B, P, D

Some components are called factors

Factor B, factor D

Activated components or complexes have a
bar over to indicate activation

C4bC2a

MEMBRANE REGULATORY PROTEINS
CR1 (CD35), membrane cofactor protein (MCP; CD46), decay-­
accelerating factor (DAF, CD55), CD59 (membrane inhibitor of
reactive lysis)

Cleavage fragments are designated with a
small letter

C3a, C3b

MEMBRANE RECEPTORS
CR1 (CD35), CR2 (CD21), CR3 (CD11b/CD18), CR4 (CD11c/CD18)

Cell membrane receptor

CR1, CR2, CR3, CR4

C3a receptor, C5a receptor, C1q receptors, complement receptor of
the immunoglobulin superfamily (CRIg)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1316 Part XII u Immunology
lgM, lgG
Immune complexes

Mannose rich surface
in microbials

Bacteria, bacterial
toxin, thick over

Classical pathway

Lectin pathway

Alternative pathway

C1q, C1r, C1s

MBL, ficolins, MASP

C3

C1-INH

C3a
C4-bp,
Factor I

C4, C2

C3a

Factor B
Ba
Bb

C4bC2a
C3 convertase

C3b

Factor H+I

C3b
Properdin

C3

Factor D

C3bBb
C3 convertase
Factor H+I
CD55 (DAF)
MCP
CR1
CRIg

C3
C3b

C3a

(C3b)2Bb
C5 convertase

C4bC2aC3b
C5 convertase
C5
Protein S

CD59
C5a
C5b-9 (MAC)

Fig. 173.1 Activation and control of the complement system. C1-INH,
C1 inhibitor; C4-­bp, C4-­binding protein; CD59, cell membrane–associated
protein; CR1 (CD35), complement receptor 1; CRIg, complement receptor of the immunoglobulin superfamily; DAF, CD55, decay-­accelerating
factor; MASP, mannose-­binding lectin–associated serine protease; MAC,
membrane attack complex; MCP, membrane cofactor protein.

C1q synthesized in the brain and retina fixes to superfluous synapses, which then can be cleared through C1q receptors on microglia,
clearing the way for fresh synapses to populate the developing nervous
system.
Recognition molecules in the LP are MBL, ficolins, or collectins
(CL-­11 or kidney collectin or CL-­K1; CL-­10, collectin liver 1). MBL is
the prototype of the collectin family of carbohydrate-­binding proteins
(lectins) that play an important part in innate, nonspecific immunity;
its structure is homologous to that of C1q. Three ficolins have been
identified in humans: L-­ficolin (ficolin-­2), H-­ficolin (ficolin-­3), and
M-­ficolin (ficolin-­1). Ficolins show specificity for N-­acetylglucosamine
residues in complex oligosaccharides, but not for mannose or high-­
mannose-­
type oligosaccharides. Individual members display additional specificities, e.g., H-­ficolin binds to N-­acetyl-­d-­galactosamine
and d-­fucose, M-­ficolin binds to sialic acid, and L-­ficolin recognizes
lipoteichoic acid and 1,3-­β-­d-­glucan, the major component of yeast
and fungal cell walls. These lectins, in association with MASP-­1, -­2,
and -­3, can bind to mannose, lipoteichoic acid, and other carbohydrates on the surface of bacteria, fungi, parasites, and viruses. There,
MASPs then function like C1s to cleave C4 and C2 and activate the
complement cascade. The peptide C4a has weak anaphylatoxin activity and reacts with mast cells to release the chemical mediators of
immediate hypersensitivity, including histamine. The activation of C3
and C5 also liberates potent chemotactic fragments (i.e., the anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a) that recruit immune cells to the site of activation
and prime them. Fixation of C4b to the complex permits it to adhere
to neutrophils, macrophages, B cells, dendritic cells, and erythrocytes.
MASP-­2 can activate clotting by generating thrombin from prothrombin, which could prevent microbial spread.
Cleavage of C3 and generation of C3b is the next step in the sequence.
The serum concentration of C3 is the highest of any component, and its
activation is the most crucial step in terms of biologic activity. Cleavage
of C3 can be achieved through the C3 convertase of the CP, C142, or
of the AP, C3bBb. Once C3b is fixed to a complex or dead or dying host
cell, it can bind to cells with receptors for C3b (complement receptor
1, CR1), including B lymphocytes, erythrocytes, and phagocytic cells
(neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages). Efficient phagocytosis
of most microorganisms, especially by neutrophils, requires binding
of C3 to the microbe. The severe pyogenic infections that frequently
occur in C3-­deficient patients illustrate this point. The biologic activity

of C3b is controlled by cleavage by factor I to iC3b, which promotes
phagocytosis on binding to the iC3b receptor (CR3) on phagocytes.
Further degradation of iC3b by factor I and proteases yields C3dg, then
C3d; C3d binds to CR2 on B lymphocytes, thereby serving as a co-­
stimulator of antigen-­induced B-­cell activation.

ALTERNATIVE PATHWAY

The AP can be activated by C3b generated through CP activity or
proteases from neutrophils or the clotting system. It can also be activated by a form of C3 created by a low-­grade, spontaneous reaction of
native C3 with a molecule of water, or a tick over that occurs constantly
in plasma. Once formed, C3b or the hydrolyzed C3 can bind to any
nearby cell or to factor B. Factor B attached to C3b in the plasma or
on a surface can be cleaved to Bb by the circulating protease factor D.
The complex C3bBb becomes an efficient C3 convertase, which generates more C3b through an amplification loop. Properdin can bind to
C3bBb, increasing stability of the enzyme and protecting it from inactivation by factors I and H, which modulate the loop and the pathway.
Certain activating surfaces promote AP activation if C3b is fixed to
them, including bacterial teichoic acid and endotoxin, virally infected
cells, antigen–immunoglobulin A complexes, and cardiopulmonary
bypass and renal dialysis membranes. These surfaces act by protecting
the C3bBb enzyme from the control otherwise exercised by factors I
and H. Rabbit red blood cell (RBC) membrane is such a surface, which
serves as the basis for an assay of serum AP activity. Conversely, sialic
acid on the surface of microorganisms or cells prevents the formation
of an effective AP C3 convertase by promoting the activity of factors I
and H. Significant activation of C3 can occur through the AP, and the
resultant biologic activities are qualitatively the same as those achieved
through activation by C142.

MEMBRANE ATTACK COMPLEX

The sequence leading to cytolysis begins with the attachment of C5b
to the C5-­activating enzyme from the CP, C4b2a3b, or from the AP,
C3bBb3b. C6 is bound to C5b without being cleaved, stabilizing the
activated C5b fragment. The C5b6 complex then dissociates from C423
and reacts with C7. C5b67 complexes must attach promptly to the
membrane of the parent or a bystander cell, or they lose their activity.
Next, C8 binds, and the C5b678 complex then promotes the addition of
multiple C9 molecules. The C9 polymer of at least 3-­6 molecules forms
a transmembrane channel, and lysis ensues.

CONTROL MECHANISMS

Without control mechanisms acting at multiple points, there would be
unbridled consumption of components, which would generate severe,
potentially lethal host damage. Cells are generally protected from amplification and effector insult by a panel of complement regulators, which
are expressed on their surface or recruited from circulation At the first
step, C1 inhibitor (C1-­INH) inhibits C1r and C1s enzymatic activity
and thus the cleavage of C4 and C2. C1-­INH also inhibits MASP-­2, factors XIa and XIIa of the clotting system, and kallikrein of the contact
system. Activated C2 has a short half-­life, and this relative instability
limits the effective life of C42 and C423. The AP enzyme that activates
C3, C3bBb, also has a short half-­life, although it can be prolonged by the
binding of properdin to the enzyme complex. Properdin can also bind
directly to microbes and promote assembly of the AP C3 convertase.
The serum contains the enzyme carboxypeptidase N, which cleaves
the N-­
terminus arginine from C4a, C3a, and C5a, thereby limiting their biologic activity. Factor I inactivates C4b and C3b; factor
H accelerates inactivation of C3b by factor I; and an analogous factor, C4-­binding protein (C4-­bp), accelerates C4b cleavage by factor
I, thus limiting assembly of the C3 convertase. Three protein constituents of cell membranes (CR1, membrane cofactor protein [MCP],
and decay-­accelerating factor [DAF]) promote the disruption of C3
and C5 convertases assembled on those membranes. Another cell
membrane–associated protein, CD59, can bind C8 or both C8 and
C9, thereby interfering with the insertion of the MAC (C5b6789). The
serum proteins vitronectin and clusterin can inhibit attachment of the
C5b67 complex to cell membranes, bind C8 or C9 in a full MAC, or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 173 u Complement System
interfere with the formation or insertion of this complex. Vitronectin
also promotes macrophage uptake of dying neutrophils. The genes for
the regulatory proteins factor H, C4-­bp, MCP, DAF, CR1, and CR2 are
clustered on chromosome 1.

PARTICIPATION IN HOST DEFENSE

Neutralization of virus by antibody can be enhanced with C1 and C4
and further enhanced by the additional fixation of C3b through the
classical or alternative pathway. Complement may therefore be particularly important in the early phases of a viral infection when the
antibody titer is limited. Antibody and the full complement sequence
can also eliminate infectivity of at least some viruses by the production
of typical complement “holes,” as seen by electron microscopy. Fixation
of C1q can opsonize (promote phagocytosis) through binding to the
phagocyte C1q receptor.
C4a, C3a, and C5a can bind to mast cells and thereby trigger the
release of histamine and other mediators, leading to vasodilation and
the swelling and redness of inflammation. C5a can enhance macrophage
phagocytosis of C3b-­opsonized particles and induce macrophages to
release the cytokines tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-­1. C5a is
a major chemotactic factor for neutrophils, monocytes, and eosinophils, which can efficiently phagocytize microorganisms opsonized
with C3b or cleaved C3b (iC3b). Further inactivation of cell-­bound
C3b by cleavage to C3d and C3dg removes its opsonizing activity, but it
can still bind to B cells. Fixation of C3b to a target cell can enhance its
lysis by natural killer cells or macrophages (Fig. 173.2).
Insoluble immune complexes can be solubilized if they bind C3b,
apparently because C3b disrupts the orderly antigen-­antibody lattice.
Binding C3b to a complex also allows it to adhere to C3 receptors
(CR1) on RBCs, which then transport the complexes to hepatic and
splenic macrophages for removal. This phenomenon may at least partially explain the immune complex disease found in patients who lack
C1, C4, C2, or C3.
The CS serves to link the innate and adaptive immune systems.
C4b or C3b coupled to immune complexes promotes their binding to
antigen-­presenting macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells. The coupling of antigens to C3d allows binding to CR2 on B cells, which greatly
reduces the amount of antigen needed to trigger an antibody response.
Neutralization of endotoxin in vitro and protection from its lethal
effects in experimental animals require C1-­
INH and later-­
acting

Classical and lectin pathways
Lectin–MBL or
ficolin–MASP

C-CRP
AgAb

C1qrs

Dying cells

C1 C4
*

1317

components of complement, at least through C6. Activation of the
entire complement sequence can result in lysis of virus-­infected cells,
tumor cells, and most types of microorganisms. Bactericidal activity of complement has not appeared to be important to host defense,
except for the occurrence of Neisseria infections in patients lacking
later-­acting components of complement.

Complement Evaluation

Good quality blood sampling requires that after clotting (about 20-­120
minutes), the serum must be separated by centrifugation as soon as
possible, and stored under controlled conditions. In case complement
testing cannot be performed on the day of blood sampling, the serum
and plasma samples must be stored in a deep freezer (−20°C) for up to
3 months or in an ultra-­deep freezer (−70°C) for a longer storage until
analysis. If the analysis will be done by a specialized laboratory, the
samples must be shipped on dry ice by courier. Repeated freezing and
thawing should be avoided because of the risk of in vitro activation.
The serum is sufficient for the analysis of the total function of complement proteins and regulators as well as of autoantibodies. A quantitation of activation products requires the use of EDTA plasma because
it blocks the in vitro activation of the CS by way of its Mg2+ and Ca2+
complexing properties. Heparin and citrate are less useful. The utilization of the less invasive dried blood spot (DBS)-­based assays can also
be used for diagnosis; enzyme activities could be retained, facilitating
the samples’ transportation.
The indication for using assays for complement evaluation is to
detect genetic, acquired, or the effect of complement inhibitory therapy. Functional assays can screen and direct the following steps for the
evaluation of specific protein deficiencies (Fig. 173.3). Assays including
hemolysis of RBCs (CH50, AP50) check the activation of classical and
alternative pathways. In both cases, CH50 and AP50, the functional
result is the lytic destruction of erythrocytes on membrane insertion of
C5b-­9 (MAC). Low but not absent CH50 results could reflect complement consumption due to active immune complex disease, diminished
hepatic production due to liver disease, and immaturity of hepatic
production seen in young infants. Screening with hemolytic assays is
not adequate for C9, properdin, MBL, MASP-­2, or ficolin deficiencies. In
patients with these defects, the hemolytic assay value may be minimally
decreased or normal. An alternative assay, popular in Europe, is a plate-­
based activation assay, which more specifically detects complement

Alternative pathway

C2b
C14b
*

C2

C142a
*

C3

C4a*
Vascular
permeability

*
C3bBb(P)

C3 “activating surface”
C3b, B, D
P

*
C3a Vascular permeability

Opsonization,
clearance of
dying cells

C1423b*

C3bBbC3b*(P) Opsonization,
clearance of
dying cells
C5
C5a

Vascular permeability,
chemotaxis

Ag/Surface–C3b5b
C6
C7
C5b67*
*
C5b~9
Cytolysis

C8, C9

*
Reaction with
C5b67
bystander cells

Fig. 173.2 Sequence of activation

of the components of the classical
and lectin pathways of complement
and interaction with the alternative
pathway. Functional activities generated during activation are enclosed
in boxes. The multiple sites at which
inhibitory regulator proteins (not
shown) act are indicated by asterisks.
Ab, Antibody (immunoglobulin G
or M class); Ag, antigen (bacterium,
virus, tumor, or tissue cell); B, D, P,
factors B, D, and properdin; C-­CRP,
carbohydrate–carbohydrate-­reactive
protein; MBL, mannose-­binding lectin; MASP, MBL-­
associated serine
protease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1318 Part XII u Immunology
Table 173.3  The Steps for Complement System Evaluation

CH50

COMPLEMENT EVALUATION
AP50
LP

C1q, C1r,
C1s, C2, C4
deficiencies

Factor B,
Factor D
deficiencies

MBL,
MASP2
deficiencies

C3, C5, C6,
C7, C8
deficiencies

Fig. 173.3 Laboratory screening of complement system. LP, Lectin

pathway; MBL, mannose-­binding lectin; MASP, MBL-­associated serine
protease.

activation through CP, LP, and AP (“CS screen” test). Although the
result target of these enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs)
is principally the same as for the lytic assays, it is based on detecting
full assembly of C5b-­9 by using an antibody to a C9 neoantigen when
serum is added to microtiter wells coated with the activation agent for
the different pathways (e.g., IgM for CP, mannan for LP, and lipopolysaccharides for AP).
Once an abnormal CH50 or AP50 has been confirmed, immunochemical tests can be used to define the serum levels of specific
components, the second step for defining complement deficiencies.
Normal concentrations of single components do not exclude functional defects. The functional activity of a single component can be
tested. Sera depleted of the actual component and patient’s fresh serum
are mixed to see whether the activity can be restored by using hemolysis as a result. Reduced functional activity of individual complement
components either reflects a deficiency state, or indicates consuming
complement activation. To distinguish primary or acquired defects,
activation products generated by CS activation could be measured.
Different approaches can be applied for this aim: detection of split
fragments, generated after enzymatic cleavage of certain components,
e.g., C4 (C4a, C4b/c, C4d), C3 (C3a, C3b/c, iC3b, C3d), factor B (Ba,
Bb), and C5 (C5a), or the identification of protein complexes where
activated components are bound to their respective regulators, like
C1rs-­C1-­inhibitor, the properdin-­containing AP convertase, C3bBbP,
and sC5b-­9 (soluble terminal complement complex). Detection of
complement activation products like C3d and C4d on red cells using
flow cytometry has been used to evaluate in vivo complement activation
in autoimmune diseases and trauma. The terminal C5b-­9 complement
complex exists in two forms, the MAC and the soluble form (sC5b-­
9). The in vitro–generated surface-­bound C5b-­9 must not be confused
with sC5b-­9, which is found in plasma and if increased is a useful
marker of complement activation in vivo reflecting diseases with disturbed complement function. sC5b-­9 can be quantified by ELISA and
is based on the same C9 neoepitope principle. In the case of efficient C5
blockade, there should ideally be no sC5b-­9 present.
C4 levels have been used as a screening test for C1-­INH deficiency
in hereditary angioedema (HAE); this test does not substitute quantitative and/or functional evaluation of C1-­INH. C4 concentrations can
be within normal range between episodes in approximately 5–10% of
the patients. Also, a defective C1-­INH protein can reflect only a functional assay with normal quantitative values. Deficiency of factor I or
H permits persistence of the classical and alternative pathway convertase and thus consumption of C3, with reduction in the CH50 value. If
multiple components are decreased, it is possible that sample handling
was improper, a regulatory protein was deficient, or autoantibodies
were present. Flow cytometry is the standard technique for the diagnosis of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) by detecting
reduced levels of CD55 and CD59 on blood cells.
Autoantibodies to complement components could simulate deficiencies and assays for their detection would be relevant according
to clinical information. They are often associated with specific diseases, e.g., anti-­C1q antibody is associated with hypocomplementemic

EXAMPLES

Total complement activity

CH50, AP50, lectin pathway

Quantification of single
components

C3, C4, MBL, properdin

Functional activity of single
components

Functional C1 inhibitor

Products of complement
activation

C3d; C3dg

Autoantibodies to complement
components

Anti-­C1q; nephritic factor

Cell surface expression

CD55; CD59; CR3/4

Tissue deposition of
complement proteins or
fragments

Deposition of C3 or factor H in
injury burns

Genetic evaluation

Next generation sequencing or
specific gene panels

urticarial vasculitis and/or proliferative systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) nephritis.
Assessment of cell surface expression of receptors and tissue deposition of complement proteins or fragments are further steps for complement evaluation. Specific gene panels are another accessible tool that
could supply additional information (Table 173.3).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

173.2 Complement Pathway Deficiencies
Anete Sevciovic Grumach
Most genetically determined complement deficiencies are inherited in
an autosomal recessive fashion. Exceptions are properdin deficiency,
which is X-­linked, and C1-­INH deficiency, which is autosomal dominant. In most cases, it is possible to predict the effects of a particular
deficiency based on understanding the normal physiologic function of
that protein. Increased susceptibility to infections caused by encapsulated bacteria and autoimmunity are the most common presentations of complement deficiencies. Deficiency of components of TP and
properdin deficiency are associated with neisserial infections. When
there is an imbalance between complement activation and regulation,
complement can quickly attack the host and trigger and/or exacerbate
adverse processes that result in diseases and clinical complications.
Genetic variants in the complement factor H (CFH) and complement
factor I (CFI) genes have been associated with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) and aging macular degeneration (AMD). A
distinct clinical manifestation is described for deficiency of C1-­INH
causing recurrent angioedema.

CLASSICAL PATHWAY DEFICIENCIES

Patients deficient in the initial components of the CP are prone to autoimmune connective tissue diseases (Table 173.4). Most patients with primary C1q deficiency have SLE; some have SLE-­like syndrome without
typical SLE serology, a chronic rash with underlying vasculitis, or membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN). The association with
SLE is due to compromised clearance of apoptotic debris and impaired
B-­cell tolerance. Some C1q-­deficient children have serious infections,
including septicemia and meningitis. Only a few patients with inherited
deficiencies of C1r and C1s have been described. It is thought that neither component is stable without the other so that a pathogenic variant
in one often leads to diminished levels of both. Glomerulonephritis and
lupus have been reported in C1r/C1s-­deficient patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 173 u Complement System

1319

Table 173.4  Pathway Deficiencies of Complement System
DEFICIENCY
C1q, C1r/s (often combined), C2,
C4 (total C4 deficiency)
C4A or C4B

INHERITANCE

ASSOCIATED SYMPTOMS/DISORDERS

AR

SLE, systemic infections with encapsulated organisms; heterozygous
C2 deficiency may have a reduced CH50 but remain asymptomatic

Complex

Susceptibility to infections and/or autoimmunity (SLE); mostly
asymptomatic

C3 GOF

AD

aHUS (2–10% of the cases)

C3

AR

Pyogenic infections, neisserial infections, glomerulonephritis, AMD

C5, C6, C7, C8α–γ/C8β

AR

Neisserial infections; recurrent meningitis

C9

AR

Neisserial infections (mostly asymptomatic)

Factor B

AR*

Neisserial and pneumococcal infections, aHUS (1–4% of the cases)

AR

Bacterial infections

Factor D
MBL

Polymorphism

Bacterial infections (mostly asymptomatic) and susceptibility to
autoimmunity in some cases

Ficolin-­3 (H-­ficolin)

Polymorphism

Various clinical phenotypes

MASP-­1

AR

3MC syndrome

MASP-­2

AR

Respiratory infections, mostly asymptomatic

*AR, Autosomal recessive non-­codominant.
AR, Autosomal recessive; AD, Autosomal dominant; C4A and C4B, isotypes encoded by C4A and C4B genes, respectively; GOF, gain of function; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus;
aHUS, atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome; AMD, aging macular degeneration; 3MC, Mingarelli, Malpuech, Michels and Carnevale.

Complement component C4 is a central protein in the classical and
lectin pathways within the CS. C4A and C4B genes encode the two
isoforms of the component C4, an essential element for the effector
arm of the humoral immune response. The two isotypes of C4, which
differ by only four amino acids, demonstrate differential chemical
reactivities: C4A displays a higher affinity for amino group–containing antigens or immune complexes, and C4B for hydroxyl group-­
containing antigens. The presence of one C4A or C4B gene is called
heterozygous C4A or C4B deficiency, whereas the presence of no
functional C4A or C4B genes causes complete C4A or C4B deficiency
and is called homozygous C4 deficiency. Homozygous deficiencies
of complement C4A or C4B are detected in 1–10% of populations.
Homozygous deficiency of C4A is associated with an increased frequency of SLE; whereas homozygous C4B deficiency has been associated with increased susceptibility to bacterial and enveloped viral
infections. Within each C4 gene, there can be deletions or duplications or simple inactivating variants; therefore interpretation of a
serum level is difficult.
C2 deficiency is found with a frequency of 1/10,000 in the White
population. The lowest frequency of autoimmunity (10–42%), among
the proteins of the CP, is observed in C2-­deficient patients. Individuals with C2 deficiency also carry the risk of life-­threatening septicemic
illnesses, usually caused by pneumococci; however, most have not had
problems, presumably because of protective effects of other complement pathways. The genes for C2, factor B (AP), and C4 are situated
close to each other on chromosome 6, and a partial depression of factor
B levels can occur in conjunction with C2 deficiency.
Patients with C1, C2, or C4 deficiency have an increased occurrence of autoantibodies; antinuclear antibodies are present in 75%
of patients with C1 or C4 deficiency and 25–55% of patients with C2
deficiency. Anti-­dsDNA antibodies are present in 20% of patients with
C1q/C4 deficiency and 33% of patients with C2 deficiency. Individuals with heterozygous C2 or C4 deficiency often remain asymptomatic.
Also, there is an increased incidence of bacterial infections associated
with deficiency of components in CP, including meningitis, pneumonia, arthritis, or septicemia. Other infections such as epiglottitis, and
peritonitis have been described. The most common organisms identified in C2-­deficient patients have been Streptococcus pneumoniae and
Haemophilus influenzae type b.

C3 Deficiency

C3 deficiency is rare and the disease manifests early in life. Severe infections (pneumonia, meningitis, osteomyelitis, or bacteremia) caused by
encapsulated bacteria (H. influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis) occur. The
infections reflect the impairment in the C3b opsonization, generation
of chemotactic factor, influence in B-­cell stimulation, and failure of
complete complement activation. MPGN is noted in approximately
30% of the cases of C3 deficiency. Slightly more common is a partial
deficiency of C3, termed hypomorphic C3. This partial deficiency has
been seen in some autoimmune disorders. Rare C3 gain-­of-­function
(GOF) variants may lead to aHUS and endothelial damage in the glomerulus. One common and several rare variants in C3 have been associated with increased risk of AMD. A unique feature of C3 deficiency is a
vasculitic rash that may appear during infections; symptoms of serum
sickness may occasionally be seen. These unusual findings are due to
the lack of immune complex solubilization by C3. They typically are
transient in nature but can cause confusion with lupus, particularly in
the presence of glomerulonephritis.

DEFICIENCY OF TERMINAL COMPONENTS (C5, C6,
C7, C8, C9)

Terminal components are shared by the classical, lectin, and alternative pathways, and are ultimately responsible for the formation of the
MAC. The risk of developing meningococcal sepsis or meningitis is
markedly increased in people who have a deficiency of one terminal
component. In contrast to the immunocompetent population (median
age for meningococcal infection: 3 years), the onset of symptoms in
patients with terminal deficiencies is 17 years. However, infections
generally lead to lower mortality, may be recurrent, and have a milder
course than in an immunocompetent person. Rarely, SLE or other
autoimmune disorders has been identified in these defects. Disseminated Neisseria gonorrhoeae infections have also been described; an
increased frequency of other bacterial infections is not observed. A
terminal component deficiency should be suspected if there is a family
history of meningococcal infections, repeated neisserial infections, or
if the causative meningococcal serotype is W-­135, X, Y, or Z, which
less frequently cause infections in healthy individuals. Early vaccination of children could change the profile of serotypes causing infection
in those patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1320 Part XII u Immunology
C6 deficiency occurs more frequently in African Americans and in
people from South Africa. Two variations of C6 deficiency have been
described. In one case, a splice defect leads to a smaller than usual protein, C6SD. This protein functions less efficiently than wild-­type C6;
however, it is not clear whether bearing C6SD leads to compromised
host defense. The other variation is combined C6 and C7 deficiency. C7
deficiency is rare and in the few reported cases, the clinical presentations have varied.
C8 is composed of three chains: α, β, and γ. C8β deficiency is more
common in White people, whereas C8α-­γ deficiency is more common
among African Americans. Approximately 1 patient in 1000 carries
a homozygous common nonsense variant causing C9 deficiency as
described in Japan and Korea. It is more difficult to diagnose than most
of the other complement deficiencies because the CH50 is diminished
but not absent. Lytic activity can be generated in the absence of C9. The
neisserial disease can occur, although the penetrance appears to be less
than that with other terminal component deficiencies.

ALTERNATIVE PATHWAY DEFICIENCIES

The AP is a highly conserved surveillance system that is continuously
turning over (tick over) due to a labile thioester bond in C3 and thus
does not require antibodies or lectins for activation. Properdin is a
positive regulator of AP activity and works by stabilizing AP convertases. Properdin deficiency is rare, hereditary, and is the only X-­linked
complement deficiency. A small number of patients have been identified with properdin deficiency; these patients are unusually susceptible to Neisseria infections. There is a particularly high fatality rate
for meningococcal disease in properdin-­deficient patients, in contrast
with the protection from early death seen in patients with terminal
complement component deficiencies. It manifests with either complete
absence of the molecule (type I), partial deficiency (type II), or a normal level of dysfunctional protein (type III). Properdin-­deficient individuals are susceptible to meningococcal disease, which is frequently
complicated by sepsis and most commonly occurs in adolescence.
Factor D and Factor B deficiencies were described in few cases and
the association with Neisseria infections was also identified. Systemic
streptococcal infections have also been involved in factor D deficiency.
GOF pathogenic variants in factor B are associated with the aHUS.

LECTIN PATHWAY DEFICIENCIES

The LP is focused on the recognition of repetitive carbohydrate patterns found on the surface of microbial pathogens. Lectin pattern
recognition molecules (PRMs), which include MBL, ficolin-­1, ficolin-­2, ficolin-­3, collectin-­10, and collectin-­11, activate the pathway in
an analogous manner to antibodies in the CP. MASPs, which act in a
similar fashion to C1r and C1s, associate with MBL and activate C4 and
C2 by proteolytic cleavage (see Fig.173.1). Among White populations,
approximately 5–7% of people have inherited MBL deficiency. LP
impairment due to insufficient production of any of these components
is common and may be associated with no clear clinical phenotype.
However, MBL insufficiency is, in combination with other factors,
associated with more severe forms of sepsis and fatal outcomes. The
deficiency appears to represent a modest risk factor for infection, typically revealed in a high-­risk setting. Similarly, it may subtly alter the
course or contribute to the overall risk of developing several autoimmune diseases. MBL deficiency has been associated as an additional
severity influence for common variable immunodeficiency, cystic
fibrosis, and hepatitis. In contrast, low MBL levels have been described
as protective for mycobacterial infection. MBL deficiency is not typically associated with absent levels, and it has been difficult to define the
normal range in healthy people.
MASP-­1, the most abundant protease of the LP, has a central role in
pathway activation via MASP-­2. MASP-­1 may be involved in coagulation, renal, gastrointestinal, and myocardial ischemia/reperfusion-­
related pathology; there is no firm evidence for this type of pathology
in humans.
The Malpuech, Michels, Mingarelli, Carnevale (3MC) syndrome
is a rare, autosomal recessive genetic disorder associated with pathogenic variants in the MASP1/3; COLEC11; or COLEC10 genes. The

number of 3MC patients with known pathogenic variants in these three
genes reported so far remains very small. The clinical manifestations of
the 3MC syndrome consist of developmental delay, facial dysmorphia,
and various skeletal anomalies. Developmental defects include cleft
lip and palate, postnatal growth deficiency, cognitive impairment, and
hearing loss. Excess or unusual infections and autoimmunity have not
yet been described in this syndrome. The proposed mechanism was
revealed by an unexpected role for these proteins in cuing neural crest
cell migration.
MASP-­2 deficiency was initially described in a patient with serious infections and autoimmune disease. MASP-­2 deficiency has been
included in the classification of primary immunodeficiencies. Asymptomatic individuals have been described; the frequency is 6/10,000, suggesting that the phenotype is mild. Healthy individuals homozygous for
p.D120G have also been found by chance in genetic association studies. These findings suggest that MASP-­2 deficiency could no longer be
associated to a specific clinical phenotype. In contrast, increased levels
of MBL or MASP-­2 may contribute to poor disease outcome associated
with mycobacterial infections or pneumococcal meningitis.
Complete ficolin-­3 (or H-­ficolin) deficiency was initially associated with increased susceptibility to infections and necrotizing enterocolitis. A heterogeneous range of clinical manifestations have been
described in patients with complete ficolin-­3 deficiency, and the first
case described was later diagnosed with Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome.
Respiratory and nervous system involvement in the few reported cases
of FCN3 deficiency raises awareness regarding the significance of ficolin-­3 in respiratory and nervous immunity.

DEFICIENCIES OF COMPLEMENT REGULATION

The CS has several levels of regulation at the initiation, amplification
(formation of convertases), and membrane attack phases, thereby preventing inadvertent tissue damage. Deficiency of complement inhibitors leads to dysregulation either in the fluid phase or on cell surfaces
and consequent recurrent infections (mostly bacterial), inflammatory disorders, and presentations with a broader clinical phenotype.
These include angioedema (C1-­INH deficiency), kidney and eye diseases (factor H, factor I, or CD46/MCP deficiency), protein-­losing
enteropathy (CD55/DAF deficiency), and PNH (CD55 + CD59 deficiency). In addition, there are seven complement receptors (C1qR, C3aR,
C5aR, CR1, CR2, CR3, and CR4). The same disease spectrum may be
caused and shaped by a broad variety of different alterations in complement activators and/or regulators. The individual complement profile
of a patient (sometimes referred to as complotype) often determines
the course and severity of the disease. Disorders such as AMD, aHUS,
or C3 glomerulopathy (C3G) are among the most well-­
described
examples in this context.
Approximately 50% of patients with aHUS have genetic pathogenic
variants of factors H and I, C3, factor B, and/or MCP, and deletion
of complement factor H–related proteins 1 and 3 (CFHR1/CFHR3).
Approximately 20% of patients with aHUS have pathologic variants
in more than one gene and patients with autoantibodies to regulatory
proteins also comprise a significant subset. The majority of aHUS cases
are sporadic and occur in the absence of prior family history. Furthermore, even in familial forms of aHUS, penetrance is incomplete.
Thrombomodulin (CD141) also has a regulatory role and binds to
factor H and C3b, thereby inhibiting complement activation. Interestingly, pathologic variants in factor H, MCP, and factor I have also been
reported in C3 MPGN, as well as preeclampsia and hemolysis, elevated
liver enzyme levels, and low platelet levels (HELLP) syndrome.
Several complement proteins, their activation products, and regulators have also been related to AMD, particularly, C3 and factors H and I.

Hereditary Angioedema

HAE comprises a group of diseases characterized by recurrent angioedema without wheals, showing an autosomal dominant inheritance
pattern. It was first recognized in patients with heterozygous deficiencies of C1-­INH and the estimated prevalence is 1:50,000 (Chapter 189.1). Patients with angioedema without wheals have also been
described with normal C1-­INH levels. Several pathogenic variants

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 173 u Complement System
were associated with this group of patients with primary angioedema:
factor XII (FXII-­
HAE), plasminogen (PLG-­
HAE), angiopoietin-­
1
(ANGPT1-­
HAE), kininogen-­
1 (KNG1-­
HAE), myoferlin (MYOF-­
HAE), and heparan sulfate-­
glucosamine 3-­
O-­sulfotransferase 6
(HS-­HAE). However, a significant proportion do not have a defined
molecular explanation.
The angioedema is self-­limited and recurrent, affecting the deep
layers of skin and mucosa, commonly causing swelling of extremities
(hands, feet, limbs), face, lips, tongue, genitalia, bowels, and the upper
airway. The involvement of the gastrointestinal tract causes severe
abdominal pain, distension, vomiting, and, less frequently, diarrhea.
The symptoms can be misdiagnosed, and unnecessary surgery may be
performed. The obstruction of upper airways due to edema of the glottis is associated with asphyxia if the attacks are not prevented. Swelling
attacks are transitory and usually last from 2-­5 days, but their severity
and frequency vary widely from patient to patient. Approximately 5%
of people who carry a C1-­INH pathologic variant are asymptomatic.
In the most frequent subtype, HAE with C1-­INH deficiency (HAE-­
C1INH, OMIM #106100), the first HAE episodes occur at a mean age
of 10 years; however, the onset of symptoms may occur at an early age
(Chapter 189.1). This type of HAE is classified as type I when there
is low quantitative and functional C1-­INH levels (85% of the cases)
and type II for decreased functional C1-­INH values. A typical functional level is approximately 25–40% of normal in both types. Attacks,
when identified, are triggered by stress, trauma, hormones (estrogen),
infections, extreme temperatures, and alcohol. Although many patients
can identify triggers, many episodes have no identifiable trigger, which
increases anxiety and contributes to feelings of loss of control. The
symptoms are preceded by prodromes, such as erythema marginatum,
irritability, nausea, and flulike symptoms. Consumption of C2 and
C4 increases the risk for the development of SLE. Positive family history occurs in 75% of the cases and de novo pathogenic variants are
described in 25% of the cases.
The third type of HAE referred to as HAE with normal C1-­INH (previously called type III), is not a complement deficiency. It is characterized
by normal serum levels and functional activity of C1-­INH. It has been
described primarily in females; however, both sexes are affected.
Acquired C1-­INH deficiency is rarer than HAE-­C1-­INH (1:9)
and is clinically indistinguishable from inherited C1-­INH deficiency
except that onset is later in life (>40 years old). Patients with acquired
C1-­
INH deficiency require careful surveillance for malignancy;
B-­cell malignancies, autoimmunity, and monoclonal gammopathies
are the most common. The laboratory features are similar to those of
hereditary C1-­INH deficiency, except that C1q levels are diminished
in these patients. Anti–C1-­INH can be detected in approximately
70% of the cases.

C4 Binding Protein Deficiency

C4 binding protein deficiency has been described in one family. The
proband presented with angioedema, vasculitis, and arthritis. The
manifestations were thought to relate to uncontrolled activation of the
CP and the release of anaphylatoxins.

Factor H Deficiency

Factor H (CFH), which is present at high concentrations (500 μg/mL)
in plasma, works in both the liquid and solid phases and attenuates the
activity of C3 convertase in the AP and acts as a cofactor for factor I in
the cleavage of C3b and C4b. It is a multifunctional molecule that has the
function of decay acceleration and plays a very important role in regulating complement activation. Infections, aHUS, glomerulonephritis, and
macular degeneration are the main disease phenotypes seen in patients
with factor H deficiency. Infections occur due to secondary consumption of C3 with consequent partial deficiency. Diagnosis is suggestive
when C3 has diminished levels and low but not absent CH50 and AP50
is found. The antigenic levels of factor H are typically low.
Several people with MPGN were identified with factor H deficiency. CFH deficiency was found to be the underlying basis for the
pathophysiologic changes in 15–30% of patients with aHUS. aHUS
is a thrombotic microangiopathy characterized by hemolytic anemia,

1321

thrombocytopenia, and renal failure, which occurs in the absence of
its usual cause (infection with a Shiga toxin–producing organism). It is
called “atypical” because it lacks the common trigger of infectious diarrhea. CFH deficiency probably affects the ability to protect the fenestrated endothelium in the glomerulus from complement-­mediated
damage. Recurrent aHUS also has been seen in patients with antibodies to factor H, defining an acquired form as well. This form may
be slightly more amenable to therapy. Both autosomal recessive and
heterozygous pathogenic variants have been seen. The age at onset is
quite young in most cases, and the disease is recurrent. Mortality is not
uncommon. These patients have a diminished C3 level, although the
antigenic level of factor H typically is normal or elevated. Normal C3
levels are sometimes seen, and the only way in which this disorder can
be identified is with direct genetic analysis.
A common tyrosine-­histidine polymorphism of factor H was identified as a significant risk factor for macular degeneration with a higher
risk of the development of macular degeneration and blindness subsequently. In macular degeneration, the central region of the retina is
gradually destroyed by a process that leaves deposits of protein that
contain factor H and terminal complement components. It has been
hypothesized that the abnormal factor H provides less protection to
the choroidal vessels, allowing smoldering complement activation with
gradual damage to the endothelium.

FACTOR I DEFICIENCY

Not only factor H but also factor I is a key regulator of the AP. Deficiency of factor I results in uncontrolled activation of the AP with
subsequent secondary C3 deficiency and a reduction in circulating
factor H levels. Distinct clinical manifestations have been associated
with factor I deficiency. Marked susceptibility to infections relates to
the role of factor I as a cofactor for C3bBb dissociation. When factor
I is lacking, C3bBb continues to cleave C3 resulting in secondary C3
deficit. Both the CH50 and the AP50 are depressed but not absent,
and C3 antigen levels are low. In factor I deficiency, infections are
similar to those seen in true C3 deficiency. Neisserial disease has been
reported, as well as infections with encapsulated organisms such as
S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae. Partial factor I deficiency has been
described. aHUS, or MPGN II, has also been associated with factor I
deficiency, probably related to the capacity of complement regulatory
proteins to protect vascular endothelium from activating complement
after microtrauma. These cases of factor I deficiency are difficult to
identify because complement studies often give normal results. C3 may
be depressed but is not necessarily affected. The pathogenic variants
inactivate certain binding sites like surface-­bound C3b and polyanion
surfaces such as the fenestrated endothelium of the glomerulus, which
exposes the basement membrane. A third phenotype resembles an
autoinflammatory process and has been described in a small number of
patients. Central nervous system inflammation has been the hallmark.
Partial factor I deficiency has also been previously associated with clinical manifestations including recurrent tonsillitis, urinary infections,
otitis, pyelonephritis, severe meningitis, and sepsis.

Membrane Cofactor Protein (CD46) Deficiency

MCP is a membrane protein, and its defect is intrinsic to the kidney.
Deficiencies of MCP are associated with a later onset of atypical HUS
compared with factor H and factor I deficiencies and it accounts for
approximately 10% of all cases. There is no other known phenotype
for MCP deficiency. Findings on traditional complement analysis are
normal, although the mechanism is thought to be the same as for factor
H and factor I deficiencies. Considering the local defect, renal transplantation can be successful.

CD59 Deficiency

CD59 is the key membrane regulator of the TP that prevents insertion of the MAC into host tissue. It is expressed on most hematopoietic cells and endothelial cells, where it confers protection from
intravascular complement-­mediated lysis. Isolated CD59 deficiency
manifests by chronic hemolytic anemia, recurrent stroke, and severe
Guillain-­Barré–like neurologic symptoms with hemolysis. This defect

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1322 Part XII u Immunology
Table 173.5  Protein Regulators and Receptor Deficiencies of Complement System
DEFICIENCY

INHERITANCE

C1 inhibitor

AD

C4-­binding protein

ASSOCIATED SYMPTOMS/DISORDERS
HAE with C1-­INH deficiency

Unknown

Atypical Morbus Behçet, angioedema, protein S deficit

Properdin

X-­linked recessive

Factor H

AR

Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, AMD, aHUS
(20–30% of the cases)

Factor I

AR

Pyogenic infections, neisserial infections,
glomerulonephritis, aHUS (5–10% of the cases), central
nervous system inflammation

CFHR1 (FHR3)

Meningitis (Neisseria)

Complex

aHUS, C3G, AMD, RA, SLE

AD

aHUS (3–5% of the cases)

CD46/MCP

Most often heterozygous or compound
heterozygous pathogenic variants

aHUS (10–15% of the cases)

CD55/DAF

AR

Protein losing enteropathy

CD55 (DAF) or CD59

AR

PNH

CD59

AR

Chronic hemolysis and relapsing peripheral
demyelinating disease, cerebral infarction

CR2 (CD21)

AR

Infections, associated with CVID

CR3 (CD18/CD11b); CR4 (CD18/CD11c,
LFA-­1)

AR

LAD

Thrombomodulin (CD141)

CFHR1, Complement factor H related 1; MCP, membrane cofactor protein; DAF, decay-­accelerating factor; LFA-­1, integrin called lymphocyte function-­associated antigen 1; AR,
autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; aHUS, atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome; C3G, C3 glomerulopathy; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; AMD, aging macular
degeneration; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; PNH, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria; CVID, common variable immunodeficiency; LAD,
leukocyte adhesion deficiency.

in CD59 was suspected in cases of chronic hemolysis because of the
phenotypic resemblance to PNH. PNH is caused by acquired somatic
variants of phosphatidylinositol glycan class A (PIG-­A) or phosphatidylinositol glycan class M (PIG-­M) in a clone of bone marrow progenitor cells. The protein product of PIG-­A is an anchoring structure
for C8 binding protein, DAF (CD55), and CD59. Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-­anchored proteins protect hematopoietic cells from
complement-­mediated lysis. PNH is characterized by recurrent episodes of hemoglobinuria secondary to intravascular hemolysis and can
be associated with thrombosis and aplastic anemia. The red cells are the
most vulnerable because they have no ability to repair membrane damage. When the cells develop from the variant-­bearing progenitor, they
lack all GPI-­anchored membrane proteins, although the major features
relate to loss of CD59. The diagnosis of PNH is made by flow cytometry
for CD59 or CD55 (DAF).

Decay-­Accelerating Factor (CD55) Deficiency

DAF (CD55) is a membrane-­bound regulator that dissociates both
classical and alternative C3 convertases. In certain kindreds, DAF deficiency has been associated with protein-­losing enteropathy, whereas in
others, all of the members have been completely healthy, with the deficiency being identified at the time of blood donation or cross matching
for a transfusion. The Cromer blood group antigens reside on DAF. The
RBCs of people with the Cromer-­null phenotype, Inab, lack DAF but
do not appear to show increased susceptibility to hemolysis. This finding suggests that CD59 is substantially more important in regulating
red cell lysis by complement.

DEFICIENCIES OF COMPLEMENT RECEPTORS
CR1 Deficiency

CR1 (CD35) is a multiple modular protein that binds C3b/C4b-­
opsonized foreign antigens, mediating the immune adherence phenomenon. No cases of complete inherited CR1 deficiency have been
reported; however, acquired mild C1R deficiency is quite common in
patients with immune complex diseases and serum sickness. Similarly,
a polymorphic variant of CR1 with diminished levels and function has

been described, although it does not appear to be a risk factor for autoimmune disease.

CR3/CR4 Deficiency

CR3/CR4 deficiency (LFA-­1) is a defect in the 3 β2-­integrin adhesion
molecules. Pathogenic variants in the common β chain (CD18) lead to
failure to express adequate α chains: CD11a, CD11b, and CD11c. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) is an autosomal recessive disorder
of neutrophil function resulting from a deficiency of β2-­integrin subunit of the leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (Table 173.5; see Chapter
170). The leukocyte cell adhesion molecule is present on the surface of
peripheral blood mononuclear leukocytes and granulocytes and mediates cell-­cell and cell-­extracellular matrix adhesion. LAD is characterized by a delayed separation of the umbilical cord, recurrent bacterial
and fungal infections, and impaired pus formation and wound healing
associated with heavy mortality; bone marrow transplantation often is
recommended. The infections are characteristic in that necrosis predominates, with little neutrophilic infiltrate. With some residual β2-­
integrin expression, the patient may be able to survive without a bone
marrow transplant and infections are common.
The manifestations of the disorder are due to the combined effects of
ineffective opsonization and an inability to traverse the vascular endothelium to phagocytose bacteria. β2-­Integrins are essential for the firm
adhesion step and diapedesis. Lacking β2-­integrins, the neutrophils
remain in the vascular space, where they are unable to participate in
the defense against bacteria. This explains the lack of pus at sites of
active infection.
Two other forms of LAD are recognized: LAD type II is due to a
defect in fucosylation of selectin ligands and LAD type III is due to
an activation defect of integrins. The major manifestations are the
infection pattern just described and a moderate to severe bleeding tendency secondary to impaired activation of platelet adhesion molecules.
LAD-­III results from pathogenic variants in FERMT3, or KINDLIN3,
which encodes an intracellular protein that interacts with β-­integrins
in hematopoietic cells. In LAD-­III, the adhesive functions of integrins on both leukocytes and platelets are disrupted, most likely due

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 173 u Complement System
to defects in activation-­dependent alterations of surface integrins that
enable high-­avidity binding to ligands on target cells, a process termed
inside-­out signaling.

MANAGEMENT OF COMPLEMENT DEFICIENCIES

Prophylactic antibiotics may offer additional protection from serious infection. With the onset of unexplained fever, cultures should be
obtained and antibiotic therapy instituted rapidly and with less stringent indications than in an unaffected child. The parent or patient
should be given a written action plan describing any predisposition to
systemic bacterial infection or autoimmune disease associated with the
patient’s deficiency, along with the recommended initial approach to
management, for possible use by school, camp, or emergency department physicians. Therapy for infection is not standardized, but it is
usually directed to prevent infections caused by encapsulated bacteria.
Early complement component deficiencies have major risks to acquire
infections caused by S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae.
Patients should also be vaccinated against encapsulated organisms
to maintain high titers. In the case of terminal component, factor D,
and properdin deficiencies, high levels of antibody after vaccination
may partially compensate for the complement deficiency. Effective vaccines are available; high titers of antibody may offer protection. Repeat
immunization of patients is advisable because complement deficiency
can be associated with a blunted or shorter-­lived antibody response
than normal. Immunization of household members may reduce the
risk of exposing patients to these pathogens.
Patients under immunosuppression for rheumatologic disorders
such as SLE will require more vigilance for severe infection. Individuals
with SLE and a complement defect generally respond as well to therapy
as do those without complement deficiency. Management of cardiac
risk factors is of heightened importance in early complement component–deficient individuals because of their accelerated atherosclerosis.
C1q deficiency has a poor prognosis and this protein is produced to a
large extent by myeloid cells. Bone marrow transplantation has been
curative and should be considered for C1q deficiency.
MBL purified from plasma or recombinant material has been administered in trials; however, no prospective study has been performed. In
addition, the role of MBL deficiency in significant infections is not well
established.
The treatment of HAE with C1-­INH deficiency is noted in Chapter
189.1. General guidance includes avoiding the use of estrogens or drugs
that can induce angioedema, such as angiotensin-­converting enzyme
inhibitors (ACEis) and gliptins. If possible, trigger factors could be
avoided. Vaccination is not contraindicated, and hepatitis A and B
vaccinations are recommended. The approach includes long-­term prophylaxis (LTP), short-­term prophylaxis (STP), and on-­demand therapy
(Table 173.6; see Chapter 189.1).
STP is used for dental procedures, surgical procedures, endoscopies,
or other situations in which significant trauma may be expected. Attenuated androgens can be used for this indication; C1-­INH concentrates
have largely supplanted androgens in this setting. A recombinant C1-­
INH, conestat alfa, is effective for both HAE attacks and for STP. Fresh-­
frozen plasma (FFP) is another alternative in this setting.
Despite prophylaxis, breakthrough episodes do occur. On-­demand
therapy should also be an option for patients with sporadic attacks or
who may not be on any active prophylaxis. There are several options to
treat the attacks: C1-­INH concentrate; ecallantide, a kallikrein inhibitor; and icatibant, a bradykinin β2-­receptor antagonist.
On-­demand treatment and STP is the same for HAE with normal C1-­INH. LTP shows improvement with tranexamic acid and
progestins.

Table 173.6  Therapies for Hereditary Angioedema with C1
Inhibitor Deficiency
LONG-­TERM PROPHYLAXIS
Androgens
Avoid use
(danazol,
If necessary: Danazol: 10 mg/kg/day
oxandrolone,
(max 200 mg/day)
stanozolol)
Oxandrolone: ≤ 0.1 mg/kg/day (no max)
Stanozolol: 2-6 mg/day (dose and max) after
puberty (Tanner 5)
Oral
Antifibrinolytics
(tranexamic acid,
epsilon
aminocaproic acid)

Tranexamic acid: 10 mg/kg/day bid to
25 mg/kg/day tid
Limit dosage 3 g/day
Oral

pdC1-­INH
nanofiltrated*

Approved for ≥12 yr in some countries, ≥6 yr
in others
1,000 IU in ≥12 yr
6-­12 yr 500 IU
q 3-­4 days
IV

SC pdC1-­INH
nanofiltrated

60 IU/kg twice weekly
>12 yr
SC

Lanadelumab

300 mg every 2 wk
After 6 mo, if no attacks: 300 mg every 4 wk
>12 yr
SC

Berotralstat

Approved in some countries for 12 yr or older
150 mg/day
Oral

SHORT-­TERM PROPHYLAXIS
pdC1-­INH
nanofiltrated*

20 IU/kg IV (no age limits) 1-­6 hr before
procedure/trigger
IV

rhC1-­INH/conestat
alfa

Approved for ≥12 yr in some countries, ≥2 yr
in others
50 IU/kg, max. 4,200 IU (50 IU/kg <84 kg, 4,200
IU >85 kg) IV

Androgens
(danazol,
oxandrolone,
stanozolol)

Avoid use
Danazol: 10 mg/kg/day (max 200 mg/day)
Oxandrolone: ≤0.1 mg/kg/day (no max)
Stanozolol: 2-6 mg/day (dose and max)
5 days before and 2-3 days after procedure/trigger
Oral

Fresh-­frozen
plasma

May be used, if other STP medications not available
10 mL/kg IV
No age limits

ON-­DEMAND THERAPY
Ecallantide
Approved in some countries for ≥12 yr
30 mg SC
Self-­administration is not allowed due to anaphylaxis
Icatibant

Approved for ≥18 yr in some countries, ≥2 yr
in others
30 mg/3 mL
Dose adjustment is needed for adolescent/
children <65 kg/≥2 yr SC

pdC1-­INH
nanofiltrated*

20 IU/kg IV (no age limits)

rhC1-­INH/conestat
alfa

Approved for ≥12 yr in some countries, ≥2 yr
in others
50 IU/kg, max. 4,200 IU (50 IU/kg <84 kg, 4,200
IU >85 kg) IV

Fresh-­frozen
plasma

May be used if other on-­demand medications
are not available
10 mL/kg IV
No age limits

PNH/aHUS Treatment

Eculizumab, a humanized monoclonal IgG2/4-­antibody targeting C5,
prevents the generation of the MAC C5b9 and is an effective treatment
for PNH and aHUS.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1323

*Commercial name for pdC1-INH nanofiltered indicated for LTP is Cinryze and for STP is Berinert.
IV, Intravenous; LTP, long-term prophylaxis; pd, plasma derived; rh, recombinant; SC,
subcutaneous; STP, short-­term prophylaxis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1324 Part XII u Immunology

Section 5

of regulation or inhibition manifests as immune dysregulation. Clinical
symptoms of these disorders include early onset multiorgan autoimmunity, endocrinopathy, enteropathy, colitis, and lymphoproliferation.

Immune Dysregulation

Diagnosis

Immune Dysregulation

In a patient with early-­onset, severe, or difficult to control autoimmunity, endocrinopathy, colitis, or nonmalignant lymphoproliferative
disease, a diagnosis of a Tregopathy should be considered. Next generation sequencing via a targeted panel and/or whole exome sequencing is
necessary to establish a genetic diagnosis.

Danielle E. Arnold and Jennifer W. Leiding

Treatment

Chapter 174

Primary immune dysregulatory diseases (PIRDs) are a recognized subset
of primary immunodeficiencies that are characterized by hyperinflammation, organ-­specific and systemic autoimmunity, endocrinopathy, enteropathy, and nonmalignant lymphoproliferation. Clinical manifestations of
immune dysregulation should lead to a consideration of PIRD. Genetic
testing can confirm a diagnosis. Targeted treatments are available for many
PIRDs and hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT) is often curative.

Targeted treatment is available for several Tregopathies (see Table
174.1). Abatacept, a CTLA4-­Ig fusion protein, has been used successfully in the treatment of refractory cytopenias, interstitial lung
disease, and lymphoproliferation in CTLA4 haploinsufficiency and
lipopolysaccharide-­responsive and beigelike anchor protein (LRBA)
deficiency. Jakinibs are a class of medications that inhibit Janus kinase
activation of certain STAT transcription factors. Jakinibs have been
used successfully to treat immune dysregulatory and autoimmune
symptoms in gain-­of-­function of STAT1 and STAT3 diseases. HCT can
provide a curative option for many Tregopathies.

IMMUNE DYSREGULATION POLYENDOCRINOPATHY,
ENTEROPATHY, X-­LINKED SYNDROME

174.1 Tregopathies
Danielle E. Arnold and Jennifer W. Leiding
Tregopathies are a subset of primary immunodeficiency diseases recognized by the International Union of Immunologic Societies. The clinical
manifestations of these diseases are variable, but all involve some degree
of immune dysregulation manifesting as autoimmunity, hyperinflammation, cancer predisposition, and/or lymphoproliferative disease.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

T regulatory (Treg) cells are specialized T cells responsible for the
maintenance and self-­tolerance of immune responses (Fig. 174.1).
These cells are responsible for suppressing production of proinflammatory cytokines and growth factors and suppressing T-­cell proliferation. The transcription factor FOXP3 is essential for the regulatory
function of Treg cells. Several subsets of Treg cells exist, each characterized by unique features. Thymic-­
derived Treg cells (tTreg)
(CD4+CD25+FOXP3+) account for ∼5% of total CD4+ T cells in the
peripheral blood. FOXP3+ Treg cells can also differentiate outside of
the thymus in peripheral tissues. These cells are known as peripherally induced regulatory (pTreg) cells. A number of monogenic diseases
(Table 174.1) of the immune system that affect the number and/or
function of Treg cells have been described. By reducing the effect of
Treg cells, T-­cell activation and proliferation are unrestrained. This lack

This immune dysregulation syndrome is characterized by onset within
the first few weeks or months of life with watery diarrhea (autoimmune
enteropathy), an eczematous rash (erythroderma in neonates), insulin-­
dependent diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism or more often hypothyroidism, severe allergies, and other autoimmune disorders (Coombs-­positive
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia). Psoriasiform or ichthyosiform rashes and alopecia have also been reported.
Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked
(IPEX) syndrome is caused by a pathogenic variant in the FOXP3 gene,
which encodes a forkhead-­winged helix transcription factor (scurfin)
involved in the function and development of CD4+ CD25+ Tregs. The
absence of Tregs may predispose to abnormal activation of effector T
cells. Variants in multiple other genes also produce an IPEX-­like syndrome (see Table 174.1; Fig. 174.2).

Clinical Manifestations

Watery diarrhea with intestinal villous atrophy leads to failure to thrive in
most patients. Cutaneous lesions (usually eczema) and insulin-­dependent
diabetes begin in infancy. Lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly are also
present. Serious bacterial infections (meningitis, sepsis, pneumonia, osteomyelitis) may be related to neutropenia, malnutrition, or immune dysregulation. Laboratory features reflect the associated autoimmune diseases,
dehydration, and malnutrition. In addition, serum IgE levels are elevated,

Function
and maturation
PD-1 CTLA-4

DC
TCR-mediated
activation

CD39

CD25
CD4

CD73

FOXP3
Cytolysis
with granzyme

Teff
Metabolic disruption

Anti-inflammatory
cytokines

Treg

Fig. 174.1 Immunosuppressive mechanisms underlying Treg-­mediated
immune suppression. Tregs are characterized by expression of the cell
surface markers CD4+, CD25high and CD127low/−, and transcription
factor FOXP3. Tregs modulate the immune system using their suppressive molecules PD-­1, CTLA-­4, and CD39, and various surface receptors
through inhibition of dendritic cell (DC) function and maturation, through
the secretion of anti-­inflammatory cytokines such as IL-­10, TGF-­β, and
IL-­35, and/or through direct inhibition of Teff via induction of cytolysis
using granzyme and metabolic disruption. Moreover, Tregs can reduce
Teff activation by limiting TCR-­ligand binding. DC, dendritic cell; TCR, T
cell receptor; Teff, effector T cell; Treg, regulatory T cell. (From Kempkes
RWM, Joosten I, Koenen HJPM, He X. Metabolic pathways involved in
regulatory T cell functionality. Front Immunol. 2019;10:2839. Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 174 u Immune Dysregulation 1325
Table 174.1  Tregopathies
GENE (PROTEIN)

DISORDER

INHERITANCE

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

DEFINITIVE OR DISEASE-­
SPECIFIC TREATMENT

FOXP3

IPEX syndrome

XL

Enteropathy, type 1 diabetes, eczema,
FTT, autoimmune cytopenias,
thyroiditis, hepatitis

Tacrolimus, cyclosporine
Allogeneic HCT

IL2RA

CD25 deficiency

AR

Enteropathy, eczema,
lymphoproliferation, recurrent
infections

Allogeneic HCT

CTLA-­4
ALPSV

CTLA4 haploinsufficiency

AD

Enteropathy, type 1 diabetes,
autoimmune cytopenias, interstitial
lung disease

Sirolimus
Abatacept, belatacept
Allogeneic HCT

LRBA

LRBA deficiency

AR

Enteropathy, type 1 diabetes,
autoimmune cytopenias, interstitial
lung disease

Abatacept, belatacept
Allogeneic HCT

BACH2

BACH2 deficiency

AD

Enteropathy, lymphoproliferation,
recurrent respiratory tract infections,
infections

Allogeneic HCT

STAT3

STAT3 GOF

AD, GOF

Enteropathy, autoimmune cytopenias,
lymphoproliferation, type 1
diabetes, recurrent infections

Jakinibs
Allogeneic HCT

STAT5B

STAT5B

AD, AR

Eczema, growth hormone deficiency,
infections, enteropathy, JIA, ITP,
chronic lung disease

Symptom specific therapy,
HCT

IPEX, Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked; XL, X-­linked; FTT, failure to thrive; HCT, hematopoietic cell transplant; AR, autosomal recessive; CTLA,
cytotoxic T-­lymphocyte protein; ALPSV, autoimmune lymphoproliferative disease V; AD, autosomal dominant; LRBA, lipopolysaccharide-­responsive and beigelike anchor protein;
BACH, broad complex-­tramtrack-­bric a brac and Cap’n’collar homology; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription; GOF, gain of function; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis;
ITP, immune thrombocytopenic purpura.

Enteropathy
Skin disease
Endocrinopathy
Hematologic disease
Pulmonary
Cardiovascular
Renal
Hepatic

Fig. 174.2 Clinical manifestations

in the IPEX-­like cohorts. (Modified
from Gambineri E, Ciullini Mannurita S, Hagin D, et al. Clinical,
immunological, and molecular heterogeneity of 173 patients with the
phenotype of immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked (IPEX) syndrome. Front
Immunol. 2018;9:2411. Fig. 5.)

Lymphadenopathy
Arthritis/vasculitis
Neurologic
Serious infections

0%

10%

with normal levels of IgM, IgG, and IgA. The diagnosis is initially made
clinically and confirmed by genetic testing (exome or panels).

Treatment

Inhibition of T-­cell activation by cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or sirolimus
with corticosteroids is the treatment of choice, along with the specific
care of the endocrinopathy and other manifestations of autoimmunity.
These agents are typically used as a bridge to transplant. HCT is the
only possibility for curing IPEX. Janus kinase inhibitors have been used
in patients with IPEX-­like syndromes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

IPEX-like

IPEX

70%

80%

90%

100%

174.2 Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
Danielle E. Arnold and Jennifer W. Leiding
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a severe systemic
hyperinflammatory syndrome that can be aggressive and life-­
threatening. Classic features include fever, cytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, coagulopathy, and elevations in inflammatory markers.
Primary or genetic HLH is due to pathogenic variants in genes that
predispose patients to HLH by a variety of mechanisms and includes
classic familial HLH due to pathogenic variants in PRF1, UNC13D,
STX11, and STXBP2; certain pigmentary disorders; and other primary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1326 Part XII u Immunology
immunodeficiencies or immune regulatory disorders (see Chapter 556.2;
Fig. 174.3). Primary HLH is seen most frequently in pediatric patients but
may occur at all ages.
Secondary HLH occurs in the setting of a medical condition
that results in intense immune activation such as severe infection,
malignancy, or rheumatologic disease. Many primary immune
deficiencies (PIDs) are also associated with an increased risk of
HLH, usually in the setting of infection. HLH has been reported
in patients with severe combined immune deficiency and chronic
granulomatous disease, but secondary HLH has been seen in a wide
variety of PID. Several inborn errors of metabolism can also present
with secondary HLH.
Of note, patients with primary or genetic HLH often present with HLH
triggered by or “secondary” to infection or other immune activating events.
For more details see Chapter 556.2.

174.3 Epstein-­Barr Virus Susceptibility
­Disorders
Danielle E. Arnold and Jennifer W. Leiding
Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) is a gamma-­herpes family virus with a marked
tropism for B cells. Most individuals experience asymptomatic infection
or infectious mononucleosis, a self-­limiting lymphoproliferative disease
that is particularly common in adolescents. EBV is also an oncogenic
virus and may induce several types of neoplasms, including B-­cell,
T-­cell, and natural killer (NK) cell lymphomas; nasopharyngeal and
gastric carcinomas; and EBV-­associated smooth muscle cell tumors.
During primary infection, EBV-­infected B cells are eliminated by
EBV-­specific cytotoxic T cells as well as other innate cytotoxic lymphocytes such as NK cells, γδ T cells, and invariant natural killer T
(iNKT) cells. However, some EBV-­infected B cells escape the immune
response, establishing a reservoir for EBV that may reactivate

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

anakinra

IL-1
Ferritin

IL-18
IL-18 binding
protein
XIAP

Cytokine storm

Inflammasome

Fever
Inflammation
Tissue damage

Macrophage
ruxolitinib

NLRC4
inflammasome

IFN-γR

IL-6

emapalumab
IFN-gamma

sIL-2R
IL-12
Cytotoxic
T cell

IL-12R
alemtuzumab

Tissue
Infiltration

CD52

IL-6R

MHC1-TCR
Complex

perforin

Infected
B cell

granzyme

EBV

perforin
pore

PRF1
UNC13D
STX11
STXBP2
LYST
RAB27A
AP3B1

tocilizumab

XIAP

EBV
EBV

Cell apoptosis

Fig. 174.3 Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). HLH is a severe systemic inflammatory syndrome due to abnormal reciprocal macrophage

and cytotoxic lymphocyte hyperactivation, resulting in cytokine storm, hemophagocytosis, and tissue infiltration by activated immune cells. Primary
HLH genes associated with defective granule-­mediated cytotoxicity or inflammasome dysregulation are shown in red. Common nonsteroidal immunosuppressive agents frequently used to treat HLH are also shown. EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; TCR, T-­cell receptor; XIAP, X-­linked inhibitor of apoptosis.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 174 u Immune Dysregulation 1327
iNKT cells, mucosal-­associated invariant T (MAIT) cells, and/or
NK cells and impaired NK cell function are also often observed.

throughout an individual’s life. These reactivations are typically
asymptomatic in healthy individuals; however, in immunocompromised persons, EBV reactivations and persistence and expansion of
latently infected B lymphoblasts may result in symptomatic and often
severe disease.

Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Treatment

More than 50% of patients with EBV susceptibility disorders experience at least one episode of EBV lymphoproliferative disease.
Patients are also susceptible to other EBV-­
driven pathologies,
including HLH and both Hodgkin and non-­Hodgkin lymphoma.
Other severe viral infections (e.g., other herpesviruses, human
herpesvirus 6 [HHV-­6]), bacterial infections, particularly recurrent pulmonary infections, and hypogammaglobulinemia and/
or dysgammaglobulinemia are also common. Diagnosis for these
disorders is with a full immune evaluation and genetic testing.
Treatment includes rituximab (anti-­CD20 antibody) to eliminate
EBV-­infected B cells, treatment of infections, and immunoglobulin

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

There are several primary combined immunodeficiencies characterized by a very high predisposition to EBV infection, some of
which are listed in Table 174.2. These disorders are due to defects
in pathways involved in T-­and B-­cell interaction and crosstalk (Fig.
174.4). Disruption of these pathways results in aberrant cytotoxic
T-­cell activation, migration, proliferation, and/or cytolytic activity
in response to antigenic stimulation and, thus, impaired immune
surveillance of B cells by T cells. Marked decrease or absence of
Table 174.2  Primary or Genetic EBV Susceptibility Disorders

GENE (PROTEIN)

DISORDER

INHERITANCE

PATHOGENESIS

ADDITIONAL
FEATURES

DEFINITIVE OR
DISEASE-­SPECIFIC
TREATMENT*

MAGT1

XMEN (X-­linked
immunodeficiency
w/Mg2+ defect,
EBV infection and
neoplasia)

XL

Defective Mg2+
transporter; ↓ NKG2D
expression results in
defective cytotoxicity

Chronic EBV infection
rather than full-­scale
HLH, viral infections, lung
infections, autoimmune
cytopenia, lymphoma

Allogeneic HCT

ITK

Lymphoproliferative
syndrome 1

AR

Defective tyrosine kinase
function; defective
cytotoxic T-­cell
expansion, and cytolytic
capacity; ↓ iNKT cells

Chronic EBV infection,
lung infections, PJP,
autoimmune cytopenia,
lymphoma

Allogeneic HCT

CD27

Lymphoproliferative
syndrome 2

AD

CD27 is a co-­stimulatory
molecule on T cells;
required for normal
T-­cell proliferation and
cytotoxicity against EBV-­
infected B cells;
↓ iNKT cells

Chronic EBV infection,
lung infections, uveitis,
oral and anal ulcers,
hypogammaglobulinemia,
lymphoma

Allogeneic HCT

CD70

Lymphoproliferative
syndrome 3

AR

CD70 expressed by EBV-­
Chronic EBV infection, lung
infected B cells interacts
infections, lymphoma
with CD27 on T cells;
required for normal
expansion and cytotoxicity
of T cells; ↓ NKG2D and
2B4 expression;
↓ iNKT cells

Allogeneic HCT

CTPS1

CTPS1 deficiency

AR

Enzyme involved in de novo
synthesis of
cytidine nucleotide
triphosphate (CTP);
deficiency leads to
impaired T-­cell
proliferation; ↓ iNKT cells

Chronic EBV infection,
viral infections, lung
infections, meningitis,
eczema, lymphoma

Allogeneic HCT

CORO1A

CORO1A deficiency

AR

Actin regulator;
T lymphopenia,
impaired immunologic
synapse formation and
intracellular signaling;
↓ iNKT cells

Chronic EBV infection
rather than HLH,
viral infections, lung
infections, neurologic
involvement, lymphoma

Allogeneic HCT

RASGRP1

RASGRP1 deficiency

AR

Activates RAS, which
leads to MAPK pathway
activation; defects in
T-­cell activation,
proliferation, and
migration;
↓ iNKT cells

Chronic EBV infection,
viral infections, lung
infections, autoimmune
cytopenia, EBV negative
lymphoproliferative
disease, lymphoma

Allogeneic HCT

*Treatment should include HLH-­directed therapy, treatment of infections and malignancy, and other supportive care measures as appropriate.
EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; AR, autosomal recessive; XL, X-­linked; AD, autosomal dominant; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; iNKT, invariant NK T cell; CNS, central nervous system; HSM,
hepatosplenomegaly; PJP, Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia; HCT, hematopoietic cell transplantation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1328 Part XII u Immunology

CORO1A

iNKT

SLAMF6

T cell
expansion

CD48

SAP
2B4

CD8+ T cell

Infected
B cell

ITK

NK
cell

CD70

CD27

EBV

Mg

MAGT1

CTP ↑

CTPS1

EBV

RASGRP1

EBV

NKG2D

T cell migration

MICA

γδT
cell

Fig. 174.4 Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) susceptibility disorders. Combined immunodeficiencies characterized by a very high predisposition to EBV

lymphoproliferative disease are shown in red. These genes/proteins play essential roles in the recognition of EBV-­infected B cells by T cells and
in cytotoxic T-­cell activation, migration, proliferation, and/or cytotoxic activity. As such, defects in any of these components allow for EBV-­infected
B-­cell immune escape. Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cell, NK cell, and γδT-­cell numbers and/or function may also be low or aberrant, respectively.

replacement when indicated. Allogeneic HCT is the only curative
treatment available.

Other Primary Immunodeficiencies Associated with
Epstein-­Barr Virus Lymphoproliferative Disease

Herpesvirus infections and EBV lymphoproliferative disease are also
seen to a lesser extent in several other combined immunodeficiencies associated with T-­cell defects, particularly those affecting T-­cell
survival and mobilization. Classic examples include Wiskott-­Aldrich
syndrome, DOCK8 deficiency, GATA2 haploinsufficiency, and activated PI3K-­delta syndrome, among others. Severe EBV infections may
also be seen in patients with hypomorphic or leaky severe combined
immunodeficiency.
Any patient who presents with prolonged and/or severe EBV lymphoproliferative disease or EBV-­positive lymphoma warrants evaluation for an underlying primary immunodeficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

174.4 Chronic Active Epstein-­Barr Virus
Danielle E. Arnold and Jennifer W. Leiding
Chronic active EBV (CAEBV) is a rare systemic EBV lymphoproliferative disorder characterized by fever, persistent lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and hepatitis in the absence of an underlying primary
or secondary immunodeficiency, malignancy, or autoimmune disorder.

GENETIC PREDISPOSITION

CAEBV is seen primarily in persons of East Asian (Japan, Korea,
China, and Taiwan) or Latin American (Indigenous people in Mexico
and Central/South America) ancestry; in these patients, EBV is predominantly present in T cells or NK cells. Conversely, while rare, persons of Western European descent typically have B-­cell CAEBV. The
uneven geographic distribution of CAEBV suggests that underlying
genetic factors may contribute to the development of CAEBV; heterozygous pathogenic variants in HLH predisposing genes (e.g., perforin)
have been identified in patients with CAEBV. Causative genetic defects
have not been identified in most cases.

Pathophysiology

The mechanism of EBV entry into T cells or NK cells is unclear, but
T cells and NK cells can express low levels of CD21, the EBV receptor, during primary infection. The pathogenesis of CAEBV is less clear.
Evidence suggests that EBV infection directly induces T-­cell or NK
cell survival via activation of several survival-­promoting molecules

Table 174.3  Chronic Active EBV (CAEBV) Diagnostic
Criteria
All 4 criteria must be present:
1.	Sustained or recurrent infectious mononucleosis-­like symptoms
persisting for >3 mo
2.	EBV PCR >102.5 copies/μg DNA in the peripheral blood or tissue
lesion
3.	Evidence of EBV infection of T or NK cells in the peripheral blood
or affected tissues
4.	Exclusion of other diagnoses: primary EBV infection, primary or
secondary immunodeficiency, malignancy, autoimmune disease
EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; NK, natural killer; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.

or pathways, including upregulation of co-­stimulatory molecules that
suppress apoptosis, activation of the NF-­κB pathway, and upregulation
of activation-­induced cytidine deaminase, which acts as a genomic disruptor and has been shown to play a role in EBV-­induced lymphomagenesis in B cells.

Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis

Clinical manifestations of CAEBV are heterogenous, ranging from a
mild and indolent clinical course to a more aggressive and potentially
fatal illness due to complications such as HLH, multisystem organ
failure, and/or progression to leukemia or lymphoma. Clinical manifestations may by episodic, but patients typically have persistently and
markedly elevated levels of EBV in the blood throughout their disease
course. Infiltration of tissues by EBV-­positive lymphocytes may result in
organ failure (liver failure is commonly seen), and EBV-­infected T cells
and NK cells may undergo malignant transformation. The diagnostic
criteria for CAEBV are listed in Table 174.3; CAEBV should be suspected in any patient with sustained inflammation of unknown origin
and chronically elevated EBV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) levels.
Evaluations to determine whether EBV is predominantly present in
T cells or NK cells should be undertaken, if possible, in patients with
CAEBV. One method is EBV PCR on peripheral blood mononuclear
cells that have been sorted by flow cytometry, although this test is not
widely available. Histologic examination of tissue that has been infiltrated by EBV-­infected lymphocytes by immune staining and in situ
hybridization of EBV-­encoded mRNA (EBER) is another approach.

Treatment

Treatment options in severe cases are limited, and clinical responses
are mostly transient. Some therapeutic approaches include

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 174 u Immune Dysregulation 1329
immunomodulatory therapy, combination bortezomib and ganciclovir, and EBV-­specific T cells. Patients with HLH should receive HLH-­
directed therapy. Standard antiviral therapy is not effective. Cytotoxic
chemotherapy is also used to reduce disease activity and burden of
EBV-­infected lymphocytes, primarily as a bridge to HCT. Allogeneic
HCT is the only definitive therapy available with overall survival rates
as high as 87% in some reports. Patients with progressive disease
remain difficult to transplant. As such, some advocate rapidly proceeding to HCT early in the disease process, although the timing of HCT
remains controversial.

with classic symptoms of IBD including weight loss, failure to thrive,
abdominal pain, fever, constipation, diarrhea, hematochezia. The phenotype is heterogenous with some children having mild disease and
others presenting with or developing more severe disease over time.
Approximately 40% have extensive pancolonic disease at presentation.
Extent, location, and histology can progress or change over time.
For more details see Chapter 382.3.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

174.6 Autoimmune Cytopenias

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Danielle E. Arnold and Jennifer W. Leiding

174.5 Very Early Onset Inflammatory Bowel
Disease
Danielle E. Arnold and Jennifer W. Leiding
Inflammatory bowel disease that presents in children less than 6 years
of age is known as very early onset inflammatory bowel disease (VEO-­
IBD). Monogenic defects involved in primary immunodeficiency and
intestinal barrier processes are enriched in children with VEO-­IBD
(Fig. 174.5). Targeted therapies in children with VEO-­IBD with a
monogenic defect have been successful in treating disease manifestations (see Chapter 382.3).

DISEASE CLASSIFICATION AND CLINICAL
PRESENTATION

Children diagnosed with IBD <2 years of age are referred to as
infantile-­onset IBD and those 2-­6 years as VEO-­IBD. Children present

Autoimmune cytopenias are a group of disorders in which there is
immune destruction of differentiated hematopoietic cells. Immune
destruction can be autoantibody mediated or non-­autoantibody mediated. Single lineage disease can affect red cells (autoimmune hemolytic
anemia [AIHA]), platelets (idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura
[ITP]), or neutrophils (autoimmune neutropenia [AIN]). Bilineage or
trilineage disease can affect any combination of these cell lines. Evan
disease is a combination of AIHA and ITP.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The etiology of autoimmune cytopenias as a manifestation of an inborn
error of immunity is often multifactorial with autoantibody-­mediated
destruction or cellular-­mediated destruction of red blood cells, platelets, or neutrophils as the major causes of hemolysis (Table 174.4).
In disorders with intrinsic B-­cell defects and disrupted T-­and B-­cell
interactions, autoantibody production toward hematopoietic cells can

Environmental trigger
Intestinal microbiota
Epithelial
barrier
ADAM17
IKBKG
COL7A1
TTC7A

Hyperactive /
autoinflammatory
STXBP2
LYST
RAGB27a
MVK
PLCG2
HPS1, 4, 6
SH2D1A

Neutrophil
defects
CYBA, CYBB,
NCF1, NCF2,
NCF4
SLC37A4
G6PC3
ITGB2

Immune
regulation
FOXP3
IL2RA, IL2RB
IL10, IL10RA,
IL10RB
CTLA4, LRBA
STAT1, STAT3,
STAT5b
IL21, IL21R

Treg

IL-10, TGF-β

Adaptive immune
response
RAG1/2
WAS
ICOS
PIK3R1, PTEN
CTLA4, LRBA
BTK
DCLRE1C
CD40LG
AICDA

IL-1, IL-18

Inflammasome
dysregulation
XIAP
NLRC4
MEFV

Fig. 174.5 Very early onset inflammatory bowel disease. Complex host interactions between the environment, intestinal microbiota, and immune-­
related genes maintain gut health. Mutations in genes involved in epithelial barrier, neutrophil function, control of inflammation, and T-­and B-­cell
function can manifest as very early onset inflammatory bowel disease. IL, Interleukin; TGF, transforming growth factor; Treg, T regulatory cell.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1330 Part XII u Immunology
Table 174.4  Monogenic Causes of Autoimmune Cytopenias and Primary Immunodeficiency

DISORDER

MOI

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

IMMUNE FEATURES

DEFINITIVE OR
DISEASE-­SPECIFIC
TREATMENT

PIK3 defects

Activated PI3K-­
delta syndrome

AD, LOF
AD, GOF
AD

Insulin resistance, short
stature, nodular lymphoid
hyperplasia, lymphoma,
bronchiectasis

High IgM, low IgG,
low CD4/CD45RA

Allogeneic HCT
*Leniolisib, sirolimus

STAT3

STAT3 GOF

AD, GOF

Enteropathy, autoimmune
cytopenias,
lymphoproliferation,
recurrent infections

Elevated DNTs
Variable decreases in
IgG, IgA, IgM, B-­and
T-­cell quantities

Jakinibs
Allogeneic HCT

STAT1

STAT1 GOF

AD, GOF

Chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis, cerebral
aneurysms, interstitial
lung disease, enteropathy,
colitis

Variable decreases in
IgG, IgA, IgM, B-­and
T-­cell quantities

Jakinibs
Allogeneic HCT

CTLA-­4

CTLA4
haploinsufficiency

AD

Enteropathy, type 1
diabetes, autoimmune
cytopenias, interstitial
lung disease

Low IgG, low T-­cell
quantities

Sirolimus
Abatacept,
belatacept
Allogeneic HCT

LRBA

LRBA deficiency

AR

Enteropathy, type 1
diabetes, autoimmune
cytopenias, interstitial
lung disease

Low IgG, low T-­cell
quantities

Abatacept,
belatacept
Allogeneic HCT

TNFRSF6
TNFSF6
FADD
CASP8
CASP10

ALPS

AR
GOF

Lymphadenopathy,
lymphoma

Elevated DNTs

Mycophenolate
mofetil
Sirolimus

GENE (PROTEIN)

PI3K, Phosphoinositide 3 kinase; AD, autosomal dominant; LOF, loss of function; AD, autosomal dominant; GOF, gain of function; HCT, hematopoietic cell transplant; STAT, signal
transducer and activator of transcription; CTLA, cytotoxic T-­lymphocyte protein; LRBA, lipopolysaccharide-­responsive and beigelike anchor protein; ALPS, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome; DNT, double negative T cell.

occur. When B-­cell maturation is impaired, vital steps in the induction
of tolerance are omitted. In addition to the humoral B-­cell defects that
can lead to autoimmune cytopenias, intrinsic defects in T-­cell effector
function can lead to cellular autoimmunity. Impaired T-­cell development can cause a lack of functional effector cells against non-­self or
“dangerous” antigens while allowing production of autoreactive clones
with T-­cell receptors directed against self-­antigens. Additionally, T-­cell
defects may lead to a reduction in FOXP3+ Treg cells.

Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis

The clinical presentation of AIHA commonly includes dizziness,
fatigue, pallor, jaundice, and exertional dyspnea (see Chapter 513).
Complete blood count will show anemia and reticulocytosis. Additional features of hemolysis include hyperbilirubinemia, elevated
lactate dehydrogenase, and decreased haptoglobin levels. Direct antiglobulin testing is most often positive. ITP typically presents with
bleeding episodes that can range from mild bruising, petechiae, and
epistaxis to oral purpura, hematuria, menorrhagia, gastrointestinal
hemorrhage, or intracranial bleeding (see Chapter 533.1). Severe
life-­threatening bleeding is rare. Laboratory findings include acute
thrombocytopenia. Mean platelet volume is elevated or variable indicating that large new platelets are being generated to compensate for
loss. Autoantibodies against platelet glycoproteins may be positive
but are not helpful in elucidating immune thrombocytopenia as they
are positive in less than 65% of patients with immune thrombocytopenia and are not predictive, specific, or prognostic. AIN presents with low absolute neutrophil count (see Chapter 171). Clinical
manifestations include aphthous stomatitis, periodontal disease, and
increased frequency of soft tissue infections. Invasive infections and
sepsis are rare. Antigranulocyte antibodies can be present.

Immunodeficiencies Associated with Autoimmune
Cytopenias

Autoimmune cytopenias, especially those that include bilineages
and trilineages, are often a presenting symptom of or associated
with primary immunodysregulatory disorders. Other organ-­specific
immunodysregulatory and autoimmune conditions are often present. Next generation sequencing via whole exome sequencing or
panel-­based sequencing can aid in establishing a diagnosis. When
an inborn error of immunity is suspected with the presence of autoimmune cytopenias, a general immune screen should be performed
including serum quantities of IgG, IgM, IgA, and IgE. Quantities of
T cell, B cell, and NK cells should also be measured. Additional labs
that may be helpful in narrowing a diagnosis of immunodeficiency
include quantification of αβ+double negative T cells (CD4−CD8−),
CD27+IgD+ and CD27+IgD− memory B cells, serum ferritin, soluble
interleukin (IL)-­2 receptor, IL-­18, soluble Fas ligand, vitamin B12,
and folate.

Treatment

Targeted treatment of the primary immunodysregulatory disorder
can control or resolve autoimmune cytopenias. Standard treatment of
autoimmune cytopenias with or without a primary immunodysregulatory disorder include corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG), and biologic therapies such as rituximab and daratumumab
(monoclonal antibody against CD38 expressed on long-­lived plasma
cells). Control of symptoms is often more difficult and may increase
the suspicion for an underlying primary immunodysregulatory
disorder.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 174 u Immune Dysregulation 1331

174.7 Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative
Syndrome
Danielle E. Arnold and Jennifer W. Leiding
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), also known as
Canale-­Smith syndrome, is a disorder of abnormal lymphocyte apoptosis leading to polyclonal populations of T cells (double-­negative T
cells), which express CD3 and α/β antigen receptors but do not have
CD4 or CD8 co-­receptors (CD3+ T-­cell receptor α/β+, CD4−CD8−).
These T cells respond poorly to antigens or mitogens and do not produce growth or survival factors (IL-­2). The genetic deficit in most
patients is a germline or somatic pathologic variant in the FAS gene,
which produces a cell surface receptor of the tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) receptor superfamily (TNFRSF6), which, when stimulated by
its ligand, will produce programmed cell death (Table 174.5). Persistent survival of these lymphocytes leads to immune dysregulation and
autoimmunity. ALPS is also caused by other genes in the Fas pathway
(FASLG and CASP10). In addition, ALPS-­like disorders are associated
with other mutations: RAS-­
associated autoimmune lymphoproliferative disorder (RALD), caspase-­8 deficiency, Fas-­associated protein
with death domain deficiency (FADD), and protein kinase C delta deficiency (PRKCD). These disorders have varying degrees of immunodeficiency, autoimmunity, and lymphoproliferation.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

ALPS is characterized by autoimmunity, chronic persistent or
recurrent lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly (in
50%), and hypergammaglobulinemia (IgG, IgA). Many patients
present in the first year of life, and most are symptomatic by age 5
years. Lymphadenopathy can be striking (Fig. 174.6). Splenomegaly

Table 174.5  Revised Diagnostic Criteria for Autoimmune
Lymphoproliferative Syndrome*
REQUIRED
1.	Chronic (>6 mo), nonmalignant, noninfectious lymphadenopathy,
splenomegaly or both
2.	Elevated CD3+ TCRαβ+ CD4-­CD8-­ DNT cells (≥1.5% of total
lymphocytes or 2.5% of CD3+ lymphocytes) in the setting of
normal or elevated lymphocyte counts
ACCESSORY
Primary
1.	Defective lymphocyte apoptosis (in two separate assays)
2.	Somatic or germline pathogenic mutation in FAS, FASLG, or CASP10
Secondary
1.	Elevated plasma sFasL levels (>200 pg/mL) OR elevated plasma
interleukin-­10 levels (>20 pg/mL) OR elevated serum or plasma
vitamin B12 levels (>1500 ng/L) OR elevated plasma interleukin-­18
levels >500 pg/mL
2.	Typical immunohistologic findings as reviewed by an experienced
hematopathologist
3.	Autoimmune cytopenias (hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia,
or neutropenia) AND elevated immunoglobulin G levels
(polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia)
4.	Family history of a nonmalignant/noninfectious lymphoproliferation
with or without autoimmunity
*A definitive diagnosis is based on the presence of both required criteria plus one
primary accessory criterion. A probable diagnosis is based on the presence of both
required criteria plus one secondary accessory criterion.
DNT, Double-­negative T cell; TCR, T-­cell receptor.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, Wedderburn LR, eds. Textbook of Pediatric
Rheumatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016. Box 46-­2.

CD3 T cells

100

101

CD8 PE
102

103

104

CT scan: Lymph node

100

A

B

CD3

101

102
CD4 FITC

CD4

103

104

CD8

Fig. 174.6 Clinical, radiographic, immunologic, and histologic characteristics of the autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. A, Front view of

the National Institutes of Health patient. B, Top left, CT scan of the neck is shown demonstrating enlarged preauricular, cervical, and occipital lymph
nodes. Arrowheads denote the most prominent lymph nodes. Top right, Flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood T cells from a patient with
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), with CD8 expression on the vertical axis and CD4 on the horizontal axis. Lower left quadrant,
Contains CD4−CD8− (double-­negative) T cells, which are usually present at <1% of T cells expressing the αβ T-­cell receptor. Bottom, CD3, CD4, and
CD8 staining on serial sections of a lymph node biopsy specimen from a patient with ALPS. Large numbers of DNCD3+ CD4−CD8− (double-­negative)
T cells are present in the interfollicular areas of the lymph node. (Adapted from Siegel RM, Fleisher TA. The role of Fas and related death receptors
in autoimmune and other disease states. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999;103[5 Pt 1]:729–738.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1332 Part XII u Immunology
may produce hypersplenism. Autoimmunity also produces anemia (Coombs-­positive hemolytic anemia) or thrombocytopenia or
a mild neutropenia. The lymphoproliferative process (lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly) may regress over time, but autoimmunity
does not regress and is characterized by frequent exacerbations and
recurrences. Other autoimmune features include urticaria, uveitis,
glomerulonephritis, hepatitis, vasculitis, panniculitis, arthritis, premature ovarian failure, thyroiditis, myocarditis, pancreatitis, and CNS
involvement (seizures, headaches, encephalopathy, transverse myelitis, Guillain-­Barré syndrome, ataxia).
Malignancies are also more common in patients with ALPS and
include Hodgkin and non-­
Hodgkin lymphomas and solid-­
tissue

tumors of thyroid, skin, heart, or lung. ALPS is one cause of Evan syndrome (immune thrombocytopenia and immune hemolytic anemia).

Diagnosis

Laboratory abnormalities depend on the lymphoproliferative organ
response (hypersplenism) or the degree of autoimmunity (anemia,
thrombocytopenia). There may be lymphocytosis or lymphopenia.
Table 174.5 lists the criteria for the diagnosis. Flow cytometry helps
identify the lymphocyte type (see Fig. 174.6). Functional genetic
analysis for the TNFRSF6 gene often reveals a heterozygous mutation. The differential diagnosis of ALP-­related syndromes is noted
in Table 174.6.

Table 174.6  Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome (ALPS)-­Related Syndromes That Are Potentially Similar to But
Genetically Distinct from ALPS or Meet Characteristics of ALPS with Undetermined Genetic Defects (ALPS-­U)
NOMENCLATURE

DISEASE

MUTATION

CLINICAL FEATURES

POTENTIAL
TARGETED
THERAPIES

LABORATORY
BIOMARKERS

Ras-­associated
autoimmune
leukoproliferative
disorder

RALD

Germline or somatic
NRAS and KRAS
pathogenic variants
RAS markedly decreases
Bim protein
expression leading to
impaired lymphoid
withdrawal and T-­cell
receptor (TCR)-­induced
apoptosis

Primary immunodeficiency
Persistent absolute
disorder of defective
or relative
apoptosis leading to
monocytosis,
lymphadenopathy, massive
hypergamma­
splenomegaly, increased
globulinemia, B
circulating B cells,
lymphocytosis
hypergammaglobulinemia, Does not exhibit
and autoimmunity
elevated “double-­
increased risk for
negative T cells”
hematopoietic
(DNTs), vitamin B12
malignancies
Activating somatic
mutations in KRAS or
NRAS

Dianzani
autoimmune
lymphoproliferative
disease

DALD

No causative genes
identified
Overexpression of the
cytokine osteopontin
Perforin

Exhibit autoimmunity,
lymphoproliferation,
splenomegaly, and
defective Fas without
expansion of DNT cells

Absent DNTs
FAS resistance but
without FAS or FASL
mutations

Caspase-­8 deficiency
state

CEDS

Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic variants
in CASP8 thought to
play a dual role in the
induction of the nuclear
factor-­kappa B (NF-­κB)
transcription factor
during lymphocyte
activation as well as in
apoptosis mediated by
the Fas death-­inducing
signaling complex
(DISC)

Exhibits
lymphoproliferation
and apoptosis
defects observed in
ALPS, but manifests
immunodeficiency rather
than
autoimmunity;
recurrent sinopulmonary
infections
Increased risk for
malignancy

Serum Ig levels,
antibody function,
lymphocyte
activation
Defective activation of
T, B and natural killer
(NK) cells
CASP8 deficiency

Fas-­associated
death domain
deficiency

FADD deficiency

Autosomal recessive
(AR) FADD deficiency

Characterized by severe
bacterial and viral
infections, congenital
heart
defects, and recurrent
episodes of fever, liver,
dysfunction, and seizures

FADD deficiency

Common variable
immunodeficiency 9

Protein kinase C
delta (PRKCD)
deficiency

AR PRKCD primary
immunodeficiency

Characterized by
recurrent infections,
lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly,
autoimmunity, and NK
cell dysfunction

IL-­10 overexpression by
B cells

Mitogen-­activated
pathway
kinase (MAPK)
inhibitors
(for example,
trametinib),
mammalian
target of
rapamycin
(mTOR)
inhibitors
(sirolimus,
everolimus)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 174 u Immune Dysregulation 1333
Table 174.6  Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome (ALPS)-­Related Syndromes That Are Potentially Similar to But Genetically
Distinct from ALPS or Meet Characteristics of ALPS with Undetermined Genetic Defects (ALPS-­U)—cont’d
NOMENCLATURE

DISEASE

MUTATION

CLINICAL FEATURES

LABORATORY
BIOMARKERS

POTENTIAL
TARGETED
THERAPIES

Activated PI3K delta
syndrome

APDS, also
known as PASLI

Heterozygous
gain-­of-­function
pathogenic variants
in PI3KCD or PI3KR1

Recurrent respiratory
infections and
increased susceptibility
to viral infections with
both B-­and T-­cell
defects

Decreased naïve
T cells, low IgG,
IgA, and normal or
elevated IgM

mTOR inhibitors,
PI3K inhibitors

X-­linked
immunodeficiency
with magnesium
defect, Epstein-­
Barr virus (EBV)
infection and
neoplasia

XMEN disease

Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic variants
in magnesium
transporter 1 (MAGT1);
X-­linked

Chronic high-­level EBV
with increased EBV-­
infected B cells and
increased susceptibility
to EBV-­associated
lymphomas

Mg deficiency

Magnesium

Gain-­of-­function
mutations in signal
transducer and
activator of
transcription 1
defect

GOF STAT1
defect

STAT1 gain-­of-­function
pathogenic variants

Chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis, recurrent
Staphylococcus aureus
infections, cerebral
aneurysms, and multiple
autoimmune features

Decreased TH17
response

JAK/STAT
inhibitors
(for example,
ruxolitinib)

Gain-­of-­function
mutations in signal
transducer and
activator of
transcription 3

GOF STAT3-­
mutations

STAT3-­gain of function
pathogenic variants

Lymphoproliferation
and childhood-­onset
autoimmunity thought to
result from dysregulated
cytokine signaling and
interstitial lung disease

Anti–IL-­6R
monoclonal
antibody
(tocilizumab)

Cytotoxic T
lymphocyte
antigen (CTLA4)
haploinsufficiency
with autoimmune
infiltration

CHAI

Heterozygous loss-­of-­
function pathogenic
variants in CTLA4

Hypogammaglobulinemia
and autoantibody-­
mediated cytopenias,
lymphadenopathy,
splenomegaly, organ-­
specific
autoimmunity, and
lymphocytic infiltration of
nonlymphoid organs
CHAI more commonly
seen in older children or
young adults, whereas
disease onset in LATAIE is
typically earlier

CTLA4-­Ig
fusion drug
(Abatacept)
mTOR inhibitors

LRBA encodes the
lipopolysaccharide-­
responsive and
beigelike anchor
protein, thought to
regulate CTLA4

Antibody deficiency,
infection, autoimmunity,
and lymphoproliferation,
often linked with
enteropathy or
inflammatory bowel
disease
Lymphocyte infiltration
also seen in lungs and
brain

CTLA4-­Ig
fusion drugs
Hydroxy­
chloroquine or
chloroquine
mTOR inhibitors

Common variable
LRBA deficiency
immune deficiency
LATAIE
caused by defect in
lipopolysaccharide-­
responsive and
beigelike anchor
protein
LRBA deficiency with
autoantibodies,
regulatory
T-­cell defects,
autoimmune
infiltration, and
enteropathy

Note: The majority of these syndromes have been defined based on the genomic defect with associated symptoms.
From Bride K, Teachey D. Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome: more than a FAScinating disease. F1000Res. 2017;6:1928. Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1334 Part XII u Immunology
Treatment

to activation and translocation of NF-­κB proteins into the nucleus,
where they initiate downstream inflammatory responses. Defects in
many proteins in both pathways have been described. Table 174.7
describes immune defects of the NF-­κB pathways that cause symptoms of immune dysregulation or autoimmunity. Treatment of NF-­
κB defects includes prevention of infections and replacement of
immunoglobulin and has included HSCT.

174.8 Nuclear Factor-­κB Pathway Defects

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Rapamycin (sirolimus) will often control the adenopathy and autoimmune cytopenias. Malignancies can be treated with the usual protocols used in patients unaffected by ALPS. Stem cell transplantation is
another possible option in treating the autoimmune manifestations
of ALPS.

Danielle E. Arnold and Jennifer W. Leiding

The NF-­κB pathways consist of canonical (NF-­κB1) and noncanonical (NF-­κB2) pathways. On cellular activation, both pathways lead

Table 174.7  Defects of Nuclear Factor-­κB Pathways Associated with Immune Dysregulation
PROTEIN

INHERITANCE

AUTOIMMUNE OR INFLAMMATORY
COMPLICATIONS

OTHER
MANIFESTATIONS

IMMUNOLOGIC
PHENOTYPE

IKBKG (NEMO)

XL

Colitis

• Ectodermal dysplasia
• Osteopetrosis
• Lymphedema
• Bacterial infections
• Opportunistic infections
• DNA viral infections

• Hypogammaglobulinemia
• Hyper-­IgM
• Hyper-­IgA
• Hyper-­IgD
• Poor antibody
­responses
• Decreased NK cell
­function
• Decreased TLR
­responses

NF-­κB1

AD

• Pyoderma gangrenosum
• Lymphoproliferation
• Cytopenia
• Hypothyroidism
• Alopecia areata
• Enteritis
• LIP
• N RH

• Atrophic gastritis
• Squamous cell
carcinoma
• Respiratory tract
infections
• Superficial skin
infections
• Lung adenocarcinoma
• Respiratory insufficiency
• Aortic stenosis
• Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma

• Hypogammaglobulinemia
• IgA deficiency

NF-­κB2

AD

• Alopecia totalis
• Trachyonychia
• Vitiligo
• Autoantibodies: thyroid ­peroxidase,
glutamate decarboxylase,
­thyroglobulin
• Central adrenal insufficiency

• Viral respiratory
infections
• Pneumonias
• Sinusitis
• Otitis media
• Recurrent herpes
• Asthma
• Type 1 Chiari
malformation
• Interstitial lung disease

• Early-­onset hypogamma­
globulinemia
• Low vaccine responses
• Variable B-­cell counts
• Low switched memory B
cells (CD19+CD27+IgD−)
• Low marginal zone B
cells (CD19+CD27+IgD+)

XL, X-­linked; AD, autosomal dominant; LIP, lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis; NRH, nonregenerative hyperplasia; TLR, toll like receptor.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 175 u Defects of Innate Immunity

Chapter 175

Defects of Innate
Immunity
Jenna R.E. Bergerson and
Alexandra F. Freeman
The innate immune system is the body’s first defense against pathogens, and includes barriers such as the skin as well as neutrophils,
natural killer (NK) cells, the toll-­like receptors (TLRs) for microbial
pathogen recognition, cytokines, and the complement system. Breakdown of different parts of this system can predispose primarily to different pathogens, such as viruses, fungi, bacteria, and mycobacteria.
The innate immune system also plays an important role in engaging the
adaptive immune response.

175.1 Predisposition to Fungal Infections
Jenna R.E. Bergerson and Alexandra F. Freeman
Despite constant exposure to environmental fungi at sites like the
respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts and the skin, immunocompetent individuals do not develop invasive fungal disease because highly
sophisticated host defenses have evolved with time. The genetic basis
for inborn errors of immunity (IEIs) presenting with mucocutaneous
and/or invasive fungal disease have provided valuable insight into the
immunologic mediators necessary for antifungal host defense. Certain IEIs whose phenotype includes fungal disease, such as chronic
granulomatous disease (CGD), APECED, GATA2 deficiency, and
dominant negative STAT3 pathogenic variants (Job syndrome), are
examples.
Candida and Aspergillus are the two most commonly encountered
opportunistic fungi in clinical practice; both of these fungi are recognized in host tissues by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) on the cell
surface. When triggered by a relevant ligand, activation of these receptors results in pathogen uptake and killing. Most relevant to antifungal
immunity is the C-­type lectin receptor (CLR) family, which recognizes
specific fungal cell wall components called pathogen-­associated molecular patterns, like β-­glucans or mannans. When CLRs like Dectin-­1
bind ligand, the CARD9/BCL10/MALT1 complex (BCM complex) is
formed. Signaling via downstream pathways ultimately results in production of proinflammatory cytokines and promotes fungal uptake
and killing by myeloid phagocytes.
The molecular mechanisms that protect against host mucosal infections with Candida spp. are vastly different than those that confer
protection against systemic infection. Neutrophils, monocytes, and
macrophages are seemingly dispensable for immunity to mucosal
Candida infection; chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) is not
seen in neutropenic patients or those with CGD. Instead, mucocutaneous candidiasis seems to correlate with impairments in T-­lymphocyte
number or function. Interleukin (IL)-­17 signaling is also a critical
pathway for protection against CMC. On receptor activation, the adaptor molecule ACT1 is recruited to the IL-­17 receptor and mediates the
induction of signaling pathways that upregulate the transcription of
cytokines and antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) that help clear Candida
from the mucosal surfaces. Control of endemic fungi, such as Histoplasma, is dependent on the IL-­12/IFNg/STAT1 pathway.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis is characterized by severe,
persistent, or recurrent symptomatic infection of the nails, skin, oral,
or genital mucosa by the Candida genus. CMC has been associated
with a number of IEIs, in which it is one of many disease features along
with other infections and/or autoimmune manifestations. However,

1335

CMC can also be a main feature of a primary immunodeficiency disease (PIDD) (Table 175.1).
Antifungal therapy is the hallmark of treatment in these diseases.
Episodes of CMC typically respond to either topical or oral therapy.
Recurrences are common without secondary prophylaxis. Prophylaxis
should be initiated in those patients with frequent and early recurrences
after discontinuation of antifungal therapy. Prophylaxis is important
not only to reduce the morbidity associated with recurrent episodes of
CMC, but also to prevent mucosal inflammation, which can increase
the risk of squamous cell carcinoma. Repeated courses of antifungal
therapy increase the risk of developing resistance to antifungal therapy.
All cases of CMC should be confirmed with culture, and susceptibility
testing should guide the choice of antifungal if a therapeutic response
is not observed.
Systemic fungal disease should be guided by culture and susceptibility data with consideration of antifungal penetration in the affected
tissue. Additional factors to consider include concomitant medications
(triazoles are metabolized by P450 and prolong the QT interval with
the exception of isavuconazole, which shortens it), liver function, and
kidney function (amphotericin use). It is important to also consider
that voriconazole is associated with additional toxicities including an
increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, fluorosis, peripheral neuropathy, and visual disturbances. Survival of life-­threatening
fungal infection should also mandate secondary antifungal prophylaxis
unless the underlying immunodeficiency is cured by hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation (HSCT).

CARD9 DEFICIENCY

CARD9 deficiency is caused by biallelic loss-­of-­function (LOF) pathogenic variants in CARD9. CARD9 contributes to antifungal host
defense in a pathogen-­and organ-­specific manner with a striking
predilection for Candida albicans central nervous system (CNS) infections. CARD9 deficiency is the only known IEI in which patients are
predisposed to both mucocutaneous and systemic candidiasis, with C.
albicans typically isolated. The CNS is the most common site of systemic involvement, with CNS candidiasis often presenting as either
meningoencephalitis or an intracranial abscess ± obstructive hydrocephalus. The next most common site of systemic involvement is bone.
Neutrophils are absent in all involved exudates and tissues.
Deep dermatophytosis and subcutaneous phaeohyphomycosis
infections can also be seen in CARD9 deficiency. Trichophyton rubrum
and Trichophyton violaceum were the most common dermatophyte
species. Severe complications like lymphadenitis, extension into adjacent organs with fistula formation, and dissemination to the CNS have
been seen. Dermal biopsies show necrotizing granulomatous inflammation, subcutaneous nodules, and severe ulceration of the superficial tissues. Subcutaneous phaeohyphomycosis with a predilection for
facial involvement has also been reported. Granulomatous inflammation with scattered lymphocytes and eosinophils are seen on biopsy.
Extrapulmonary aspergillosis and a variety of dematiaceous fungi have
also been reported including Phialophora verrucosa, Exophiala spinifera, Ochroconis musae, and Corynespora cassiicola.
Clinical manifestations of CARD9 deficiency are fully penetrant by
the fourth or fifth decade of life with about 40% of patients presenting in adulthood. Sequencing of CARD9 is required to establish the
diagnosis, and determination of functional consequences of CARD9
variants is difficult. Lymphocyte phenotyping is usually normal, as
are absolute neutrophil and monocyte counts despite a lack of neutrophils in infected CSF. Nearly 60% of affected patients have findings
of elevated serum IgE and/or hypereosinophilia. Treatment of fungal
infection follows the tenets outlined earlier, frequently with infectious diseases consultation followed by lifelong antifungal prophylaxis
unless HSCT is successfully performed. Two patients with CARD9
deficiency have been successfully treated with HSCT leading to clinical
remission. There is a potential role for treatment of fungal disease with
granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor (GM-­CSF) therapy
in CARD9 deficiency, but there is variability in response that may relate
to the underlying pathogenic variant(s) responsible for disease; thus
seeking expert advice is recommended.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1336 Part XII u Immunology
Table 175.1  	 Medelian Susceptibility to Mycobacterial Disease Defects
GENE/INHERITANCE

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

TREATMENT

Complete IFNgR1/R2 deficiency

IFNgR1 or IFNgR2/AR

Early-­onset disseminated NTM
or BCG

Antimycobacterials; HSCT

Autosomal dominant IFNgR1
deficiency

IFNgR1/AD

NTM or BCG osteomyelitis,
disseminated Salmonella,
disseminated endemic mycoses

Antimycobacterials; adjuvant
IFN-­γ

IL-­12RB1 deficiency

IL12RB1/AR

Disseminated NTM, BCG,
Salmonella
Mucocutaneous candidiasis
Variable penetration

Antimycobacterials; consider
IFN-­γ with careful monitoring

IL-­12p40 deficiency

IL12B/AR

Disseminated NTM, BCG,
Salmonella
Variable penetration

Antimycobacterials; consider
IFN-­γ with careful monitoring

IL-­12Rb2 deficiency

IL12RB2/AR

NTM, BCG, and tuberculosis

Antimycobacterials

IL-­23R deficiency

IL23R/AR

NTM, BCG, and tuberculosis

Antimycobacterials

STAT1 LOF

STAT1/AD

Disseminated BCG/NTM, often
osteomyelitis

Antimycobacterials; consider
IFN-­γ

SPPL2a deficiency

SPPL2A/AR

Disseminated BCG

Antimycobacterials

TYK2 deficiency

TYK2/AR

Disseminated BCG, tuberculosis,
viral infections

Antimycobacterials

Macrophage gp91 phox
deficiency

CYBB/XL; distinct variants than
those causing CGD

Disseminated BCG

Antimycobacterials

IRF8 deficiency (dominant)

IRF8/AD

Disseminated BCG, NTM

Antimycobacterials

IRF8 deficiency (recessive)

IRF8/AR

Viral, mycobacterial,
mucocutaneous candidiasis

Antimicrobials, consider HSCT

ISG15 deficiency

ISG15/AR

Disseminated BCG

Antimycobacterials

RORγt deficiency

RORC/AR

Disseminated BCG and
mucocutaneous candidiasis

Antimicrobials

JAK1 LOF

JAK1/AR

Bacterial, viral, and disseminated
NTM

Antimicrobials

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; BCG, bacilli Calmette-­Guérin; CGD, chronic granulomatous disease; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; IFN, interferon; LOF, loss of function; NTM, nontuberculous mycobacteria.

STAT1 GOF

STAT1 gain-­
of-­
function (GOF) pathogenic variants present with
CMC, autoimmunity, intracranial aneurysms, and/or squamous cell
carcinoma. This condition likely accounts for more than 50% of CMC
cases; CMC affects most patients with this diagnosis and typically presents in the first year of life. Candida involvement of the oropharynx is
most common, but esophagitis, genital, and skin and nail disease are
also common. C. albicans is the most common cause of CMC, but other
Candida species have also been isolated. Azole resistance is a major
challenge over time making treatment difficult.
Invasive fungal infections are less common in this disease but can
be quite severe. Disseminated Histoplasmosis, Cryptococcus, Coccidioides, and Paracoccidioides can be difficult to treat and, in some cases,
have been fatal. Pulmonary and disseminated mold infections have been
reported infrequently and include organisms such as Aspergillus, Nannizziopsis, and Mucorales. Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia has been
reported rarely.
A wide range of other types of pathogens cause infections in this
patient population as well including recurrent bacterial sinopulmonary
infections, typically due to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus
influenzae, and Staphylococcus aureus. Bronchiectasis, when present,
may further produce susceptibility to pathogens such as Pseudomonas.
Less commonly skin infections such as folliculitis or cellulitis are also
observed. Mycobacterial infections are typically due to BCG in those
from countries that routinely immunize against tuberculosis (TB), and
nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) adenitis or TB, or NTM lung

infections. NTM infections do not usually disseminate widely in STAT1
GOF as they do in autosomal recessive or dominant STAT1 LOF.
Severe or recurrent viral infections, most commonly due to herpesviruses (herpes simplex virus [HSV], varicella-­zoster virus [VZV],
Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus [CMV], BK, and JC), are
also troublesome in over 30% of patients. Recurrent oral mucocutaneous disease due to HSV or recurrent VZV infection are the most
frequent viral disease manifestations. EBV and CMV viremias are
commonly detected, but CMV disease is infrequent as is symptomatic
EBV disease. Human papillomavirus (HPV)-­driven warts and molluscum are seen in a small number of these patients and are difficult
to treat. Although rare, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
(PML) from JC virus is of particular concern due to its high mortality.
PML has been seen with and without additional immune modulation;
therapies that are sometimes indicated for the autoimmunity seen in
STAT1 GOF, such as rituximab, need to be used with caution.
Additional disease manifestations include autoimmunity, vasculopathy, and malignancy. Autoimmune thyroid disease is most common, but type 1 diabetes mellitus, vitiligo, alopecia, pernicious anemia,
autoimmune cytopenias, inflammatory bowel disease, and lupus-­like
disease have all been observed and, in many cases, the autoimmune
manifestations can be quite refractory and difficult to control. Aphthous ulcers are also especially common and can be very painful.
Cerebral aneurysms are the most common vasculopathy seen, but
extracerebral vascular abnormalities occur as well. These aneurysms
may be the result of vasculitis, perhaps from pathogens like VZV; serial

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 175 u Defects of Innate Immunity
prospective imaging should be a part of routine screening. The most
common malignancy observed is squamous cell carcinoma, mainly of
the skin, oropharynx, and esophagus. Chronic inflammation caused
by mucosal Candida infections may play an important role, as well as
inflammation driven by increased STAT1 activity.
Management has been largely targeted against the infections and
treatment of autoimmunity when present. Many of the patients need
antifungal prophylaxis, and azole resistance may emerge and limit
therapeutic choices to topical nystatin or amphotericin washes, or IV
echinocandins. It is worth highlighting that voriconazole is not recommended in this patient population due to its photosensitivity and long-­
term skin cancer risk. In those patients with recurrent sinopulmonary
infections and/or bronchiectasis, antibiotic prophylaxis is likely to be
beneficial. Azithromycin prophylaxis, if pulmonary NTM is not present, may be beneficial not only for prevention of recurrent airway
infections, but also will yield some antiinflammatory benefits. Recurrent HSV or VZV infections suggest the need for prophylaxis with
acyclovir or valacyclovir. The autoimmunity is typically treated with
immune suppression, and many have received long courses of corticosteroids. However, there are positive reports of success controlling this
inflammation and autoimmunity with JAK inhibition. Ruxolitinib has
been used in STAT1 GOF to treat alopecia, enteropathy, autoimmune
cytopenias, and hepatitis. There is one report of JAK inhibition being
used early in the course of associated insulin-­dependent diabetes, with
resolution of the need for insulin and remission of the diabetes. JAK
inhibition also can be highly effective in the treatment of CMC because
there is growing evidence that the CMC observed in this disease is due
to exuberant inflammation rather than infection susceptibility. Severe
or disseminated infections have progressed while on JAK inhibition,
thus, it is best to start this treatment only when invasive infections are
adequately controlled. Some patients develop hypogammaglobulinemia
over time; immune globulin replacement may be indicated. HSCT is
not yet the preferred option for treatment of STAT1 GOF. HSCT in
this population of patients has been difficult with high morbidity and
mortality, although it is important to note that many of these transplants were done before the genetic diagnosis was known and a variety
of conditioning regimens were used.

IL-­17F DEFICIENCY

A dominant-­
negative missense pathogenic variant in IL17F was
reported in multiple patients from one kindred with CMC. About 65%
of these patients had CMC manifesting as persistent thrush, vulvovaginal candidiasis, and interdigital intertrigo. Lymphocyte phenotyping and quantitative immunoglobulin levels were normal in the one
patient who had such testing. Diagnosis relies on sequencing of IL-­17F,
but can also be suspected if flow cytometry shows absent intracellular
IL-­17F producing CD3+ cells in patients with detectable IL-­17A and
IL-­22 producing CD3+ cells. Although there is insufficient clinical
information to suggest ideal management of patients with IL-­17F deficiency, we recommend a similar approach as outlined for management
of CMC.

IL-­17RA DEFICIENCY

IL-­17RA deficiency also presents with CMC, but usually with onset
within the first year of life. Candidiasis involved the oropharynx in 95%
of patients, the genitals in 38% (60% females), the skin or scalp in 67%,
and the nails in 19%. Episodes of CMC seemed to respond to topical
or oral therapy. Staphylococcal skin infections were seen in 65% of the
cohort, with such lesions also manifesting in the first year of life. Bacterial recurrent sinopulmonary infections occur in just over one-­third of
these patients, and all responded to antibiotic therapy.
Lymphocyte phenotyping is normal, and diagnosis should be made
by sequencing of the IL17RA gene, particularly when early-­onset CMC
and concurrent S. aureus skin infections are present.
As CMC is a presenting feature of all reported patients with IL-­17RA
deficiency, oral antifungal prophylaxis should be initiated. Strong consideration should be given to also initiating antibiotic prophylaxis in
those who have culture-­proven bacterial infections that are recurrent

1337

or severe. In those with recurrent sinopulmonary infections, although
the spectrum of organisms is not known, covering for common bacterial etiologies like S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis should be sufficient to prevent disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

175.2 Innate Immunity Defects with
Predominant Susceptibility to Viral
Infections
Jenna R.E. Bergerson and Alexandra F. Freeman
Defects in innate immunity that predispose to viral infections are
divided into three main groups: those primarily predisposing to HPV,
those predisposing primarily to HSV encephalitis, and those predisposing to other viruses, many of which interfere with interferon (IFN)
signaling. Some of these defects are described in the following sections
along with other rare defects highlighted in Table 175.2.

PREDOMINANT HPV SUSCEPTIBILITY

Epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV) is the main clinical presentation for diseases with autosomal recessive pathogenic variants in the
transmembrane channel-­like 6 and 8 (TMC6 and TMC8) genes and
more recently described in the calcium-­and integrin-­binding protein
1 (CIB1) gene, encoding for the proteins EVER1, EVER2, and CIB1,
respectively. EVER1, EVER2, and CIB1 complex together for keratinocyte intrinsic immunity, and disruption of this complex leads to
HPV susceptibility. The typical warts affecting healthy individuals are
from α-­HPV types; however, in EV, β-­HPV causes symptomatic disease, which is usually asymptomatic in healthy individuals but associated with cancer in some immune compromised individuals. The warts
are frequently not the typical verrucous appearance seen in healthy
children, but are usually flat warts, and can look like tinea versicolor
with pigment changes. The warts appear in sun-­exposed areas and
have a high incidence of cancer transformation. Individuals with EV
do not usually have increased risk of other infections; they have normal immune evaluations including normal lymphocyte number and
function. Diagnosis is with genetic testing after suspicion with atypical widespread HPV disease. There is no specific treatment, although
warts are treated with standard therapies (see Chapter 708). Patients
needed to be counseled to avoid UV and radiation exposure, and these
individuals need frequent screening for skin cancer.
WHIM (wart, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, myelokathexis) syndrome is an autosomal dominant (AD) disease caused by
GOF pathogenic variants in CXCR4. Increased responsiveness of the
CXCR4 receptor to its ligand CXCL12 (also known as SDF-­1) results
in increased retention of the neutrophils in the bone marrow and thus
the finding of myelokathexis (neutropenia related to the inability of
neutrophils to leave the marrow). Patients also have lymphopenia with
decreased B-­, T-­and NK lymphocytes, along with hypogammaglobulinemia. Although recurrent infections are common, they tend not to
be as severe as expected from the neutropenia because the neutrophils
often are released from the bone marrow with infection; dental issues
likely related to the neutropenia are common. Recurrent sinopulmonary infections likely relate more to the hypogammaglobulinemia, and
some patients develop bronchiectasis. Warts typically start in childhood
or adolescence and are often particularly severe with poor response to
therapy. Evolution into squamous cell carcinomas can occur; patients
require monitoring. Treatment traditionally has been supportive in
treating infections and preventive with immune globulin therapy and
G-­CSF, which usually needs to be dosed at lower concentrations due to
frequently experienced debilitating bone pain. Plerixafor, an antagonist
of CXCR4, may provide a specific therapy.
There are several other PIDDs that primarily affect lymphocytes that
have HPV susceptibility as a major component and are discussed in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1338 Part XII u Immunology
other chapters. Many of these diseases, such as DOCK8 deficiency and
GATA2 deficiency, have broader susceptibility than just HPV. CD28
deficiency has susceptibility specific for HPV resulting in warts and
cutaneous horns. Compared to EV, those with CD28 deficiency have
predisposition to the more common α-­ and γ-­HPV types.

Predisposition to Severe Viral Infections

Host control of viral infections is predominately dependent on normal type 1 IFN signaling (Fig. 175.1; see Table 175.2). Type 1 IFNs,
including the IFN-­α subtypes and IFN-­β, bind to their heteroreceptor
comprising IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 leading to phosphorylation of TYK2
and JAK1. Activation of TYK2 and JAK1 leads to phosphorylation
of STAT1 and STAT2, which then cause upregulation of interferon-­
stimulated genes (ISGs). There are multiple potential defects along
this pathway that can lead to viral susceptibility. The role of this pathway has been highlighted with the COVID-­19 pandemic, with not only
genetic defects but also autoantibodies against type I IFNs leading to
more severe disease.
Autosomal recessive pathogenic variants in IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 lead
to a lack of TYK2 phosphorylation for IFNAR1 defects, and both TYK2
and JAK1 phosphorylation for IFNAR2 with subsequent downstream
deficiency of ISG upregulation. Despite the severe in vitro findings, the
viral infection susceptibility appears more limited. Both are rare diseases, with most patients developing severe or fatal illness after live viral
vaccination with the measles mumps rubella (MMR) vaccine (largely
measles component) or yellow fever vaccine. Herpes viral control is variable, with a fatal case of herpes encephalitis reported in IFNAR1 deficiency, and poor control of human herpesvirus 6 (HHV6) in IFNAR2.
Variants have been described with severe SARS-­CoV-2 infection. These
diseases appear to have incomplete penetrance, with some affected individuals having better control of viral infections or vaccination. Naturally
acquired viral infections have been controlled much more than live viral
vaccinations. These diseases are rare and therapy remains unclear, but
avoiding live viral vaccines, considering antiviral prophylaxis for HSV/
VZV infections, and vaccination of affected individuals and close contacts for influenza and COVID-­19 appears prudent.
Genetic defects in STAT1 can be activating (STAT1 GOF) or can
be heterozygous or recessive with LOF. Autosomal recessive complete
STAT1 deficiency is the most severe defect with most cases being fatal
early in life. As IFN-­α, IFN-­β, and IFN-­γ all signal through STAT1,
completely impaired signaling predisposes individuals to both severe

T/NK
Lymphocyte
Beta 1

IL-12R

X

IFNg

Beta 2

IFNgR R2 R1

IL-12

X
X

K
JA 1 X
AT 1
T
S AT
ST

AFB, Salmonella,
fungi

IRGs

Fig. 175.1 Host control of mycobacteria. Macrophages ingest

mycobacteria leading to secretion of cytokine IL-­
12, which then
binds to its heterodimer receptor on the T lymphocytes and NK cells
leading to the secretion of IFN-­γ. IFN-­γ binds to its heterodimer receptor,
IFN-­γR1 and IFN-­γR2, leading to JAK1 and JAK2 phosphorylation,
and then STAT1 phosphorylation. Where defects lead to MSMD are
marked by an X.

early-­onset viral disease in addition to disseminated mycobacterial
disease. Herpes family infections are common as well as live viral disseminated infection. The disease is fatal without HSCT early in life, but
HSCT outcomes have been poor with several children having herpes
family inflammatory complications after HSCT, such as with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) or severe CMV disease. There
are also patients with autosomal recessive hypomorphic STAT1 pathogenic variants who have some residual STAT1 disease that appears to
have a less severe phenotype. Treatment is with aggressive antimicrobials to treat presenting infections and prevent new infections until
HSCT is performed.
Autosomal recessive complete STAT2 deficiency presenting early in
life with severe viral infections is not as severe as STAT1 deficiency due
to maintenance of IFN-­γ signaling. Compared to IFNAR1 and IFNAR2
deficiency, there is more severe disease with naturally acquired viral
infections such as respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and enteroviruses,
but similarly severe disease has been seen with MMR vaccine. Some
children have been described to have a Kawasaki-­like inflammatory
presentation. The phenotype has been variable with some deaths early
in life and some surviving to adulthood. Treatment remains uncertain
with few patients reported, but live viral vaccines should be avoided,
antiviral prophylaxis provided, and influenza vaccination given to
those affected and close contacts.
Autosomal recessive IRF9 deficiency appears to present similarly to
STAT2 deficiency. After IFN-­α or IFN-­β stimulation leads to STAT1
and STAT2 phosphorylation, these STAT proteins can heterodimerize with IRF9 to lead to ISG upregulation. This is a very rare defect
presenting with naturally occurring or vaccine strain viruses. Life-­
threatening influenza and severe enterovirus infections have been
described in addition to vaccine strain varicella and MMR dissemination. Treatment remains uncertain with few patients reported, but live
viral vaccines should be avoided, antiviral prophylaxis considered, and
influenza and COVID-­19 vaccination given to those affected and close
contacts.
Defects have been described in cytosolic sensors of viral DNA or
RNA replication by-­products that lead to fairly specific viral susceptibility. Melanoma differentiation-­associated protein 5 (MDA5),
encoded by the IFIH1 gene, is a cytosolic sensor of double-­stranded
RNA by-­products of RNA viral replication. Several patients have been
described with LOF variants, either autosomal recessive or dominant,
with presumed dominant negative effect, resulting in severe susceptibility to respiratory viruses including rhinovirus and influenza. Retinoic acid-­inducible gene I (RIG-­I), encoded by the DDX58 gene, plays
a similar role, and a patient has been described with LOF variants having severe influenza infection. RNA polymerase III deficiency (POL
III) is a cytosolic DNA sensor detecting replication by-­products of
DNA viruses. AD pathogenic variants have been reported in POL III in
children and adults with severe varicella-­zoster disease causing pneumonitis, encephalitis, and CNS vasculitis. Treatment is not defined,
but avoiding live viral vaccines, providing antiviral prophylaxis, and
providing non-­live annual influenza and COVID-­19 vaccination to
affected individuals and family members appear prudent.
NK functional and quantitative defects can occur on their own or
as part of combined immune deficiencies and are associated with viral
infections (see Chapter 167). Pathogenic variants in the FCGR3A gene,
encoding CD16, which is a Fc receptor on NK cells, impair NK cytotoxicity. A few patients have been described who have susceptibility
to herpes family viruses with EBV-­related disease such as Castleman
disease or HSV and VZV infections. Patients also develop significant
warts from HPV infection. Antiviral prophylaxis should be given to
prevent HSV/VZV infections, in addition to HPV vaccination.

Predominant HSV Encephalitis

Defects that affect TLR3 signaling predispose quite specifically to HSV
encephalitis due to their role in the activation of type 1 IFNs in the
CNS (Fig. 175.2; see Table 175.2). Double-­stranded RNA is detected
by TLR3, which then recruits the adaptor TRIF to activate TRAF3 to
induce IFN-­α, IFN-­β, and inflammatory cytokines through TBK1 and
IRF3 and other proteins. UNC93B1 acts as a transporter protein to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 175 u Defects of Innate Immunity

1339

Table 175.2  	 Defects with Predominant Susceptibility to Viral Infections
GENE/INHERITANCE

SPECIFIC TREATMENT

GENE/INHERITANCE

Epidermodysplasia verruciformis

EVER1, EVER2, CIB1/AR

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

Diffuse flat warts, with increased
skin cancers

Avoid UV/radiation exposure, skin
cancer screening.

WHIM syndrome

CXCR4/AD

Warts, squamous cell
cancer, sinopulmonary
infections, neutropenia,
hypogammaglobulinemia

G-­CSF, IgRT, plerixafor

IFNAR1 deficiency

IFNAR1/AR

Severe disease after live viral
vaccination (MMR, yellow fever),
herpesviruses

Avoid live viral vaccination,
consider HSV/VZV prophylaxis

IFNAR2 deficiency

IFNAR2/AR

Severe disease after live viral
vaccination (MMR, yellow fever),
herpesviruses

Avoid live viral vaccination,
consider HSV/VZV prophylaxis

Complete STAT1 deficiency

STAT1/AR

Early-­onset severe viral and
disseminated Mycobacteria

Early HSCT

STAT2 deficiency

STAT2/AR

Severe respiratory viruses,
enterovirus; some live viral
vaccine disease

Avoid live viral vaccines

IRF9 deficiency

IRF9/AR

Severe respiratory viruses,
enterovirus; some live viral
vaccine disease

Avoid live viral vaccines

IRF7 deficiency

IRF7/AR

Severe influenza

Influenza vaccination*

MDA5 deficiency

IFIH1/AR or AD

Severe respiratory tract infections

Influenza vaccination

RNA polymerase III deficiency

POL3A,POL3C, POL3F/AD

Severe varicella-­zoster

Antiviral prophylaxis

CD16 deficiency

FCGR31/AR

Herpes family infections, HPV

Antiviral prophylaxis

IL-­18BP deficiency

IL18BP/AR

Fulminant hepatitis A

Hepatitis A vaccination

TLR3 deficiency

TLR3/AD and AR

HSV encephalitis, severe influenza,
zoster

Antiviral prophylaxis

TRAF3 deficiency

TRAF3/AD

HSV encephalitis

Antiviral prophylaxis

TRIF deficiency

TRIF/AD and AR

HSV encephalitis

Antiviral prophylaxis

UNC93B1 deficiency

UNC93B1/AR

HSV encephalitis

Antiviral prophylaxis

TBNK1 deficiency

TBNK1/AD

HSV encephalitis

Antiviral prophylaxis

IRF3 deficiency

IRF3/AD

HSV encephalitis

Antiviral prophylaxis

DRB1 deficiency

DRB1/AR

Brainstem encephalitis

Antiviral prophylaxis

*Although influenza vaccination is highlighted for certain inborn errors of immunity (IEIs), influenza vaccination should be given to all those with IEIs and their close contacts unless
there is a contraindication. In addition, HPV vaccination should be given per the recommended schedule. Vaccination at an earlier age can be considered for certain defects with
HPV predisposition.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; G-­CSF, granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor; HPV, human papillomavirus; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; HSV,
herpes simplex virus IFN, interferon; MMR, measles mumps rubella; UV, ultraviolet; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus; WHIM, (wart, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, myelokathexis)
syndrome.

transport TLR3 and other TLRs from the endoplasmic reticulum to
the endosome to allow RNA binding. The TLR3 pathway is redundant
for leukocyte immunity, but it is essential for CNS host viral immunity; thus the infection susceptibility of these defects is primarily CNS
HSV disease. The defects in signaling are not found in leukocytes but
required fibroblasts and inducible pluripotent stem cell generation
of CNS cells to demonstrate abnormal IFN-­α responses with HSV
infection.
Pathogenic variants in multiple genes along this pathway have similar presentations with HSV encephalitis including autosomal recessive
and dominant LOF variants in TLR3, dominant pathogenic variants in
TRAF3, dominant and recessive pathogenic variants in TRIF, recessive
pathogenic variants in UNC93B1, and dominant pathogenic variants in
TBK1 and IRF3. The HSV encephalitis tends to present in infancy and
early childhood on HSV exposure, with frontal and temporal lobes predominantly affected. Dominant pathogenic variants in TLR3 have also
been associated with severe influenza and varicella-­zoster encephalitis
in a few adults. Genetic diagnosis is essential as routine immunologic

studies are normal. Treatment is supportive with acyclovir or similar
prophylaxis.
Rarely children can have brainstem CNS infections, including
HSV; defects in the TLR3 pathway have not been found in these cases.
Autosomal recessive hypomorphic pathogenic variants in DBR1 (debranching enzyme 1) have been identified in children with brainstem
encephalitis caused by HSV, norovirus, and influenza virus. DBR1 is an
RNA lariat-­debranching enzyme that degrades spliced RNA introns,
which is ubiquitously expressed in humans but with highest amounts
in the brainstem and peripheral nervous system. With decreased function, there is increased accumulation of lariat introns that presumably
interfere with viral recognition and control. Genetic diagnosis can
allow prophylaxis with antivirals such as acyclovir and influenza vaccination of the affected individual and close contacts.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1340 Part XII u Immunology

175.3 Susceptibility to Invasive Bacterial
Infections

Type I Interferons
(e.g. IFNalpha, Beta)

Jenna R.E. Bergerson and Alexandra F. Freeman
Inborn errors of immunity (IEIs) with predominant susceptibility
to invasive bacterial infections such as meningitis, sepsis, arthritis,
osteomyelitis, and deep-­seated abscesses are rare, and are mostly due
to neutrophil defects or defects in innate immunity. Inherited disorders of the Toll and IL-­1 receptor (TIR)-­pathway are innate immunity
defects with a very distinct phenotype with invasive pyogenic bacterial
infections and usually the absence of fever and inflammatory markers. TLRs on white blood cell surfaces sense bacterial peptides leading
to activation of the NF-­κB and MAPK pathway leading to inflammatory mediators (Fig. 175.3). IEIs associated with impaired TLR signaling include pathogenic variants in NEMO, IKBA, MyD88, and IRAK4
(Table 175.3).

I
F
N
XA
R
1

X

TYK2

I
F
NX
A
R
2
JAK1

X

STAT1

STAT2

X
IRF9

IRAK4 DEFICIENCY

MYD88 DEFICIENCY

MyD88 deficiency resembles the clinical and laboratory findings in
IRAK4 deficiency (Fig. 175.4; see Table 175.1). These patients have a
susceptibility to serious bacterial infections due primarily to S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, and P. aeruginosa, including an inability to mount
fever at the beginning of infection. CRP does not rise early during infection, likely due to impaired IL-­6 production. Invasive bacterial infections begin before age 2 years and seem to improve with age, although
noninvasive bacterial infections similarly persist after adolescence.
Diagnosis is similar to IRAK4 deficiency relying on genetics, as routine
immunologic testing is nondiagnostic. MyD88-­deficient patients may
have elevated serum IgE and IgG4 concentrations in up to 50% and

X

Interferon Stimulated Genes (ISGs)

Fig. 175.2 Defects along type 1 interferon (IFN) signaling lead to viral

susceptibility. Type 1 IFNs bind to their heteroreceptor comprising IFNAR1
and IFNAR2 leading to TYK2 and JAK1 phosphorylation followed by phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT2, which then cause upregulation of IFN-­
stimulated genes (ISGs). IRF9 can also heterodimerize with STAT2 leading
to ISG upregulation. Multiple genetic defects along this pathway (marked
with X) can lead to viral susceptibility.

a
Vir
Endosome

X
YTLR3

Y

Endoplasmic
Reticulum

NA
lR

X
UNC93B1

Y

IRAK4 deficiency presents in infancy and early childhood with severe,
recurrent bacterial infections, specifically due to S. pneumoniae, S.
aureus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Unique to this disorder, clostridial
infections have also been reported. An impairment in mounting a fever
at the beginning of infection with a corresponding rise in CRP are also
hallmark features of this disease. Most patients with IRAK4 deficiency
present with their first bacterial infection before 2 years of age; there is a
high mortality rate in the early years. However, the frequency and severity of infections in IRAK4 deficiency improves with age, with none of the
reported patients having invasive bacterial infections after the onset of
adolescence, even those not on prophylactic antibiotics. Approximately
50% of IRAK4-­deficient patients continue to have noninvasive skin and
upper respiratory infections after adolescence. Delayed separation of the
umbilical cord has been reported in IRAK4-­deficient patients due to an
unclear mechanism.
Diagnosis relies on clinical suspicion and genetic testing because
other immunologic studies are variable or require research laboratory
testing. All T-­and B-­cell and NK cell subsets are unremarkable, but
there may be a deficiency of unswitched memory B cells with normal
levels of switched memory B cells. Specific antibody levels to pneumococcal and allohemagglutinins of the ABO system are impaired
in up to 30% of patients. Serum IgE and IgG4 concentrations are elevated in up to 65% and 30%, respectively. Defective IL-­6 production
leads to the inability to increase plasma CRP or mount fevers. Without the clinical findings of fever and inflammatory markers, there
may be a low threshold for diagnostic imaging and initiating empiric
parenteral antibiotic treatment against S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, and
P. aeruginosa. Antibiotic prophylaxis should be implemented with
agents like clotrimazole plus penicillin, and immunizations against
pneumococcus serotypes, H. influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis
given. If patients have a poor response to vaccination, immunoglobulin replacement should be considered. There is a paucity of data to
support the duration of antibiotic prophylaxis, but given that invasive
pyogenic infections seem to resolve by adolescence a trial discontinuation could be considered at this time. Nonetheless these patients
continue to have skin and upper respiratory infections and may benefit from lifelong antibiotic prophylaxis targeting pyogenic bacteria.

X

TLR3

TRIF
TRAF3

X
X

TBK1

X
IRF3

X

IFN alpha

Fig. 175.3 Defects that affect toll-­like receptor (TLR) 3 signaling predispose to HSV encephalitis by impairing type I interferon (IFN) activation. Double-­stranded RNA is detected by TLR3, which then recruits
the adaptor TRIF to activate TRAF3 and then through TBK1 and IRF3 to
induce IFN-­α and other inflammatory cytokines. UNC93B1 transports
TLR3 from the endoplasmic reticulum to the endosome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 175 u Defects of Innate Immunity

1341

Table 175.3  	 Innate Defects with Bacterial Susceptibility
DISEASE

GENE/INHERITANCE

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

LABORATORY PARAMETERS

IRAK4 deficiency

IRAK4, AR

Early-­onset invasive pyogenic
bacterial infections resolving in
adolescence
Persistence of noninvasive skin
and URT infections

↓ IL-­6, undetectable CRP in setting
of infection
↓ CSM B cells
Poor specific antibody levels to
pneumococcus

MyD88 deficiency

MYD88, AR

Early-­onset invasive pyogenic
bacterial infections resolving in
adolescence
Persistence of noninvasive skin
and URT infections

↓ IL-­6, undetectable CRP in setting
of infection
↓ CSM B cells

IRAK1 deficiency

IRAK1, XL

Undefined as reported in only one
patient with Rett syndrome

Unknown

TIRAP deficiency

TIRAP, AR

Undefined
Identified in nine members of one
family with only one affected
(pneumonia and sepsis from PVL-­
associated Staphylococcus aureus

Selectively ↓CSM B cells

Isolated congenital asplenia

RPSA, AD

Sepsis with encapsulated bacteria,
absent spleen

HJB on blood smear

PBX1, NKX2-­5, BAPX1,
POD1, AR

Sepsis with encapsulated bacteria,
absent spleen

HJB on blood smear

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CSM; class switched memory; HJB; Howell-­Jolly bodies; IL, interleukin; PVL, Panton-­Valentine leukocidin; URT, upper respiratory
tract; XL, X-­linked.

33% of patients tested (respectively), as well as a specific deficiency of
unswitched memory B cells. Treatment of MyD88 deficiency should
follow the same principles as outlined previously for IRAK4 deficiency.
Other inherited disorders of the TIR pathway like IRAK1 deficiency
and TIRAP deficiency will be addressed in Table 175.3.

ISOLATED CONGENITAL ASPLENIA

Asplenia refers to the complete lack of splenic tissue and includes a
heterogenous group of conditions ranging from surgical asplenia to
congenital asplenia. Congenital asplenia can be part of a syndrome of
multiple congenital anomalies (see Chapter 480.11) or, less often, it can
be isolated (see Table 175.3).
A diagnosis of isolated congenital asplenia (ICA) is made on the
basis of the presence of Howell-­Jolly bodies (HJBs) on blood smear
and the lack of a detectable spleen at ultrasound in the absence of
cardiovascular malformations. Some cases are due to an AD inheritance; relatives of those with ICA should be evaluated because the
outcome is typically poor without initiation of antibiotic prophylaxis
and pneumococcal vaccination. Half of all isolated cases are due to
pathogenic variants in RPSA, a protein component of the small ribosomal subunit. Involvement of related key spleen patterning genes
involved during embryogenesis can also result in splenic agenesis.
Presentation is typically with overwhelming, refractory infections
due to encapsulated bacteria, particularly S. pneumoniae, but also other
encapsulated bacteria like H. influenzae and N. meningitidis. Diseases
like malaria and babesiosis also affect asplenic patients more severely
due to defective removal of intra-­erythrocytic parasites. In all cases of
pneumococcal sepsis, a blood smear should be evaluated for HJBs in
addition to an abdominal ultrasound to identify patients with ICA.
Immunization against pneumococcal serotypes and meningococcal
serotypes is essential. Conjugated vaccines are preferred to unconjugated
vaccines. Influenza vaccination should also occur yearly due to the risk
of pneumococcal superinfection. Long-­term oral penicillin prophylaxis
(amoxicillin 10 mg/kg twice daily to max 250 mg OR ≤3 years: penicillin
V 125 mg twice daily, ≥3 years: penicillin 250 mg twice daily) is recommended, as is early initiation of IV antibiotics in the setting of febrile
illnesses. Patient education is a critical part in management. Patients
should recognize and react to fever as a life-­threatening emergency with
initiation of antibiotic therapy at home (pediatric dosage of amoxicillin-­
clavulanate 45 mg/kg twice daily or levofloxacin 10 mg/kg for penicillin

allergic patients) even before seeking medical care. Animal bites (risk
of Capnocytophaga) also should be recognized as a medical emergency
requiring local wound care and debridement, and a short course of antibiotic therapy (amoxicillin-­clavulanate for 3-­5 days). Lastly, when traveling patients should know what to do in case of fever, and if in a tropical
area recognize the increased risk for malaria.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

175.4 Mendelian Susceptibility to
Mycobacterial Diseases
Jenna R.E. Bergerson and Alexandra F. Freeman
The group of diseases referred to as mendelian susceptibility to
mycobacterial diseases (MSMDs) centers around the synthesis and
signaling of IFN-­γ required for the ability of macrophages to control intracellular infections including mycobacteria as well as some
other intracellular bacteria, fungi and viruses (see Table 175.1).
Control of mycobacterial infections relies on the IL-­12/IFN-­γ/
STAT1 pathway (see Fig. 175.4). When the macrophages ingest
mycobacteria or other intracellular organisms, they secrete the cytokine IL-­12, which binds to its receptor, a heterodimer comprising
IL-­12RB1 plus IL-­21RB2, on the T lymphocytes and NK cells. This
then leads to the secretion by the T/NK lymphocytes of IFN-­γ. IFN-­
γ binds to its heterodimer receptor, IFN-­γR1 and IFN-­γR2, leading
to JAK1 and JAK2 phosphorylation, and then STAT1 phosphorylation. STAT1 is a transcription factor that leads to the upregulation
of IFN-­regulated genes (IRGs), which leads to the clearance of these
infections. Control of mycobacteria relies on this pathway, but also
other intracellular microorganisms such as endemic fungi (e.g., Histoplasma and Coccidioides), Salmonella, leishmaniasis, and, in part,
some viruses, such as those in the herpes virus family.
The MSMD defects typically present with disseminated BCG or with
extrapulmonary nontuberculous and environmental mycobacteria
(NTM); individuals with disseminated mycobacterial disease with either
bone or visceral involvement should be evaluated. Depending on the
type of defect, the infection may be more localized, such as the osteomyelitis seen frequently with dominant LOF defects in IFN-­γR1 or STAT1,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1342 Part XII u Immunology

TLR-4

IL-1R

TLR-2

X MyD88

TLR-1
TLR-5
TLR-6
TLR-10

MyD88

TX
I
R
A
P

TLR-7
TLR-8
TLR-9
X IRAK-4
IRAK-2
TRAF6

IRAK-3
IRAK-1
NEMO

NF-KB

MAPK

NF-KBs

AP1
IL-6, IL-1β, TNFα

IL-6, IL-1β, TNFα

Fig. 175.4 TLR/IL-­1R pathways. MyD88 is a cytosolic adaptor protein that bridges TLRs and IL-­1Rs to the IRAK complex and subsequently allows
for the downstream production of cytokines and interferons (IFNs) through the NF-­κB and MAPK pathways. All TLRs, except TLR3, as well as multiple
IL-­1Rs use MyD88 and IRAK4. Where defects lead to predominant susceptibility to invasive bacterial infections are marked by an X.

or with more disseminated disease often with lymph node, bowel, and
hepatosplenic involvement. Extrapulmonary TB should also raise suspicion of MSMD in young BCG-­vaccinated children. Mycobacterial disease
restricted to the lungs is much less frequently associated with MSMD,
but more often with diseases predisposing to bronchiectasis. In addition,
young children with isolated cervical adenitis from NTM do not usually
have MSMD; the evaluation can be limited to those with recurrent or difficult to treat disease.
Therapy relies on targeted antimicrobials, but cytokine adjuvants,
such as IFN-­γ, and consideration of HSCT varies based on the defect.
Related defects that predispose to CMC are noted in Table 175.4.

IFN-­γR Defects

The IFN-­γ receptor is a heterodimer comprised of IFN-­γR1 and IFN-­
γR2, and defects in both components lead to abnormal signaling. There
are biallelic and heterozygous pathogenic variants that lead to differing
presentations.

Autosomal Recessive Complete IFN-­γR1/IFN-­γR2
Deficiency

The most severe defect of the IFN-­γR defects are homozygous or
compound heterozygous pathogenic variants that block all IFN-­γ
signaling. The variants are in the extracellular domains of the protein and lead to no surface receptor expression. In countries where
BCG is given, these patients typically present in infancy with disseminated BCG; in other countries affected patients present usually
in early childhood with disseminated NTM, such as Mycobacterium
avium complex (MAC). Salmonella and Listeria can also cause severe
infection; there may be more severe disease with common respiratory viruses and herpes family viruses. Diagnosis is with genetic
testing, but some laboratories can also suggest the diagnosis by performing flow cytometry showing no surface expression of the IFNg-­γ

on monocytes or lack of intracellular STAT1 phosphorylation after
stimulation with IFN-­γ.
Treatment of complete IFN-­γR1 deficiency is aggressive antimicrobial therapy until HSCT. Adjuvant IFN-­γ is not helpful because
signaling is blocked; addition of IFN-­α has been used successfully
in some cases of disseminated MAC. These patients usually have
disseminated NTM or BCG and require combination antibiotics
through HSCT, with breakthrough infections being seen often if
antibiotics are withdrawn. High serum IFN-­γ levels in the blood are
typical when infection is present and has been correlated with a poor
HSCT outcome; these levels can be followed and HSCT optimally
performed when they decline.

Autosomal Dominant IFN-­γR1 Deficiency

Compared with complete γ/2 deficiency, AD IFN-­γR1 deficiency allows
partial IFNg signaling, and thus a typically less severe clinical course.
Most pathogenic variants are small frameshift deletions in the intracellular domain of the IFNGR1 gene, thus blocking both the JAK binding site
as well as the receptor recycling domain, eliminating the removal of the
nonfunctional receptor from the cell surface. Clinical presentation is usually later in childhood or adolescence with more focal NTM infections,
which is usually osteomyelitis. BCG can present with osteomyelitis as well,
at a younger age than is usually seen for the environmental NTM. Disseminated endemic fungi infections with Histoplasma and Coccidioides are
seen, in addition to disseminated Salmonella infections. Diagnosis relies
on genetic testing, but in laboratories able to perform flow cytometry for
IFN-­γR expression, diagnosis is suspected by increased IFN-­γR expression
due to the inability to recycle the receptor. Intracellular STAT1 phosphorylation is reduced after IFN-­γ stimulation, although not absent such as with
the complete defects.
Treatment involves antimicrobials guided by the specific infection, with
combination antibiotics needed for NTM/BCG. The addition of IFN-­γ is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 175 u Defects of Innate Immunity

1343

Table 175.4  	 Chronic Mucocutaneous Candidiasis Associated Inborn Errors of Immunity
OTHER
MANIFESTATIONS

SYNDROME

GENE

INHERITANCE

FUNGAL SPECIES

CARD9 deficiency (30% CMC)

CARD9

AR

Candida spp. (often CNS
involvement), CMC
Aspergillus spp.
(extrapulmonary),
dermatophytes,
phaeohyphomycosis

Some with increased IgE
and eosinophilia

IL-­17F deficiency (67% CMC)

IL17F

AD

CMC

Asthma, folliculitis

IL-­17RA deficiency (100% CMC)

IL17RA

AR

CMC

Folliculitis, susceptibility
to Staphylococcus
aureus (skin) bacterial
infections

IL-­17RC (100% CMC)

IL17RC

AR

CMC

None

ACT1 (100%)

TRAF3IP2

AR

CMC

Seborrheic dermatitis

STAT1

AD

CMC, Histoplasma
capsulatum,
Coccidioides spp.
Talaromyces marneffei,
Trichophyton,
Cryptococcus,
Aspergillus, Mucorales

Herpes viral infections,
bacterial sinopulmonary
and skin infections,
mycobacterial pulmonary
and disseminated
infections, CNS
aneurysms, autoimmunity

STAT1 GOF (95% CMC)

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CMC, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis; CNS, central nervous system; GOF, gain of function; IL, interleukin.

often helpful to clear the infection because some IFN-­γ signaling remains.
After clearance of the infection, lifelong prophylaxis is suggested such as
with azithromycin therapy, and consideration of fluconazole for Coccidioides endemic regions. IFN-­γ is not usually long term for prophylaxis. HSCT
has been performed in rare cases but is typically not considered necessary.

Autosomal Recessive IL-­12 Receptor Beta 1 (IL-­
12RB1) Deficiency

Biallelic typically missense or nonsense pathogenic variants in IL-­
12RB1 result in complete loss of IL-­12 signaling leading to disseminated
NTM or other intracellular infections. Compared with complete IFN-­
γR deficiency, the penetration and expressivity of IL-­12RB1 deficiency
is much more variable. Some patients are asymptomatic, even if BCG
is given, whereas others develop severe disease early in life with early
mortality; even within families the disease can have very different presentations. This defect is also more common than IFN-­γR deficiency.
Disseminated BCG is common in countries in which the vaccine is
given and disseminated environmental NTM presents at much more
variable ages in other countries. Although there is increased childhood
mortality from this defect, patients who clear disseminated BCG infection have lower rates of subsequent NTM infection than those who did
not have a BCG infection. Disseminated Salmonella is seen frequently.
IL-­12RB1 forms a heterodimer with IL-­23R, so perturbation of this
signaling cascade also results in an increased rate of mucocutaneous
candidiasis. Diagnosis is confirmed with genetic testing, but some laboratories can test the lymphocyte response to IL-­12 signaling, noting
absence of STAT4 phosphorylation or IFN-­γ secretion.
Treatment is aimed at antimicrobials for the diagnosed infection.
Secondary prophylaxis is suggested after clearance of mycobacterial
infections, such as with azithromycin. Adjuvant IFN-­γ therapy has
been used in cases where antimicrobials do not adequately clear the
infection. Increased doses than are used in CGD may be needed, with
prudence being to titrate up the dose slowly as hyperinflammatory presentations can complicate the therapy. There is very little experience
with HSCT in IL-­12RB1 deficiency.

AD STAT1 Loss of Function

Although GOF and complete LOF STAT1 defects can be associated
with NTM infections, NTM infections occur with the highest frequency in AD STAT1 LOF, which is to be expected because STAT1 is
downstream of the IL-­12/IFN-­γ pathway. Presentation is typically with

more focal NTM or BCG infections, often with osteomyelitis, similar
to that seen with AD IFN-­γR1 deficiency. Diagnosis requires genetic
testing. Patients typically respond well to combination antimicrobials
and can then be placed on long-­term prophylaxis. Infants with complete STAT1 deficiency have had disseminated BCG; this defect also
has severe viral infections.

TYK2 Deficiency

JAK proteins and TYK2 are part of the JAK/STAT signal transduction
pathway. TYK2 is downstream of IFN-­α and -­β, as well as IL-­12/IL-­
23, with its activation leading to STAT1 phosphorylation. Patients have
had disseminated BCG, TB, and viral infections.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS FOR MSMD

MSMD centers around the control of intracellular organisms including
Mycobacteria by the lymphocyte/macrophage interactions involving
the IL-­12/IFN-­γ/STAT1 pathway. However, other primary and secondary immune deficiencies should be included in the differential diagnosis of those presenting with disseminated NTM. Disseminated NTM
is a common infection for those with GATA2 deficiency, which typically presents in adolescence or adulthood, and is often associated with
monocytopenia and myelodysplasia, susceptibility to HPV, and pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Nuclear factor-­κ-­B (NEMO) deficiency and
other genetic defects involved in NF-­κB activation, such as defects in
IkBα, are combined immune deficiencies that present with recurrent
bacterial, viral, and disseminated mycobacterial disease; NEMO and
IKBα may both have ectodermal dysplasia as part of the phenotype.
Disseminated NTM is a less frequent complication for other myeloid
and lymphocyte IEIs such as CGD, NFKB1 deficiency, and severe combined immune deficiency (SCID). Disseminated NTM is also associated with autoantibodies against IFN-­γ; these should be considered
for adult-­onset disease. In the United States, anti–IFN-­γ autoantibody
disease with disseminated NTM is much more common in Asian
females but is seen in males and females in East Asian countries. HIV/
AIDS should always be ruled out for those with disseminated NTM.
Disseminated NTM can also be seen secondary to immune suppressive medications, with TNF-­α blockade being the most common cause.
Hairy cell leukemia has an increased incidence of disseminated NTM.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1344 Part XII u Immunology

Chapter 176

Approaches to Treatment
of Primary Immune
­Deficiency Diseases
Alissa McInerney, Stefani Su, and
Artemio M. Jongco III
GENERAL INFECTION PREVENTION AND
MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES

Whenever possible, precautionary measures to reduce or minimize
exposure to infection should be implemented. Whereas patients with
severe immunologic defects (e.g., severe combined immunodeficiency
[SCID]) would benefit from strict isolation, patients with other, less
severe types of primary immunodeficiency disease (PID) usually do
not require such restrictive measures. It is imperative to maximize the
patient’s quality of life while implementing appropriate infection mitigation strategies. Using shared decision-­making, the clinician, patient,
and caregivers should regularly discuss the risks, benefits, and alternatives of infection mitigation strategies, as the patient’s clinical situation
and risk change over time. Universal precautions, including but not
limited to proper and thorough hand hygiene, should be frequently
practiced by patients as well as their close contacts. The use of masks
that cover the nose and mouth should be considered to avoid infection,
especially when highly transmissible infections (e.g., SARS-­CoV-­2)
are prevalent in the community. This is especially important in those
PID patients before hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) while
on immunosuppressive medications and afterward while awaiting
immune reconstitution. There is a low threshold to do further diagnostic
testing to identify acute infections early and to start antimicrobial therapy or admit the patient to hospital for aggressive treatment if needed.
It is also important to practice standard routine oral hygiene. Guidelines for antibiotic prophylaxis prior to dental procedures in PID
patients has not been well established. Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended for patients with PIDs requiring invasive dental procedures
such as root canals and tooth extraction. In particular, those patients
with PID with ongoing odontogenic infections require antibiotics
before and during dental treatment. There is not enough evidence for
antibiotic prophylaxis for noninvasive dental procedures such as oral
examinations.

IMMUNIZATIONS

Some PID patients will not mount an adequate immune response to
vaccinations because of their underlying immunologic defect. Nonetheless, immunizations should be given to prevent infections to PID
patients who are able to respond to vaccination. Specific immunization
practices are covered in Chapter 215. Immunization with live viral or
bacterial vaccines (BCG) is contraindicated in many PIDs due to the
risk of acquiring the live vaccine–related disease. Specific recommendations for vaccines in PID are shown in Table 176.1.
Patients who are on immunoglobulin G (IgG) replacement therapy
(IgRT) do not require routine vaccinations because they receive passive
immunization. Protective levels of antibodies against tetanus toxoid,
diphtheria toxoid, measles, varicella, pertussis, pneumococci, and three
meningococcal serotypes are documented in patients receiving IgRT.

GUIDANCE FOR CLOSE CONTACTS

Household members and other close contacts should not receive live
oral polio virus or live influenza vaccine because they may shed the
virus and transmit infection. Household members should generally
be vaccinated to all recommended vaccines, including MMR and

varicella, to facilitate herd immunity. Transmission of MMR vaccine
viruses has not been reported. The risk of transmission of varicella vaccine virus from a healthy person to an immunocompromised person is
rare. If a close contact develops varicella rash after immunization with
the varicella or zoster vaccines, isolation of the patient and administration of varicella-­zoster immune globulin is recommended.

COVID-­19 VACCINE

The impact and severity of SARS-­
CoV-­
2 infection likely varies
depending on the underlying immune defect. Small case series have
suggested that B-­cell lymphopenia (such as in X-­linked agammaglobulinemia [XLA]) may actually be a protective factor and correlates with
milder COVID-­19 course. Meanwhile, patients with biallelic loss-­of-­
function variants in AIRE, who have autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type-­1 (APS-­1), appear to have higher risk for life-­threatening
COVID-­19 pneumonia due to the presence of autoantibodies to type
I interferons (IFNs). Although all PID patients will benefit from infection prevention and mitigation practices, it is becoming apparent that
morbidity and mortality is variable among PID patients.
The most effective COVID prevention practices include the standard infection prevention strategies for all diseases including frequent
handwashing, minimizing exposure to sick contacts, self-­isolation/
quarantining while ill, and mask wearing when in crowded public areas
or areas with suboptimal ventilation. The most effective prevention
strategy against COVID-­19 is vaccination. Although this is a rapidly
changing situation, a variety of organizations have created recommendations for immunodeficiency patients. The consensus is that PID
patients should be vaccinated with non-­live vaccines based on what
has been approved for the age-­group in their country. Patients with
humoral deficiencies who do not respond with measurable antibody
titers should still be considered for vaccination as vaccines can induce
cellular immunity as well.
In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends administration of a third or fourth dose in
high-­risk patients, such as immunocompromised patients, including
PID patients with moderate to severe immunodeficiency and patients
on chronic immunosuppressive therapy.

PROPHYLAXIS
Antimicrobial Prophylaxis

Prophylactic antibiotics are one of the mainstays for infection prevention in patients with PID. The specific antimicrobial prophylaxis recommended differs depending on the type of PID because patients with
different PIDs are susceptible to different pathogens.

IMMUNODEFICIENCIES AFFECTING CELLULAR
AND HUMORAL IMMUNITY
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency

Patients with SCID will require definitive treatment with allogeneic
HSCT to correct the immune defect. It is crucial that patients remain
infection free to maximize chances of long-­term survival. With the
implementation of newborn screening for SCID, infants with SCID are
being detected before they develop infections. When SCID is suspected,
the number of people in contact with the infant should be limited. Due
to risk of transmission of cytomegalovirus (CMV) through breast milk,
many PID transplant centers recommend cessation of breastfeeding
until the CMV status of both the mother and infant is established.
Antimicrobial prophylaxis should be directed toward pneumonia
caused by Pneumocystis jiroveci with a combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim. However, in infants under 2 months of age,
there is a concern for bilirubin displacement from albumin and subsequent risk of kernicterus. In these young infants, close monitoring
of bilirubin levels is recommended or alternatives such as atovaquone,
dapsone, and pentamidine can be considered. Fluconazole to prevent
mucocutaneous candidiasis and acyclovir for viral prophylaxis can
be considered as well. In countries where BCG vaccine is commonly
administered in early infancy, daily chemoprophylaxis until definitive
treatment with HSCT and immune reconstitution is needed with isoniazid and rifampin due to the risk of disseminated BCG infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 176 u Approaches to Treatment of Primary Immune ­Deficiency Diseases

1345

Table 176.1  Immunizations in Patients with Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases
EXAMPLE OF SPECIFIC
IMMUNODEFICIENCY

PRIMARY DEFECT

NOT RECOMMENDED

RECOMMENDED

Predominantly antibody
deficiencies

Hypogammaglobulinemias (X-­linked
agammaglobulinemia, common
variable immunodeficiency)
Other antibody deficiencies
(selective IgA deficiency, IgG
subclass deficiencies, specific
antibody deficiency with normal
immunoglobulins)

Live-­attenuated vaccines excluding
BCG
Live-­attenuated influenza, OPV,
adenovirus, typhoid, yellow fever

Inactivated vaccines
All vaccines likely effective
Pneumococcal and Hib

Combined
immuno­deficiencies

Complete defects (SCID, complete
DiGeorge syndrome)
Partial defects (partial DiGeorge
syndrome, Wiskott-­Aldrich
syndrome, ataxia telangiectasia)

All live vaccines
Live-­attenuated influenza, OPV,
rotavirus, adenovirus, smallpox,
typhoid, yellow fever, BCG

All vaccines likely ineffective
Inactivated vaccines, live-­
attenuated MMR, varicella, and
herpes zoster if documentation
of adequate T-­cell number*

None

All routine vaccines, especially
pneumococcal and meningococcal
vaccines

Live-­attenuated influenza,
adenovirus, typhoid, BCG

All inactivated vaccines, other live-­
attenuated viral vaccines

Complement

Phagocytic function

Chronic granulomatous disease,
leukocyte adhesion defects

IFN-­γ-­IL-­12 pathway defects

BCG

*Age-­related levels of immunocompetence proposed by the CDC: <1 yr, 1500; 1-­5 yr, 1,000; and >6 yr, 500 CD4+ T cells/mm3 for HIV may also be used.
BCG, Bacille Calmette-­Guérin; OPV, oral poliovirus vaccine; SCID, severe combined immune deficiency; MMR, measles, mumps, rubella; IFN-­γ, interferon gamma; IL-­12, interleukin-­12.
Data from Medical Advisory Committee of the Immune Deficiency Foundation, Shearer WT, Fleisher TA, et al. Recommendations for live viral and bacterial vaccines in immunodeficient patients and their close contacts. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014;133(4):961–966.

Palivizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV), can be considered for children under 2 years of
age with SCID during the RSV season to prevent serious disease. The
specific RSV seasonal patterns differ between countries.

HYPER-­IgM/CD40LG DEFICIENCY

Patients with hyper-­IgM or CD40LG deficiency are especially susceptible to P. jiroveci pneumonia (PJP) and require prophylaxis with a combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim. These patients are
also at special risk for developing sclerosing cholangitis, which can be
associated with Cryptosporidium parvum infection. To prevent the risk
of cryptosporidium infection, steps need to be taken to avoid drinking
contaminated water and places where risk of infection is higher, such
as at recreational water parks.

COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCIES WITH
ASSOCIATED OR SYNDROME FEATURES
DiGeorge Syndrome/22q11 Deletion Syndrome

Most patients with DiGeorge syndrome do not require antimicrobial
prophylaxis as most patients do not have severe immunodeficiency
(i.e., partial DiGeorge syndrome). Less than 1% of patients have significant thymic aplasia and profound T-­and B-­cell lymphopenia (i.e.,
complete DiGeorge syndrome), putting them at risk of PJP and CMV;
PJP prophylaxis is recommended.

Wiskott-­Aldrich Syndrome

Patients with Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome (WAS) are susceptible to
a variety of viral and bacterial infections. Prophylactic antimicrobials
against infection by PJP and herpes simplex virus are often recommended.
If splenectomy is necessary for severe refractory thrombocytopenia,
those patients would then require penicillin prophylaxis to protect
against infection by encapsulated organisms.

Ataxia Telangiectasia

Opportunistic infections in patients with ataxia telangiectasia are
infrequent; however, sinopulmonary infections are common. Prophylactic azithromycin is commonly used empirically, however, efficacy
data are sparse.

STAT3 HYPER-­IgE SYNDROME (JOB SYNDROME)

These patients are susceptible to skin infections predominantly with
Staphylococcus aureus causing “cold” abscesses with diminished inflammatory response. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis occurs in over
70% of patients. Pneumonia is a frequent infection with risk of leading to bronchiectasis and pneumatoceles. Common causative pathogens
include Staphylococcus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and fungal organisms such as Aspergillus and P. jiroveci. Antimicrobial
prophylaxis with a combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim
and antifungal medications such as itraconazole is recommended.

NF-­κB ESSENTIAL MODULATOR (NEMO)
DEFICIENCY

Patients with NF-­κB essential modulator (NEMO) deficiency are susceptible to nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), similar to patients
with IFN-­γ and interleukin (IL)-­12 defects. Prophylaxis with azithromycin should be considered. However, these patients are also at risk for
many bacterial infections, viral infections such as herpesviruses, and
opportunistic infections such as PJP. Acyclovir for viral prophylaxis and
a combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim for PJP prophylaxis should be considered as well.

PREDOMINANTLY ANTIBODY DEFICIENCIES
Hypogammaglobinemias

Lifelong IgRT is the mainstay of infection prevention for patients with
major antibody deficiencies such as agammaglobulinemia and common variable immunodeficiency (CVID). Prophylactic antibiotics can
be used in conjunction with IgRT for patients who develop recurrent
respiratory tract infections, which can lead to severe complications of
bronchiectasis. Macrolide antibiotics such as azithromycin are commonly used for prophylaxis due to their anti-­inflammatory properties
in chronic lung disease. Low-­dose oral azithromycin reduces the number of exacerbation episodes per patient-­year, with a consequent reduction in additional courses of antibiotics and risk of hospitalization.

Other Antibody Deficiencies

Patients with minor antibody deficiencies such as transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy (THI), selective IgA deficiency, IgG

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1346 Part XII u Immunology
subclass deficiency, or specific antibody deficiency with normal immunoglobulins can usually be managed without need for IgRT. Patients
who experience chronic or recurrent infections may benefit from
prophylactic antibiotics. Prophylactic antibiotics and IgRT are equally
effective as first-­line treatment in preventing infections in specific antibody deficiency patients.

(3) normal immunoglobulin levels with impaired specific antibody
production, (4) hypogammaglobulinemia with normal antibody function, (5) isolated IgG subclass deficiency with normal immunoglobulin
levels and normal quality antibody responses, and (6) recurrent infections related to an unknown immune mechanism.

CONGENITAL PHAGOCYTE DEFECTS
Chronic Granulomatous Disease

IgRT reduces both acute and chronic infections in this patient population; the number and severity of infectious complications are inversely
correlated with IgRT dose. When IgG trough levels are maintained
above 800 mg/dL, serious bacterial illness and enteroviral meningoencephalitis are prevented; increasing trough levels up to 1,000 mg/
dL are associated with decreased risk for pneumonia. In the setting of
SCID, IgRT is warranted at diagnosis because maternally derived IgG
wanes after birth, during the posttransplant period, or gene therapy
or enzyme replacement (for adenosine deaminase [ADA] deficiency)
until B-­cell function reconstitution, or indefinitely if B-­cell function is
not restored.

Patients with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) are susceptible
to severe bacterial and fungal infections. The most common bacterial
organisms include S. aureus, Serratia marcescens, Burkholderia cepacia, and Nocardia species. The majority of fungal infections in CGD
are attributed to Aspergillus species causing invasive aspergillosis. Prophylaxis with a combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim and
itraconazole is recommended.

Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency

Antibiotic prophylaxis to protect against infections with S. aureus or
gram-­negative bacilli is recommended.

DEFECTS IN INTRINSIC AND INNATE IMMUNITY
Interferon-­γ/IL-­12 Pathway Defects

Patients with IFN-­γ/IL-­12 pathway defects are at special risk for infections with intracellular pathogens such as nontuberculosis Mycobacterium species as well as Salmonella. Prophylaxis with daily azithromycin
or clarithromycin is recommended.

COMPLEMENT DEFICIENCIES

Deficiency of terminal pathway components can lead to recurrent neisserial infections. Antibiotic prophylaxis with penicillin can be considered. Immunization against S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and Neisseria
meningitidis is strongly recommended.

IMMUNOGLOBULIN G REPLACEMENT THERAPY

Human immunoglobulin preparations, derived from the plasma of
paid donors, can be administered intravenously (IVIG), subcutaneously (SCIG), or intramuscularly (IMIG) to treat a variety of disorders,
including inborn errors of immunity, acquired immunodeficiency, and
autoimmune and inflammatory disorders. IgRT provides passive immunity through preformed antibodies against a wide range of pathogens
that are encountered by the general population, leading to immediate
but transient protection; IgRT has an integral role in the treatment of
patients with defects in the humoral immune system. IgRT is also used
for a variety of medical conditions because of its anti-­inflammatory
and immunomodulating effects.

Products

Although most products are approved for a specific administration
route, several 10% IVIG solutions can be administered subcutaneously
with good patient tolerability. More concentrated 20% SCIG and 16%
IMIG products should not be used intravenously. Available products
and their key properties are summarized in Table 176.2. IMIG is rarely
used because of its inferior safety and tolerability profile. Injections are
painful, the injectable volume is limited, and the risk of local injury and
adverse reactions is higher. Both IVIG and SCIG products are effective
in treating humoral immunodeficiencies, without significant differences
in the infection rates between the two routes. Incidence of infection is
inversely correlated with dose regardless of route.

INDICATIONS FOR IgRT

IgRT is indicated for the treatment of primary immunodeficiencies characterized by absent or deficient antibody production, which
comprises the majority of PIDs. The utility of IgRT in decreasing the
frequency and severity of infection is well accepted for agammaglobulinemia (e.g., XLA) and hypogammaglobulinemia (e.g., CVID). There
are six distinct phenotypes of primary immunodeficiency for which
IgRT is or may be indicated: (1) agammaglobulinemia due to absence
of B cells, (2) hypogammaglobulinemia with poor antibody function,

Agammaglobulinemia Due to Absence of B cells

Hypogammaglobulinemia with Poor Antibody
Function

Patients with recurrent infections who demonstrate decreased immunoglobulin concentrations and/or impaired response to protein and/or
polysaccharide vaccines benefit from IgRT. CVID falls in this category.
Initiation of IgRT is associated with decreased infection rate compared
with pretreatment. Adequate IgRT dosing is associated with decreased
frequency of sinopulmonary infections, which can mitigate the development of lung inflammation, bronchiectasis, and chronic lung disease. Growing evidence and expert consensus support individualizing
IgRT dosing to keep the patient relatively infection free, achieving a
“biologic trough or biologic steady-­state level,” and following clinical
outcomes rather than using a standardized dose in all patients by disease. In addition to CVID, patients with class-­switching defects, such
as autosomal recessive and X-­linked hyper-­IgM syndromes, also demonstrate decreased infection rates from a variety of pathogens.

NORMAL IMMUNOGLOBULIN LEVELS WITH
IMPAIRED SPECIFIC ANTIBODY PRODUCTION

Determining whether and when IgRT is indicated for these patients
can be challenging. Available evidence and expert consensus suggest
that IgRT should be given when there is well-­documented nonresponsiveness to polysaccharide vaccines and recurrent infections that are
inadequately managed by antibiotic prophylaxis. Protective concentration of antibody to polysaccharide antigens is considered 1.3 μg/mL
and conversion from nonprotective to protective titers. In children 2-­5
years, >50% of concentrations tested are considered protective, with an
observed increase of at least twofold postvaccination, while the threshold is >70% in patients aged 6-­65 years. Selective antibody deficiency
has been categorized into four phenotypes—mild, moderate, severe, and
memory (where the patient can mount an adequate initial response
that wanes within 6 months). If an IgRT trial is started, it should be
discontinued after a period of time so that antibody responses can be
reevaluated a minimum of 3 months after discontinuation. Some children can demonstrate clinical improvement and improved response
after pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine challenge after a short
trial of IgRT, whereas others continue to have recurrent infections and
restart IgRT.

Hypogammaglobulinemia with Normal Antibody
Function

Age-­specific normal ranges differ among laboratories and having IgG
levels below the lower limit of normal for age without accompanying
infections may not be clinically significant. The IgG levels of children
experiencing THI normalize with time. THI may be exacerbated by preterm birth. In the absence of significant infections, IgRT is not routinely
recommended for these children. Acquired hypogammaglobulinemia
arising from medication (e.g., seizure medications, B-­cell depletion
therapy) can also fall in this category. Severe hypogammaglobulinemia,
conventionally defined as IgG levels ≤150 mg/day, is considered a risk

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

