Table 176.2  Available Immunoglobulin Replacement Therapy Products
DOSAGE
FORM

FILTRATION
REQUIRED?

OSMOLALITY
(mOsm/kg)

PRODUCT

IV

Asceniv

10% liquid

NA

Yes

No

Bivigam

10% liquid

NA

Yes

Flebogamma
DIF 5%

5% liquid

NA

No‡

Flebogamma
DIF 10%

10% liquid

NA

Gammagard
5% S/D

Lyophilized

Gammaplex

IgA
(mcg/mL)

STABILIZER OR
REGULATOR*

PATHOGEN
INACTIVATION/
REMOVAL†

SODIUM

PH

Not available

0.100-­0.140
mol/L

4.0-­4.6

<200

Glycine and
polysorbate 80

FP, S/D, VF

No

<510

100-­140 mM

4.0-­4.6

≤200

Glycine

FP, S/D, NF

Optional

240-­370

Trace

5.0-­6.0

<50

D-­sorbitol

Past, S/D, dsNF,
FP, PEG, pH 4

No‡

No

240-­370

Trace

5.0-­6.0

<100

D-­sorbitol

Past, S/D, dsNF,
FP, PEG, pH 4

Sterile water

No

Yes

636

8.5 mg/mL

6.8

<1

2% glucose and
glycine

CEF, CHROM,
S/D

5% liquid

NA

No‡

15-­20-­μm filter
preferred

420-­500

30 to 50
mmol/L

4.8-­5.0

<4

Sorbitol and
glycine and
polysorbate 80

S/D, VF, low pH

Gammaplex

10% liquid

NA

No‡

No

≥280

<30 mM/L

4.9-­5.2

<20

Glycine and
polysorbate 80

S/D, VF, low pH

Octagam

5% liquid

NA

No‡

Optional

310-­380

0.03 mEq/mL

5.1-­6.0

<200

Maltose

CEF, UF,
CHROM, S/D,
pH 4

Octagam

10% liquid

NA

No‡

Optional

310-­380

<30 mmol/L

4.5-­5.0

106

Maltose

CEF, S/D, pH 4,
UF, CHROM

Panzyga

10% liquid

NA

No§

Optional

240-­310

Trace

4.5-­5.0

100

Glycine

S/D, CEF, NF,
CHROM

Privigen

10% liquid

NA

No**

No

240-­440

Trace

4.6-­5.0

<25

L-­proline

CEF, CHROM,
pH 4, DF, NF,
OAF

Gammagard
liquid

10% liquid

NA

No‡

Optional

240-­300

None added

4.6-­5.1

37

Glycine

CEF, CHROM,
S/D, pH 4, NF

Gammaked

10% liquid

NA,
incompatible
with saline

No**

No

258

None added

4.0-­4.5

46

Glycine

CEF, pH 4.2, DF,
CAP, CHROM,
NF

Gamunex-­C

10% liquid

NA,
incompatible
with saline

No**

No

258

None added

4.0-­4.5

46

Glycine

CEF, pH 4.2, DF,
CAP, CHROM,
NF
Continued

Chapter 176 u Approaches to Treatment of Primary Immune ­Deficiency Diseases

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ROUTE

IV or SC

DILUENT

REFRIGERATION
REQUIRED?

1347

DOSAGE
FORM

FILTRATION
REQUIRED?

OSMOLALITY
(mOsm/kg)

IgA
(mcg/mL)

STABILIZER OR
REGULATOR*

PATHOGEN
INACTIVATION/
REMOVAL†

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

ROUTE

PRODUCT

SODIUM

PH

SC

Cutaquig

16.5% liquid

NA

Yes¶

No

310-­380

<30 mmol/L

5.0-­5.5

≤600

Maltose

CEF, UF,
CHROM, S/D,
pH 4

Cuvitru

20% liquid

NA

No***

No

208-­290

None

4.6-­5.1

80

Glycine

CEF, CHROM,
NF, S/D

Hizentra

20% liquid

NA

No

No

380

Trace, <10
mmol/L

4.6-­5.2

≤50

Proline

CEF, CHROM,
pH 4.2, DF, NF,
VF, OAF

HyQvia

10% liquid +
recombinant
human
hyaluronidase

NA

No

No††

240-­300

None added

4.6-­5.1

37

Glycine

CEF, CHROM,
S/D, pH 4, NF

Xembify

20% liquid

NA

2-­8°C

No

280-­404

None

4.1-­4.8

≤70

Glycine

CEF, CHROM,
CAP, NF, DF,
low pH

GamaSTAN

16.5% liquid

NA

2-­8°C

No

Not available

Not
measured

4.1-­4.8

Not
measured

Glycine

CEF, CAP,
CHROM, NF,
low pH, DF

GamaSTAN
S/D‡‡

15–18% liquid

NA

2-­8°C

No

Not available

0.4-­0.5%

6.4-­7.2

Not
measured

Glycine

CEF, S/D, UF

IM

DILUENT

REFRIGERATION
REQUIRED?

*Precautions and laboratory abnormalities associated with specific stabilizers include the following:
• Glucose: May alter glycemic control in patients with diabetes mellitus.
• L-­proline: Cannot be used in patients with hyperprolinemia.
• Maltose: Falsely elevates glucose readings in certain blood glucose monitoring systems, may contain trace corn protein (potential allergen), and may increase plasma osmolality (usually not clinically important).
• Polysorbate 80: Some patients may be hypersensitive (also known as Tween 80); reactions can be delayed type.
• Sorbitol, D-­sorbitol: Cannot be used in patients with hereditary fructose intolerance.
• Sucrose: Avoid in patients with renal impairment or increased risk of acute kidney injury.
†Pathogen inactivation/removal using CEF, DF, UF, CAP, CHROM, Nano, dsNF, VF, S/D, Past, FP, or OAF.
‡Not required (+2 to 25°C).
§Storage is 2-­8°C for 24 months or 25°C for 9 months.
**Storage is 2-­8°C for 36 months or 25°C for 6 months.
¶Storage is 2-­8°C for 24 months or 25°C for 6 months.
***Storage is 2-­8°C for 36 months or 25°C for 12 months.
††Storage is 2-­8°C for 36 months or 25°C for 3 months.
‡‡GamaSTAN S/D has been discontinued in the United States.
Note: Brand names and descriptions refer to products available in the United States and some other countries; product availability, specific composition, and other details regarding individual products vary in other countries.
IgA, Immunoglobulin A; IV, intravenous; NA, not applicable; FP, fraction precipitation; S/D, solvent detergent; VF, virus filtration; Nano, NF, nanofiltration; DIF, dual inactivation and filtration; Past, pasteurization; dsNF, double sequential
nanofiltration; PEG, polyethylene glycol precipitation; CEF, cold ethanol fractionation; DF, depth filtration; UF, ultrafiltration; CHROM, chromatography; SC, subcutaneous; CAP, caprylate; OAF, octanoic acid fractionation; IM, intramuscular.
Adapted from Perez EE, Orange JS, Bonilla F, et al. Update on the use of immunoglobulin in human disease: A review of evidence. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017;139(3S):S1–S46; with data from Immune Deficiency Foundation. Characteristics
of Immunoglobulin Products Used to Treat Primary Immunodeficiencies. Accessed 8/10/21. https://primaryimmune.org/sites/default/files/publications/IDF_IG%20Booklet%202020.pdf

1348 Part XII u Immunology

Table 176.2  Available Immunoglobulin Replacement Therapy Products—cont’d

Chapter 176 u Approaches to Treatment of Primary Immune ­Deficiency Diseases
factor for infection, and empiric trial of IgRT is reasonable. However,
patients with levels between 150 and 250 mg/dL deserve further consideration of antibody function and individual clinical history.

Isolated IgG Subclass Deficiency with Normal
Immunoglobulin Levels and Normal Quality Antibody
Responses

Most patients with subclass deficiency are asymptomatic, but a few may
have recurrent infections and poor antibody responses to specific antigens. First-­line management includes prophylactic antibiotics and treatment of other comorbidities, such as allergic rhinitis, that can contribute
to the development of sinopulmonary infections. IgRT is not routinely
recommended for these patients; some case studies have demonstrated
reduced infection rate, decreased antibiotic use, and improved quality
of life among patients on therapy.

Table 176.3  Guiding Principles for Effective Use of IgRT
for Patients with Primary Immunodeficiency
GUIDING PRINCIPLE

IgG is indicated as replacement therapy for
patients with PI characterized by absent
or deficient antibody production; PI is an
FDA-­approved indication for IgRT

Diagnoses

A large number of PI diagnoses exist for
which IgRT is indicated and recommended;
many diagnoses have low total IgG
levels, but some have a normal level with
documented specific antibody deficiency

Frequency of IgRT

Treatment is indicated as ongoing
replacement therapy for PI; treatment
should not be interrupted once a
definitive diagnosis has been established

Dose

IVIG is indicated for PI patients at a starting
dose of 400-­600 mg/kg every 3-­4 wk;
SCIG is generally used at a starting dose
of 100-­200 mg/kg/wk; SCIG dosing
frequency is flexible

IgG trough levels

IgG trough levels can be useful in some
diagnoses to guide care but should not
be a consideration in access to IgRT

Site of care

The decision to infuse IgRT in a hospital,
outpatient infusion center, community
office, or home-­based setting must be
based on patient clinical characteristics

Route

Administration route must be based on
patient characteristics; throughout life,
certain patients may be more appropriate
for IV or SC therapy depending on many
factors, and patients should have access
to either route as needed

Product

IVIG/SCIG are not generic drugs and
products are not interchangeable; a
specific product needs to be matched to
patient characteristics to ensure patient
safety; product change should only occur
with active participation of the prescribing
physician

INDIVIDUALIZING IgRT

Clinicians, patients, and caregivers need to consider each patient’s specific clinical situation and comorbidities, incorporate patient and caregiver preferences, and consider flexibility in dosing route and frequency.
Children and adolescents may object to the multiple and more frequent
needlesticks associated with SCIG. Once the decision is made to start
IgRT, the clinician, patient, and caregivers need to periodically reassess
and adjust as needed. Available IgRT products differ from one another
and are not interchangeable; the product used should be matched carefully to the patient characteristics to maximize patient safety. There are
eight guiding principles on the safe, effective, and appropriate use of
IgRT in patients with primary immunodeficiency (Table 176.3).

CONSIDERATIONS FOR PRODUCT SELECTIONS
IVIG
IgA Content

The amount of IgA in various products varies. Rarely, severe allergic
reactions, including anaphylaxis, have been reported in patients with
IgE anti-­IgA or IgG anti-­IgA. In these cases, use of low IgA-­containing
IVIG products or SCIG, which appears to be tolerated by these patients
despite having higher IgA content, is recommended. Anaphylaxis due
to IgA in SCIG has not been reported.

Adverse Reactions

All IgRT products are associated with a potential risk for adverse reactions, but historically IVIG is associated with higher risk. Most IVIG
adverse reactions are rate related, mild, and occur in 5–15% of infusions. Slowing or stopping the infusion for 15-­30 minutes usually leads
to complete resolution. Premedication regimens can also help. Ensuring adequate hydration or switching to SCIG has been used successfully
to mitigate this risk. Risk factors for experiencing adverse reactions
include (1) having IVIG for the first time, (2) having or recently having a bacterial infection, (3) having underlying chronic inflammation,
(4) using higher concentration products, (5) using lyophilized product, and (6) fast infusion rates. Future reactions become less likely after
subsequent infusions with the same product. However, patients can
develop adverse reactions at any point even to products they have tolerated previously; clinicians and patients need to remain vigilant. For
enhanced safety, patients who have experienced prior adverse reactions
may benefit from getting infusions at a medical facility, instead of at
home with an infusion nurse.
Serious adverse events, including acute renal failure, neurodegeneration, and thromboembolic events, can occur during or soon after
infusion. Thromboembolic events such as myocardial infarction,

RATIONALE

Indication for IgRT

Recurrent Infections Related to an Unknown Immune
Mechanism

There are defined immunodeficiencies, such as ataxia telangiectasia, WAS,
and STAT3 deficiency, as well as syndromic immunodeficiencies, such as
Jacobsen syndrome, which can present with variable humoral immune
defects. IgRT can prevent infections in select patients, and the decision
to start IgRT and dosing considerations should be tailored to individual
needs.

1349

IgRT, Immunoglobulin replacement therapy; IgG, immunoglobulin G; PI, primary
immunodeficiency; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; SCIG, subcutaneous
immunoglobulin; IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneous; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin.
Data from Perez EE, Orange JS, Bonilla F, et al. Update on the use of immunoglobulin
in human disease: A review of evidence. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017;139(3S):S1–S46;
with data from Yong PL, Boyle J, Ballow M, et al. Use of intravenous immunoglobulin
and adjunctive therapies in the treatment of primary immunodeficiencies: A working
group report of and study by the Primary Immunodeficiency Committee of the American
Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology. Clin Immunol. 2010;135(2):255–263.

stroke, deep vein thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism are rare,
but they need to be watched for and require timely intervention
when they occur. Risk factors include preexisting cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, dehydration, sepsis, increased blood viscosity, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertension. The use of indwelling
venous catheters solely for IVIG administration is not recommended
due to the increased risk for thromboembolism and infection with
these devices.

SCIG
Products

Available products range from 10–20% concentration and offer much
dosing flexibility for patients. Facilitated SCIG (fSCIG) involves recombinant human hyaluronidase to facilitate the SC administration of large
volumes of IgG among multiple sites and a variety of dosing schedules.
Many studies demonstrate equivalence and noninferiority of SCIG and
IVIG for management of PIDs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1350 Part XII u Immunology
Adverse Reactions

SCIG is well tolerated by many patients, including children and IgA-­
deficient patients, and its safety profile is well documented. The most
common adverse reaction is local infusion site reactions that can range
from mild to severe, but severe local reactions are rare. The prevalence
of these local site reactions appears to diminish when infusions are
continued. Carefully cleaning the skin of the infusion site with alcohol
and using appropriately sized infusion needles or catheters can further
decrease risk of local reactions. IV administration of 10% products that
are approved for both IV and SC administration is unlikely to be problematic, but 20% products should not be used intravenously. Premedication is usually not needed for SCIG, but pretreatment of the infusion
site with local anesthetic creams may improve tolerability in children.
In the United States, patients are routinely provided epinephrine
autoinjectors as part of an anaphylaxis kit for home infusions, regardless of prior history of allergic reactions to IgRT.

DOSING CONSIDERATIONS

The IgRT dose that keeps a patient relatively infection free varies between patients and can vary in the same patient over time, so
the goal of IgRT should be to maximize clinical outcomes and not to
achieve a specific IgG level.

traditional SCIG, a four-­dose/7-­week “ramp-­up” period is recommended when starting fSCIG, even in patients who have used other
IgRT products successfully. Once established on therapy, fSCIG infusion rates can be increased as tolerated by the patient from 50 mL/hr up
to 300 mL/hr. The IgG is infused via peristaltic pump or large volume
battery-­operated pump, similar to IVIG, which has been programmed
to account for the higher pressure of fSCIG compared with IV.

ADMINISTRATION DETAILS
Premedication

Many patients tolerate IVIG infusions without premedication. Pediatric pretreatment regimens include oral acetaminophen or ibuprofen,
oral or IV or IM diphenhydramine, or alternatively a nonsedating
antihistamine and/or a glucocorticoid such as oral prednisolone or
IV hydrocortisone. Maintaining adequate hydration before infusion
orally or via IV fluids with normal saline may be beneficial, especially
for patients with preexisting renal disease or other risk factors (e.g.,
concomitant use of nephrotoxic agents). Premedication is usually not
required for SCIG.

VACCINATION WHILE ON IgRT

For traditional SCIG, a starting dose of 100-­200 mg/kg of body weight
per week is commonly used. For hyaluronidase fSCIG, a starting dose
of 400-­600 mg/kg via one or two sites every 3-­4 weeks is common. When
fSCIG is given every 3-­4 weeks, the initial peak will still be lower than
that of IVIG given at the same intervals, but the trough serum levels
will be similar. Patients have more dosing frequency flexibility because
there are products approved for daily, weekly, biweekly, or monthly dosing. Infusion rates generally range from 10-­35 mL/hr per site by pump
with volumes of 15-­40 mL per site. The number of sites depends on
the total volume for the target dose, and typical infusion sites include
abdomen, outer thigh, upper arm, and buttocks. Manual rapid-­push
protocols that do not require infusion pumps have been reported to be
safe and tolerable by patients in small nonrandomized trials. Steady-­
state serum IgG levels should be monitored periodically after approximately 3 months and can be used to assess patient adherence.

Administration of IgRT may interfere with vaccination efficacy because
the antibodies in the product might bind to the antigens in the vaccine
and inhibit the immune response. The IgG in the IgRT product may
hinder the viral replication that is needed to induce the desired immune
response in live-­virus vaccines such MMR or varicella (varicella-­zoster
virus [VZV]). Antibody-­containing blood products from the United
States do not interfere with the immune response to yellow fever vaccine and are not believed to interfere with the response to live typhoid,
live-­attenuated influenza, rotavirus, or zoster vaccines. The duration
of inhibition ranges from 3-­11 months and is related to the amount of
antigen-­specific antibody contained in the immune globulin or blood
product. For patients on IgRT, 8 months since last IVIG infusion is the
suggested waiting time before administering live vaccines. Although
no specific recommended waiting time has been suggested for SCIG,
many clinicians will also wait for 8 months since last infusion.
• If the antibody-­containing product is administered before the vaccine is scheduled, the vaccine should be delayed for the suggested
interval. If a dose of MMR or VZV vaccine is administered after an
antibody-­containing product but at an interval shorter than the suggested interval, the vaccine dose should be repeated at the suggested
interval unless an antibody response to the vaccine is documented.
• If the antibody-­containing product is necessary within 14 days after
administration of MMR or VZV vaccine, the vaccine dose should be
repeated after the suggested interval, unless an antibody response to
the vaccine is documented.
Caution is advised when checking and interpreting IgG-­based serologies while on IgRT. Stopping IgRT to assess vaccine efficacy in immunodeficient patients is generally not recommended. Neoantigen vaccines
such as Salmonella typhi Vi can be used to assess a patient’s ability to
make specific antibodies while on IgRT, but this is not widely available.
Annual inactivated influenza vaccine is generally recommended
for immunodeficient patients, including those on IgRT, presumably to
stimulate T-cell immunity, although data are lacking that demonstrate
induction of protective antibodies. The influenza vaccine may be given
simultaneously or at any time interval before or after IgRT infusion.
Clinical trials using gene therapy with retroviral vectors have been
conducted for several inborn errors of immunity including ADA-­
SCID, X-­linked SCID, X-­linked CGD, and WAS in which immunity
was restored but with leukoproliferative complications due to insertion
of the vector into oncogenes, in all except for ADA-­SCID. The use of
lentiviral vectors represented a breakthrough in the field with clinical
recovery and immune reconstitution while minimizing vector-­related
complications. For further details on HSCT and gene therapy/editing,
see Chapters 177 and 178.

Facilitated SCIG

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Conversion from IVIG to SCIG

The bioavailability of SCIG is approximately 67% lower compared to
IVIG. Thus the monthly dose of SCIG required to achieve an equivalent
monthly area under the curve (AUC) is 1.37 times the IVIG dose for 16%
products and 1.53 for 20% products. No significant differences in infection incidence or outcome have been shown between studies that do not
utilize this dose adjustment compared to studies with this dose adjustment. In clinical practice, AUC dose adjustment is rarely used.

IVIG Dosing

For IVIG, many clinical immunologists use 400-­600 mg/kg every 3-­4
weeks as an acceptable starting point for maintenance therapy, while
continuing to check annual trough levels. Infusion rates start slowly
(e.g., 0.01 mL/kg/min) to minimize adverse reactions, and the rate can
be increased as tolerated. Clinicians should monitor weight changes and
adjust dosing accordingly. Also, IgG levels may need to be checked more
frequently if the patient experiences breakthrough infections, develops new medical conditions (e.g., protein losing conditions), or is not
responding to treatment as expected. Because pharmacokinetics also differs among patients, a specific IVIG dose can result in different trough
levels in patients with similar body mass. There is insufficient evidence
to routinely recommend higher loading IVIG doses in patients with low
IgG levels at presentation; this practice has been associated with higher
risk for adverse reactions at IgRT start. There is limited data on optimal
dosing intervals for IVIG, and current practices vary widely.

SCIG Dosing

The dosing of hyaluronidase fSCIG is similar to IVIG. In the United
States, fSCIG is approved for use in patients 2 years or older. Unlike

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 177 u Principles and Clinical Indications of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation 1351

Section 6

Hematopoietic Stem
Cell Transplantation
Chapter 177

Principles and
Clinical Indications of
Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Transplantation
Rachel A. Phelan and David Margolis
Allogeneic (from a donor) or autologous (from the same individual)
hematopoietic stem cells have been used to cure both malignant and nonmalignant disorders. Autologous transplantation is employed as a rescue
strategy after delivering otherwise lethal doses of chemotherapy with or
without radiotherapy in children with hematologic malignancies such as
relapsed lymphoma or selected solid tumors (e.g., neuroblastoma, brain
tumors). Allogeneic transplantation is used to treat children with genetic
diseases of blood cells, such as hemoglobinopathies, primary immunodeficiency diseases, various inherited metabolic diseases, and bone marrow
failure. Allogeneic transplant is also used as treatment for hematologic
malignancies, such as leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes. Bone
marrow had originally represented the only source of hematopoietic
progenitor cells. Growth factor (granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor)–
mobilized peripheral blood hematopoietic stem cells and umbilical cord
blood hematopoietic progenitors have also been regularly used in clinical
practice to perform hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).
A human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­matched sibling was traditionally the only type of donor employed. Matched unrelated volunteers,
full-­haplotype mismatched family members, and unrelated cord blood
donors have been largely utilized to transplant patients lacking an
HLA-­identical relative.
Protocols for allogeneic HSCT consist of two parts: the preparative
regimen and transplantation itself. During the preparative conditioning regimen, chemotherapy, at times in conjunction with irradiation, is
administered to eliminate the patient’s hematopoietic system and to suppress the immune system, especially T cells, so that graft rejection is prevented. In patients with malignancies, the preparative regimen also serves
to significantly reduce the tumor burden. The patient then receives an
intravenous infusion of hematopoietic cells from the donor. Less aggressive conditioning regimens, known as reduced-­intensity conditioning
regimens, are also used in pediatric patients. These regimens are mainly
immunosuppressive and aim at inducing a state of reduced immune competence of the recipient to avoid the rejection of donor cells.
The immunology of HSCT is distinct from that of other types of
transplant because, in addition to stem cells, the graft contains mature
blood cells of donor origin, including T cells, B cells, natural killer cells,
and dendritic cells. These cells repopulate the recipient’s lymphohematopoietic system and give rise to a new immune system, which helps
eliminate residual leukemia cells that survive the conditioning regimen. This effect is known as the graft-­versus-­leukemia (GVL) effect.
The donor immune system exerts its T-­cell–mediated GVL effect
through alloreactions directed against histocompatibility antigens displayed on recipient leukemia cells. However, because some
of these histocompatibility antigens are also displayed on tissues,
unwanted T-­cell–mediated alloreactions may ensue. Specifically, donor

alloreactive immune cells may attack recipient tissues, particularly the
skin, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and liver, causing acute or chronic
graft-­versus-­host disease (GVHD), a condition of varying severity
that in some cases can be life-­threatening or even fatal (see Chapter
179).
The success of allogeneic HSCT is undermined by diversity between
donors and recipients in major and minor histocompatibility antigens.
HLA, including HLA-­A, HLA-­B, and HLA-­C major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class I molecules, present peptides to CD8+ T cells,
whereas the HLA-­DR, HLA-­DQ, and HLA-­DP MHC class II molecules
present peptides to CD4+ T cells. There are hundreds of variant forms
of each class I and class II molecule, and even small differences can
elicit alloreactive T-­cell responses that mediate graft rejection and/or
GVHD. Disparities for HLA-­A, HLA-­B, HLA-­C, or HLA-­DRB1 alleles
in the donor-­recipient pair are independent risk factors for both acute
and chronic GVHD. There is also increasing evidence that HLA-­DQ
and HLA-­DP may play a role, prompting some transplant centers to
also explore matching at these alleles.
Minor histocompatibility antigens derive from differences between the
HLA-­matched recipient and donor in peptides that are presented by the
same HLA allotype. These antigens result from polymorphisms of non-­
HLA proteins, differences in the level of expression of proteins, or genetic
differences between males and females. An example of the latter is represented by the H-­Y antigens encoded by the Y chromosome, which can
stimulate GVHD when a female donor is employed to transplant an HLA-­
identical male recipient. Thus, from this evidence, GVHD may occur even
when the donor and recipient are HLA identical.
The preferred donor for any patient undergoing HSCT has traditionally been an HLA-­identical sibling. Because polymorphic HLA genes
are closely linked and usually constitute a single genetic locus, any
pair of siblings has a 25% chance of being HLA identical. Thus, also in
view of the limited family size in the developed countries, <25–30%
of patients in need of an allograft can receive their transplant from an
HLA-­identical sibling. This percentage is even lower in patients with
inherited disorders because affected siblings will not be considered
donor candidates.

HSCT FROM AN HLA–IDENTICAL SIBLING DONOR

Allogeneic HSCT from an HLA-­compatible sibling is the treatment of
choice for children with hematologic malignancies and various congenital or acquired diseases (Table 177.1). Best results are achieved in
patients with congenital or acquired nonmalignant disorders because
the risk of disease recurrence is low and the cumulative transplantation-­
related mortality is lower than in children receiving transplants for
hematologic malignancies.

ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA

Allogeneic HSCT is used for pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL), either in the first complete remission when a child is considered at high risk of leukemia recurrence (e.g., those carrying poor-­risk
cytogenetic characteristics or with high levels of minimal residual disease),
or in second or further complete remission after previous marrow relapse.
ALL is the most common indication for HSCT in childhood. Several
patient-­, donor-­, disease-­, and transplant-­related variables may influence
the outcome of patients with ALL given an allogeneic HSCT. The probabilities of 3-­year overall survival (OS) for US patients <18 years of age
with ALL transplanted in the first or second complete remission is 70–80%
and 60–70%, respectively. Inferior results are obtained in patients receiving
transplants in more advanced disease phases (50–60%; Fig. 177.1). The use
of total body irradiation (TBI) during the preparative regimen offers an
advantage in terms of better event-­free survival (EFS) compared to a regimen consisting of cytotoxic drugs alone, but it can induce more long-­term
side effects. This has prompted more investigation into TBI-­sparing alternatives. Less intensive GVHD prophylaxis is also associated with a better
outcome. Bone marrow is generally the preferred source of stem cells to
be employed for transplantation, although this differs among transplant
centers.
Although the main benefit for allogeneic HSCT recipients with
leukemia derives from the GVL effect displayed by immunocompetent cells, disease recurrence remains the main cause of treatment

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1352 Part XII u Immunology
Table 177.1  Indications for Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation for Pediatric Diseases
MALIGNANCY
ALL
First complete remission for patients at very high risk of relapse
T-­cell immunophenotype and poor response to corticosteroid
therapy
Not in remission at the end of the induction phase
Marked hypodiploidy (<43 chromosomes)
Minimal residual disease at the end of consolidation therapy
High-­risk infant ALL
Second complete remission
Third or later complete remission
Acute myeloid leukemia in first complete remission or in advanced-­
disease phase
Philadelphia chromosome–positive chronic myeloid leukemia
Myelodysplastic syndromes
Hodgkin and non-­Hodgkin lymphomas
Selected solid tumors
Metastatic neuroblastoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma refractory to conventional treatment
Very high risk Ewing sarcoma
High-­risk CNS tumors
ANEMIAS
Severe acquired aplastic anemia
Fanconi anemia
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinemia
Congenital dyskeratosis
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia
Thalassemia major
Sickle cell disease
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome

IMMUNOLOGIC DISORDERS
Variants of severe combined immunodeficiency
Hyper-­IgM syndrome
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency
Omenn syndrome
Zap-­70 kinase deficiency
Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia
PNP deficiency
CD40 ligand deficiency
MHC class II deficiency
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome
Kostmann syndrome (infantile malignant agranulocytosis)
Chronic granulomatous disease
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome
X-­linked lymphoproliferative disease (Duncan syndrome)
IPEX syndrome
Interleukin-­10 receptor deficiency
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Interferon-­γ receptor deficiency
Griscelli disease
Granule deficiency
OTHER DISORDERS
Selected severe variants of platelet function disorders (e.g., Glanzmann
thrombasthenia, congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia)
Selected types of mucopolysaccharidosis (e.g., Hurler disease) or
other liposomal/peroxisomal disorders (e.g., Krabbe disease,
adrenoleukodystrophy)
Infantile malignant osteopetrosis
Life-­threatening cytopenia unresponsive to conventional treatments

ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia; CNS, central nervous system; IPEX, immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked; MHC, major histocompatibility complex;
PNP, purine nucleoside phosphorylase.

100

p<0.001

CR1 (n=332)

Probability, %

80
60

CR2+ (n=472)

40

Relapse/never in CR (n=42)

20
0

0

1

2

3

4

5

Years

Fig. 177.1 Survival after matched related donor hematopoietic stem

cell transplantation for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), age <18
years, 2008-­
2018. CR1, first complete remission; CR2+, second or
greater remission. (From Phelan R, Arora M, Chen M. Current use and
outcome of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: CIBMTR US summary slides 2020. http://www.cibmtr.org.)

toward target antigens expressed by leukemic cells. When expressed
by T cells, CARs mediate antigen recognition and tumor cytolysis in
an MHC-­unrestricted fashion and can target any molecule (protein,
carbohydrate, or glycolipid) expressed on the surface of tumor cells,
thus bypassing one of the major tumor escape mechanisms based
on the downregulation of MHC molecules. CARs are composed of
an extracellular specific antigen-­binding moiety, obtained from the
variable regions of a monoclonal antibody, linked together to form a
single-­chain antibody (scFv), and of an intracellular signaling component derived from the ζ chain of the T-­cell receptor (TCR)-­CD3
complex. The addition to the CAR gene construct of co-­stimulation
signals and cytokines promoting T-­
cell expansion and survival
improves the antitumor efficiency of the engineered T cells and their
survival in the tumor milieu. Gamma retrovirus and lentiviruses are
usually used to transduce CARs into T lymphocytes to be employed
in the clinical setting. These vectors have been shown to efficiently
infect T lymphocytes, integrate into the host genome, and produce
robust expression of the gene in human T cells and their progeny.

ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA
failure. The risk of failing to eradicate leukemia is influenced by
many variables, including disease phase, molecular lesions of tumor
cells, and disparity for major or minor histocompatibility antigens
in the donor/recipient pairs. To overcome the hurdle of tumor elusion caused by HLA loss on malignant cells, the use of non–HLA-­
restricted chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) has also been used.
This therapeutic strategy is based on genetic reprogramming of T
cells through artificial immune receptors that reproducibly and efficiently redirect the antigen specificity of polyclonal T lymphocytes

Allogeneic HSCT is largely employed as postremission treatment of
pediatric patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) who meet certain high-­risk disease criteria. This subset of children with AML in first
complete remission who are given allogeneic HSCT as consolidation
therapy have a better probability of EFS than those treated with either
chemotherapy alone or autologous transplantation. Results obtained in
patients given HSCT after either a TBI-­containing or a chemotherapy-­
based preparative regimen are similar. Therefore, for AML, conditioning regimens generally omit the use of TBI because of associated
long-­term side effects. Children with acute promyelocytic leukemia in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 177 u Principles and Clinical Indications of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation 1353
molecular remission at the end of treatment with chemotherapy and
all-­trans-­retinoic acid, or with AML and translocation t(8;21) inversion of chromosome 16 (inv16), translocation t(16;16), or normal cytogenetics and presence of NPM1 or CEPBα pathogenic variants are no
longer considered eligible for allogeneic HSCT in first complete remission in view of their improved prognosis with alternative treatments.
Studies suggest restricting the use of HSCT to those patients with poor
molecular lesions, such as FLT3-­internal tandem duplication or mixed-­
lineage leukemia abnormalities, or with high levels of minimal residual
disease at the end of induction therapy. Approximately 40–60% of pediatric patients with AML in the second complete remission can be rescued by HSCT. The probabilities of 3-­year OS for US patients <18 years
of age with AML transplanted in the first or second complete remission is 60–70%. Similar to ALL, inferior results are obtained in patients
receiving transplants in more advanced disease phases (30–40%).

CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA

For many years, allogeneic HSCT has been considered the only proven
curative treatment for children with Philadelphia-­
positive (Ph+)
chronic myelogenous leukemia. Leukemia-­free survival of chronic
myelogenous leukemia patients after an allograft is 45–80%. The phase
of disease (chronic phase, accelerated phase, blast crisis), recipient age,
type of donor employed (related or unrelated), and time between diagnosis and HSCT are the main factors influencing the outcome. The best
results are obtained in children transplanted during the chronic phase
from an HLA-­identical sibling within 1 year from diagnosis. Unlike
other forms of pediatric leukemia, infusion of donor leukocytes can
reinduce a state of complete remission in a large proportion of patients
experiencing leukemia relapse.
Treatment with the specific BCR-­
ABL tyrosine protein kinase
inhibitors (imatinib mesylate, dasatinib, nilotinib), targeting the enzymatic activity of the BCR-­ABL fusion protein, has modified the natural history of the disease and thus the indications for transplantation.
The indication for HSCT in this population is generally reserved for
patients with a poor response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors or those
who do not tolerate their side effects.

JUVENILE MYELOMONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is a rare hematopoietic
malignancy of early childhood, representing 2–3% of all pediatric
leukemias. JMML is characterized by hepatosplenomegaly and organ
infiltration, with excessive proliferation of cells of monocytic and
granulocytic lineages. Hypersensitivity to granulocyte-­
macrophage
colony-­stimulating factor (GM-­CSF) and pathologic activation of the
RAS-­RAF-­MAP (mitogen-­activated protein) kinase signaling pathway
play an important role in the pathophysiology. JMML usually runs
an aggressive clinical course, with a median duration of survival for
untreated children of <12 months from diagnosis. Rare patients with
CBL1 or N-­RAS mutations can survive for years without an allograft.
HSCT can cure approximately 50–60% of patients with JMML.
Patients who receive a transplant from an unrelated donor have comparable outcome to those given HSCT from an HLA-­
compatible
related donor. Cord blood transplantation represents a suitable alternative option. Leukemia recurrence is the main cause of treatment failure
in children with JMML after HSCT, with the relapse rate as high as
40–50%. Because children with JMML frequently have massive spleen
enlargement, splenectomy has been performed before transplantation.
Spleen size at the time of HSCT and splenectomy before HSCT do not
appear to affect the posttransplantation outcome. Donor leukocyte
infusion is not useful to rescue patients experiencing disease recurrence; a second allograft can induce sustained remission in approximately 30% of children with JMML relapsing after a first HSCT.

MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES OTHER THAN
JUVENILE MYELOMONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA

Myelodysplastic syndromes are a heterogeneous group of clonal disorders characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis leading to peripheral
blood cytopenia and a propensity to evolve toward AML. HSCT is the
treatment of choice for children with refractory anemia with excess
of blasts (RAEB) and for those with RAEB in transformation (RAEB­t). The probability of survival without evidence of disease for these

children is 65–70%. It is still unclear whether patients with myelodysplastic syndromes and a blast percentage >20% benefit from pretransplantation chemotherapy. HSCT from an HLA-­identical sibling is
also the preferred treatment for all children with refractory cytopenia.
Transplantation is also considered in children with refractory cytopenia associated with monosomy 7, GATA 2 deficiency, complex karyotype, life-­threatening infections, profound neutropenia, or transfusion
dependency. For children with refractory cytopenia, the probability
of EFS after HSCT may be as high as 80%, and disease recurrence is
rarely observed. This observation has provided the rationale for testing
reduced-­intensity regimens in these patients.

NON-­HODGKIN LYMPHOMA AND HODGKIN
DISEASE

Childhood non-­Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and Hodgkin disease (HD)
are very responsive to conventional chemoradiotherapy; some patients
have refractory disease or are at high risk for relapse. HSCT can cure
a proportion of patients with relapsed NHL and HD and should be
offered early after relapse, while the disease is still sensitive to therapy.
If an HLA-­matched donor is available, allogeneic transplantation can
be offered to patients with NHL to take advantage of the GVL effect.
Patients with sensitive disease and limited tumor burden have favorable
outcomes, with EFS rates of 50–60%. Patients with relapsed or refractory
HD do well after autologous HSCT, with EFS of 50–60%. HD patients
may also benefit from a GVL effect when given an allograft.

ACQUIRED APLASTIC ANEMIA

Because the probability of long-­term survival for a matched-­sibling
bone marrow transplant (BMT) is reproducibly >80% for children and
young adults, BMT is the treatment of choice for children and young
adults with acquired severe aplastic anemia. Historically, the treatment
of choice for children and young adults without an HLA-­matched sibling has been intensive immunosuppression. Because the outcomes of
matched unrelated donor transplant for children with acquired aplastic
anemia have improved substantially over the years, the use of unrelated donor HSCT upfront without prior immunosuppressive therapy
is being considered more frequently.
For patients who do not have a matched-­sibling donor or well-­matched
unrelated donor, historically the transplant options were very disappointing. Fortunately, there is hope in using haploidentical transplant for this
disease. The use of a reduced intensity conditioning regimen combined
with GVHD prophylaxis, including posttransplant cyclophosphamide,
have shown significant improvement over prior experiences with survival
approaching transplants using well matched unrelated donors.

INHERITED BONE MARROW FAILURE SYNDROMES

Fanconi anemia (FA) and dyskeratosis congenita are genetic disorders
associated with a high risk of developing pancytopenia. FA is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by spontaneous chromosomal
fragility, which is increased after exposure of peripheral blood lymphocytes to DNA crosslinking agents, including clastogenic compounds
such as diepoxybutane, mitomycin C, and melphalan. Patients with
FA, along with being at risk for pancytopenia, show a high propensity
to develop clonal disorders of hematopoiesis, such as myelodysplastic syndromes and AML. HSCT can rescue aplastic anemia and prevent the occurrence of clonal hematopoietic disorders. In view of their
defects in DNA repair mechanisms, which are responsible for the chromosomal fragility, FA patients have an exquisite sensitivity to alkylating agents and radiation therapy. Thus they must be prepared for the
allograft with reduced doses of cyclophosphamide and only judicious
use of radiation. Many FA patients were once successfully transplanted
after receiving low-­
dose cyclophosphamide and thoracoabdominal
irradiation. However, the use of this regimen is associated with an
increased incidence of posttransplantation head and neck cancers.
Low-­dose cyclophosphamide combined with fludarabine has been very
well tolerated in patients with FA who have a matched-­related donor.
The addition of low-­dose TBI and antithymocyte globulin (ATG) for
those with an unrelated donor has shown similar success. Currently,
the 5-­year OS is >90% in patients with FA who receive HSCT before the
transformation to hematologic malignancy. Because of their underlying disorder, however, patients with FA must be monitored closely in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1354 Part XII u Immunology

THALASSEMIA

Conventional treatment (i.e., regular blood transfusion and iron-­
chelation therapy) has dramatically improved both the survival and
the quality of life of patients with thalassemia, changing a previously
fatal disease with early death to a chronic, slowly progressive disease
compatible with prolonged survival. However, HSCT remains the only
curative treatment for patients with thalassemia. In these patients the
risk of dying from transplant-­related complications depends primarily
on patient age, iron overload, and concomitant hepatic viral infections.
Adults, especially with chronic active hepatitis, have a poorer outcome
than children. Among children, three classes of risk have been identified on the basis of three parameters: regularity of previous iron chelation, liver enlargement, and presence of portal fibrosis. In pediatric
patients without liver disease who have received regular iron chelation
(class 1 patients), the probability of survival with transfusion independence is >90%, whereas for patients with low compliance with iron
chelation and signs of severe liver damage (class 3 patients), the probability of survival has been 60%.
With improvements in supportive care and conditioning regimens,
even patients with more advanced liver disease have had excellent outcomes (Fig. 177.2). The most effective pharmacologic combinations
(e.g., including cyclosporine and methotrexate) should be employed
to prevent GVHD. The outcome of patients transplanted from an unrelated donor has been reported similar to that of HLA-­identical sibling
recipients. The increased use of umbilical cord blood and haploidentical donors in this population is being explored to expand the number of patients eligible for HSCT. Also, advancements in gene therapy
are being made in thalassemia in clinical trials, which may eventually
change the approach to this disease.

SICKLE CELL DISEASE

Disease severity varies greatly among patients with sickle cell disease,
with 5–20% of the overall population suffering significant morbidity
from vasoocclusive crises and pulmonary, renal, or neurologic damage. Hydroxyurea, an agent favoring the synthesis of fetal hemoglobin,
reduces the frequency and severity of vasoocclusive crises and improves
the quality of life for patients with sickle cell disease; however, allogeneic
HSCT is the only curative treatment for this disease currently. Although
HSCT can cure homozygous hemoglobin S, hemoglobin Sβ0, or hemoglobin sickle cell disease, selecting appropriate candidates for transplantation is difficult. Patients with sickle cell disease may survive for decades,
but some patients have a poor quality of life, with repeated hospitalizations for painful vasoocclusive crises and central nervous system (CNS)
infarcts. The main indications for performing HSCT in patients with
sickle cell disease are history of strokes or abnormal transcranial Doppler
ultrasound, recurrent acute chest syndrome, and/or recurrent vasoocclusive crises. The results of HSCT are best when performed in children with
an HLA-­identical sibling, with a probability of cure of 80–90%. However,
the use of alternative donor transplants in this population, including
matched unrelated donors and haploidentical donors, is being investigated through a number of clinical trials and may increase the number of
patients eligible to undergo potentially curative HSCT. Reduced-­intensity
and reduced-­toxicity regimens are also being explored to further decrease
transplant-­related morbidity and mortality, although graft failure remains
an important issue in this patient population. Gene therapy for sickle cell
disease is currently being investigated in clinical trials.

IMMUNODEFICIENCY DISORDERS

HSCT is the treatment of choice for children affected by severe
combined immunodeficiency (SCID), as well as for other inherited

Survival Functions
1.0

OS

0.8

Cumulative Survival

the years after transplant to assess for late effects, including secondary
malignancies and endocrinopathies.
Allogeneic HSCT remains the only potentially curative approach for
severe bone marrow failure associated with dyskeratosis congenita, a
rare congenital syndrome characterized also by atrophy and reticular
pigmentation of the skin, nail dystrophy, and leukoplakia of mucous
membranes. Results of allograft in these patients have been relatively
poor, with a 10-­year survival of 20–30%, because of both early and late
complications, reflecting increased sensitivity of endothelial cells to
radiotherapy and alkylating agents.

EFS

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

5.0

10.0

15.0

20.0

25.0

Years

Fig. 177.2 Overall survival (OS) and event-­free (graft failure) sur-

vival (EFS) after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in children
≥1 year from transplant for β-­thalassemia major. (From Chaudhury S,
Ayas M, Rosen C, et al. A Multicenter Retrospective Analysis Stressing the Importance of Long-­
Term Follow-­
Up after Hematopoietic
Cell Transplantation for β-­Thalassemia. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant.
2017;23(10):1695–1700.)

immunodeficiencies, including Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, leukocyte
adhesion deficiency (LAD), and chronic granulomatous disease (see
Table 177.1). With an HLA-­identical sibling, the probability of survival
approaches 100%, with less favorable results for patients transplanted
from an HLA–partially matched relative. Some children with SCID,
mainly those without residual natural killer activity or maternal T-­cell
engraftment, may be transplanted without receiving any preparative
regimen; the donor lymphoid cells are usually the only elements that
engraft. Sustained donor engraftment is more difficult to achieve in
children with Omenn syndrome, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLD), or LAD. Life-­threatening opportunistic fungal and viral
infections occurring before the allograft adversely affect the patient’s
outcome after HSCT. Because of this, patients with the most severe
immunodeficiencies must be transplanted as early as possible to prevent infectious complications.

INHERITED METABOLIC DISEASES

Inherited metabolic diseases are a broad group of diseases that result
from the accumulation of substrate within tissues caused by dysfunction of the lysosome or peroxisome. The use of HSCT has been
established for a variety of inherited metabolic diseases, including
mucopolysaccharidosis type 1 (Hurler syndrome) and adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). Although some of these diseases are treatable with
exogenous enzyme replacement therapy, the clinical manifestations
of disease tend to progress over time, especially disease in the CNS,
where enzyme is unable to be reliably delivered. It is thought that
undergoing HSCT results in the engraftment of microglial cells that
are able to provide new enzyme to the areas where enzyme replacement therapy, if available, cannot have a substantial impact. Multiple
studies have shown significantly improved outcomes for patients who
are diagnosed with their underlying conditions relatively early and are
able to undergo HSCT expeditiously, before significant damage from
accumulated substrate that may be irreversible.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 178 u Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation from Alternative Sources and Donors

Chapter 178

Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Transplantation from
Alternative Sources and
Donors
Rachel A. Phelan and David Margolis
Two thirds of patients who need allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) do not have an available HLA-­identical sibling. Alternative sources of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are being increasingly
used and include matched unrelated donors, unrelated umbilical cord
blood, and HLA-­haploidentical relatives. Each of these three options
has advantages and limitations, but rather than being considered competing alternatives, they should be regarded as complementary strategies
to be chosen after a careful evaluation of the relative risks and benefits in
the patient’s best interest. The choice of the donor will depend on various factors related to urgency of transplantation; patient-­, disease-­, and
transplant-­related factors; center experience; and physician preference.

UNRELATED DONOR TRANSPLANTS

One of the most widely used strategies for children who need an
allograft and do not have an available HLA-­identical sibling is to
identify an unrelated HLA-­matched donor in a registry. Worldwide
international registries include almost 27 million HLA-­typed volunteer donors. HLA-­A, HLA-­B, HLA-­C class I loci, and the DRB1 class
II locus are the HLA loci that most influence outcome after HSCT
from an unrelated volunteer. Other class II loci (namely, DQB1 and
DP1 loci), as well as killer cell immunoglobulin-­like receptor (KIR)
haplotypes, are also increasingly considered when choosing a donor,
although their impact on outcome is less well elucidated.
Although in the past serologic (low-­resolution) typing was used for
HLA-­A and HLA-­B loci, currently the unrelated donors are selected using
high-­resolution (allelic) molecular typing of loci HLA-­A, HLA-­B, HLA-­
C, and -­DRB1. The chance of finding an HLA-­matched unrelated donor
depends on the frequency of the HLA phenotype, which is closely linked
to the ethnic origin of the registry donors. Data from the National Marrow Donor Program (NMDP) donor registry and banked cord blood units
estimated that essentially every patient in need of a transplant would be
able to find a donor in a timely fashion, despite the recipient’s race/ethnic
group, donor availability, and cell dose. However, many of those patients
may not have access to an “ideal” graft, defined as HLA matching of a
minimum of 8/8 for bone marrow and 6/6 for cord blood.
Initially, HLA polymorphism and the intrinsic limitations of conventional (i.e., serologic) HLA-­typing techniques unfavorably affected
the accuracy of matching, thus increasing rejection rates and the incidence of acute and chronic graft-­versus-­host disease (GVHD). The
advent of both high-­resolution molecular HLA classes I and II loci typing coupled with progress in the prophylaxis and treatment of GVHD
has resulted in a reduction of transplantation-­related mortality and
improvement in outcome. Indeed, outcomes from a fully matched
unrelated volunteer donor are now similar to those of HSCT from an
HLA-­identical sibling. The outcomes of haploidentical transplantation are similarly reaching that of matched unrelated donors as well as
matched sibling donors.
Although a single locus disparity in patients with leukemia may be
seen as beneficial by a reduction in the relapse rate caused by the graft-­
versus-­leukemia (GVL) effect, in patients with nonmalignant disorders
in whom GVL is not beneficial, optimal results are obtained only when
a donor matched at the allelic level with the recipient is selected. In
general, a single HLA disparity in the donor-­recipient pair, irrespective

1355

of whether antigenic or allelic in nature, predicts a greater risk of nonleukemia mortality; multiple allelic disparities at different HLA loci
have an additive detrimental effect and are associated with an even
worse outcome. To reduce the risk of acute GVHD, ex vivo T-­cell depletion of the graft has been employed, with variable efficacy. Studies are
looking at selectively depleting donor α/β T cells, which are the T cells
that drive GVHD, while preserving the T cells and natural killer (NK)
cells, which may be responsible for GVL and protection from infection.
Although the majority of patients who have required a matched unrelated donor transplant have received a bone marrow or peripheral stem
cell graft, for patients who urgently need a transplant, the time required
to identify a suitable donor from a potential panel, establish eligibility, and
harvest the cells may lead to relapse and failure to transplant. For this subset of patients who urgently need a transplant, attention has focused on
unrelated cord blood and HLA-­haploidentical, mismatched family donors.

UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD TRANSPLANTS

Umbilical cord blood transplantation (UCBT) is a viable option for
children who need allogeneic HSCT. UCBT offers the advantages
of absence of risks to donors, reduced risk of transmitting infections, and for transplants from unrelated donors, immediate availability of cryopreserved cells, with the median time from start of
search to transplantation of only 3-­4 weeks. Compared with bone
marrow transplantation (BMT), the advantages of UCBT are also
represented by lower incidence of chronic GVHD and the possibility of using donors showing HLA disparities with the recipient.
Despite these advantages, the large experience gained over the last
2 decades has demonstrated that UCBT patients may be exposed to
an increased risk of early fatal complications, mainly because of a
lower engraftment rate of donor hematopoiesis, delayed kinetics of
neutrophil recovery (risk of infection), and lack of adoptive transfer of pathogen-­specific memory T cells. Transfer of donor-­derived,
memory T cells significantly contributes to early immunologic reconstitution of children after unmanipulated allogeneic bone marrow or
peripheral blood stem cell transplantation.
Concerning the issues of engraftment and hematopoietic recovery, it
has been demonstrated that an inverse correlation exists between the
number of nucleated cord blood cells infused per kilogram recipient
body weight and the risk of dying for transplantation-­related causes.
In particular, engraftment is a major concern when the nucleated cells
are <2.5 × 107/kg of recipient body weight. Because a cord blood unit
usually contains between 1 × 109 and 1.8 × 109 cells, it is not surprising
that UCBT has been less frequently employed for adolescents or adults
with body weight >40 kg. Indeed, it can be estimated that only 30% of
the UCB units available in the bank inventory could suffice for a 75
kg patient, according to the recommended threshold cell dose. Efforts
have focused on approaches capable of increasing the number of UCB
cells to be transplanted. Selection of the richest cord blood units or
infusion of 2 units in the same recipient (i.e., double UCBT) have been
explored to improve the results of UCBT. The results of these studies have been mixed, with one large study demonstrating no survival
advantage for children and adolescents that receive double UCBT. Preliminary studies of ex vivo expansion of a single umbilical cord sample
with UM171, an HSC self-­renewal agonist, have suggested improved
engraftment, reduced infection, and low rates of severe acute GVHD.
The long-­term results of UCB transplants are similar to those after
transplantation from other sources of HSCs for pediatric hematologic
malignancies. In patients with hematologic malignancies, recipients of
UCBT may be transplanted from donors with greater HLA disparities,
receive 1-­log fewer nucleated cells, have delayed neutrophil and platelet
recovery, and show reduced incidence of GVHD compared with children
given BMT from unrelated donors. In one study, there were similar rates
of acute GVHD, but significantly less chronic GVHD in patients who
received UCBT. Nevertheless, both the relapse rate and the overall survival
probability did not differ in unrelated UCBT or BMT pediatric recipients.
Thus, in the absence of an HLA-­identical family donor, unrelated UCBT
can be considered a suitable option for children with malignant and nonmalignant disorders. Results of UCBT have been of particular interest in
children with certain nonmalignant disorders to proceed to transplant
quickly and prevent further progression of disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1356 Part XII u Immunology
HAPLOIDENTICAL TRANSPLANTS

HSCT from an HLA-­haploidentical (haplo-­HSCT) donor offers an
immediate source of HSCs to almost all patients who fail to find a
matched donor, whether related or unrelated, or a suitable cord blood
unit. Indeed, almost all children have at least one haploidentical–3
loci mismatched family member who is promptly available as donor.
The few patients who reject the haploidentical transplant also have the
advantage of another immediately available donor within the family.
Moreover, this may represent an approach that would be attractive in
the global health setting, where more sophisticated donor registries
and cell-­processing techniques are less unavailable.
Efficient T-­cell depletion of the graft has been demonstrated to
prevent acute and chronic GVHD even when using haploidentical
parental grafts. This can be done ex vivo or in vivo with the use of chemotherapeutic agents before and after cell infusion. The use of posttransplant cyclophosphamide is one such in vivo technique now being
widely incorporated into haploidentical transplant regimens. The benefits of T-­cell depletion were first demonstrated in transplantation of
children with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). More than
300 transplants in SCID patients using haploidentical donors have
been performed worldwide, with a high rate of long-­term partial or
complete immune reconstitution.
The elimination of mature T cells from the graft, necessary for preventing GVHD in a context of great immune genetic disparity, results in recipients being unable to benefit from the adoptive transfer of donor memory
T lymphocytes, through their peripheral expansion, are the main factor
responsible for protection from infections in the first few months after
transplantation. A state of profound immunodeficiency lasts for at least
4-­6 months after transplantation in haplo-­HSCT recipients. Sophisticated
strategies of adoptive infusions of T-­cell lines or clones specific for the
most common and life-­threatening pathogens (Epstein-­Barr virus [EBV],
human cytomegalovirus, Aspergillus, adenovirus) have been successfully
tested in trials to protect the recipients in the early posttransplant period.
For many years the absence of the T-­cell–mediated GVL effect
has been considered as rendering the recipients of a T-­cell–depleted
allograft more susceptible to leukemia relapse. However, it has been
demonstrated that a GVL effect displayed by donor NK cells can compensate for this lack of T-­specific alloreactivity when an HLA-­disparate
NK-­alloreactive relative is employed as a donor.
Selective approaches of graft manipulation in haploidentical and unrelated donor transplant have also been developed. In particular, promising
results have been obtained through a negative depletion of T lymphocytes
carrying the α/β chains of the T-­cell receptor, which are believed to be the
mediators of GVHD. B lymphocytes are also depleted to prevent EBV-­
related lymphoproliferative disease. Through this approach the patient
can benefit from the adoptive transfer of committed hematopoietic progenitors, mature NK cells and γ/δ+ T cells, which can confer a protection
against life-­threatening infections as well as provide a GVL effect.
The outcomes of haplo-­HSCT have been more extensively reported
in adults than in children. The reported probability of survival at 3-­4
yr after a haplo-­HSCT in children with acute leukemia ranged from
18–48%. Survival was influenced by many factors, most importantly
the state of remission at transplantation, with poorer outcomes in children with myeloid leukemias than in those with lymphoid leukemia. In
haplotype-­mismatched parent-­to-­child HSCT, patients with acute leukemia grafted from the mother had reduced relapse rates compared with
recipients of paternal grafts, translating into better event-­free survival.

DONOR VERSUS RECIPIENT NK CELL
ALLOREACTIVITY

NK cells are the first lymphocytes derived from the donor to recover
after allogeneic HCT. Donor versus recipient NK cell alloreactivity
derives from a mismatch between donor NK clones, carrying specific
inhibitory receptors for self–major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
class I molecules, and MHC class I ligands on recipient cells. NK cells are
primed to kill by several activating receptors, which play an important
role in the NK cell–mediated GVL effect. Human NK cells discriminate
allelic forms of MHC molecules via KIRs, which are clonally distributed with each cell in the repertoire bearing at least one receptor that
is specific for self-­MHC class I molecules. Because NK cells co-­express

Table 178.1  Indications for Autologous Hematopoietic
Stem Cell Transplantation for Pediatric
Diseases
• Relapsed Hodgkin or non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
• Stage IV or relapsed neuroblastoma
• High-­risk, relapsed, or resistant brain tumors
• Stage IV Ewing sarcoma
• Life-­threatening autoimmune diseases resistant to conventional
treatments

inhibitory receptors for self–MHC class I molecules, autologous cells
are not killed. When faced with mismatched allogeneic targets, NK cells
sense the missing expression of self–class I alleles and mediate alloreactions. In mismatched transplants, there are many donor recipient pairs
in which the donor NK inhibitory cells do not recognize the recipient’s
class I alleles as self. Consequently, the donor NK cells are not blocked
and are activated to lyse the recipient’s lymphohematopoietic cells.
Haplo-­
HSCT trials demonstrate that MHC class I mismatches,
which generate an alloreactive NK cell response in the graft-­versus-­
host direction, eradicate leukemia cells, improve engraftment, and
protect from T-­cell–mediated GVHD. The potential for donor versus
recipient NK cell alloreactivity, which can be predicted by standard
HLA typing, is increasingly being examined when selecting the donor
of choice. The importance of KIR haplotype in transplants other than
haploidentical transplantation in preventing GVHD as well as relapse
has been shown to be increasingly beneficial.

AUTOLOGOUS HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL
TRANSPLANTATION

Autologous transplantation, using the patient’s own stored marrow, is
associated with a low risk of life-­threatening transplant-­related complications, although the main cause of failure is disease recurrence. Bone
marrow was once the only source of stem cells employed in patients
given an autograft. The majority of patients treated with autologous
HSCT receive hematopoietic progenitors mobilized in peripheral blood
by either cytokines alone (mainly granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor) or by cytokines plus cytotoxic agents. A CXCR4 antagonist can
be extremely effective in mobilizing hematopoietic progenitors in the
periphery. Compared with bone marrow, the use of peripheral blood
progenitors is associated with a faster hematopoietic recovery and a
comparable outcome.
Autologous HSCT is employed primarily for selected children with
relapsed lymphomas and select solid tumors (Table 178.1).
Patients with sensitive lymphomas and minimal tumor burden have
favorable outcomes after autologous HSCT, with disease-­free survival
rates of 50–60%, whereas high-­risk patients with bulky tumor or poorly
responsive disease have a poor outcome, with survival rates of 10–20%.
Autologous HSCT in patients with high-­risk neuroblastoma is associated with a better outcome than conventional chemotherapy. A Children’s Oncology Group (COG) study demonstrated further survival
advantage by performing two sequential, or tandem, transplants that
use different chemotherapeutic agents. Because of these improved outcomes, tandem autologous transplants are now considered the standard recommended treatment. In these patients, posttransplantation
infusion of a monoclonal antibody directed against a molecule (GD2)
expressed on the surface of neuroblastoma cells confers a protection
against the risk of tumor recurrence.
For children with brain tumors at high risk of relapse, or resistant
to conventional chemotherapy and irradiation, the dose-­limiting toxicity for intensifying therapy is myelosuppression, thus providing a
role for stem cell rescue. Several studies provide encouraging results
for patients with different histologic types of brain tumors treated with
autologous HSCT.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 179 u Graft-­Versus-­Host ­Disease, Rejection, and Venoocclusive Disease

Chapter 179

Graft-­Versus-­Host
­Disease, Rejection, and
Venoocclusive Disease
Rachel A. Phelan and David Margolis
A major cause of mortality and morbidity after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is graft-­versus-­host
disease (GVHD), which is caused by engraftment of immunocompetent donor T lymphocytes in an immunologically compromised
host who shows histocompatibility differences with the donor. These
differences between the donor and the host may result in donor
T-­cell activation against either recipient major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) antigens or minor histocompatibility antigens.
GVHD is usually subdivided in two forms: acute GVHD, which
occurs within 3 months after transplantation, and chronic GVHD,
which, although related, is a different disease, occurring later and
displaying some clinical and pathologic features that resemble those
observed in selected autoimmune disorders (e.g., systemic sclerosis,
Sjögren syndrome).

1357

after exposure to recipient antigens. This approach has been successful in patients undergoing haploidentical transplantation. Pretransplantation infusion of either antithymocyte globulin (ATG) or
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) such as alemtuzumab is largely used
to modulate alloreactivity of donor T cells, in particular in patients
given the allograft from either an unrelated donor or a partially
matched relative. An alternative approach is the removal of T lymphocytes from the graft (T-­cell depletion). Other approaches are
being used to selectively remove the α/β T cells, which are thought
to be responsible for the development of GVHD, while preserving
the γ/δ T cells in order to sustain graft-versus-leukemia (GVL) and
the ability to fight infection. Any form of GVHD prophylaxis may
impair posttransplantation immunologic reconstitution, increasing
the risk of infection-­related deaths. Traditional T-­cell depletion of
the graft is also associated with an increased risk of leukemia recurrence in patients transplanted from an HLA-­identical sibling or an
unrelated volunteer.
Despite prophylaxis, significant acute GVHD develops in approximately 30% of recipients of HSCT from matched siblings and in
as many as 60% of HSCT recipients from unrelated donors. These
numbers are estimates, and the actual risk of acute GVHD is highly
variable depending on several factors. Risk for development of
GVHD is increased by diagnosis of malignant disease, older donor
and recipient age, and in patients given an unmanipulated allograft.
The most important risk factor for acute GVHD is the presence of
disparities for HLA molecules in the donor-­recipient pair.
Acute GVHD is usually initially treated with glucocorticoids;
approximately 40–50% of patients show a complete response to

ACUTE GRAFT-­VERSUS-­HOST DISEASE

Acute GVHD is caused by the alloreactive, donor-­derived T cells
contained in the graft, which attack nonshared recipient’s antigens
on target tissues. A 3-­step process generates the clinical syndrome.
First, conditioning-­
induced tissue damage activates recipient
antigen-­presenting cells, which present recipient alloantigens to the
donor T cells transferred with the graft and secrete cytokines, such
as interleukin (IL)-­12, favoring the polarization of T-­cell response
in the type 1 direction. Second, in response to recipient antigens,
donor T cells become activated, proliferate, expand, and generate
cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, IL-­2, and interferon (IFN)-­γ. In the third step of the process, these cytokines cause
tissue damage and promote differentiation of cytotoxic CD8+ T
cells, which, together with macrophages, kill recipient cells and further disrupt tissues.
Acute GVHD usually develops 2-­8 weeks after transplantation.
The primary manifestations depend on the sites of involvement and
may include an erythematous maculopapular rash (Figs. 179.1 and
179.2), persistent anorexia, vomiting and/or diarrhea, and liver disease with increased serum levels of bilirubin, alanine transaminase
(ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), and alkaline phosphatase
(ALP). Diagnosis may benefit from skin, liver, or gastrointestinal
(GI) biopsy for confirmation. Endothelial damage and lymphocytic
infiltrates are seen in all affected organs. The epidermis and hair
follicles of the skin are damaged, the hepatic small bile ducts show
segmental disruption, and there is destruction of the crypts and
mucosal ulceration of the GI tract. Grade I acute GVHD (skin rash
alone) has a favorable prognosis and often requires no treatment,
or topical treatment alone. Grade II GVHD is a moderately severe
multiorgan disease requiring immunosuppressive therapy. Grade
III GVHD is a severe multiorgan disease, and grade IV GVHD is a
life-­threatening, often fatal condition (Table 179.1).
The standard pharmacologic prophylaxis of GVHD after an
unmanipulated allograft relies mainly on posttransplant administration of immunosuppressive drugs, such as cyclosporine or
tacrolimus or combinations of either with methotrexate or prednisone, anti–T-­cell antibodies, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), and
other immunosuppressive agents. Infusion of cyclophosphamide on
days +3 and +4 after transplantation has been used as a strategy
to deplete alloreactive donor T lymphocytes that become activated

Fig. 179.1 Acute graft-­versus-­host disease. Involvement of the scalp,

ears, palms, and soles is common. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds.
Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2016. p 577.)

Fig. 179.2 Acute graft-­versus-­host disease. Almost confluent erup-

tion of erythematous macules and papules in an immunodeficient neonate treated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and
transfusion of nonirradiated blood. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds.
Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2016. p 577.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1358 Part XII u Immunology
Table 179.1  Clinical Staging and Grading* of Acute Graft-­Versus-­Host Disease
LIVER
(BILIRUBIN)

STAGE

SKIN (ACTIVE ERYTHEMA ONLY)

0

No active (erythematous) GVHD
rash

<2 mg/dL

No or intermittent nausea,
vomiting, or anorexia

UPPER GI

Adult: <500 mL/day or <3 episodes/day
Child: <10 mL/kg/day or <4 episodes/day

LOWER GI (STOOL OUTPUT/DAY)

1

Maculopapular rash <25% BSA

2-­3 mg/dL

Persistent nausea, vomiting
or anorexia

Adult: 500-­999 mL/day or 3-­4 episodes/day
Child: 10-­19.9 mL/kg/day or 4-­6 episodes/day

2

Maculopapular rash 25–50% BSA

3.1-­6 mg/dL

Adult: 1,000-­1,500 mL/day or 5-­7 episodes/day
Child: 20-­30 mL/kg/day or 7-­10 episodes/day

3

Maculopapular rash >50% BSA

6.1-­15 mg/dL

Adult: >1,500 mL/day or >7 episodes/day
Child: >30 mL/kg/day or >10 episodes/day

4

Generalized erythroderma (>50%
BSA) plus bullous formation and
desquamation >5% BSA

>15 mg/dL

Severe abdominal pain with or without ileus
or grossly bloody stool (regardless of stool
volume)

*Overall clinical grade (based on most severe target organ involvement):
Grade 0: no stage 1-­4 of any organ.
Grade I: stage 1-­2 skin without liver, upper GI, or lower GI involvement.
Grade II: stage 3 rash and/or stage 1 liver and/or stage 1 upper GI and/or stage 1 lower GI.
Grade III: stage 2-­3 liver and/or stage 2-­3 lower GI, with stage 0-­3 skin and/or stage 0-­1 upper GI.
Grade IV: stage 4 skin, liver, or lower GI involvement, with stage 0-­1 upper GI.
GI, Gastrointestinal; GVH, graft-­versus-­host; BSA, body surface area.
From Harris AC, Young R, Devine S, et al. International, Multicenter Standardization of Acute Graft-­versus-­Host Disease Clinical Data Collection: A Report from the Mount Sinai Acute
GVHD International Consortium. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2016;22(1):4–10.

corticosteroids. The risk of transplantation-­
related mortality is
much higher in patients who do not respond to corticosteroids
than in those showing a complete response. Ruxolitinib, targeting the JAK signaling pathway, or other drugs targeting molecules
expressed on T cells or cytokines released during the inflammatory
cascade (including infliximab and etanercept targeting TNF, vedolizumab targeting α₄β₇-­integrin, and tocilizumab targeting IL-­6),
which underlies the pathophysiology of GVHD, have been used in
patients with steroid-­resistant acute GVHD. Extracorporeal photopheresis is another second-­line treatment for GVHD and is most
efficacious for skin GVHD. A patient’s peripheral blood is exposed
to a photosensitive compound and then exposed to ultraviolet light.
The cells are then reinfused into the patient. It is thought that this
process results in an increase in apoptosis of lymphocytes responsible for GVHD as well as the upregulation of anti-­inflammatory
cytokines and regulatory T cells. Promising results in children with
steroid-­resistant acute GVHD have also been obtained using mesenchymal stromal cells, which are able to blunt the inflammatory
response associated with acute GVHD.

Table 179.2  Clinical Findings in Chronic Graft-­Versus-­Host
Disease
ORGAN SYSTEM
Systemic

Immunodeficiency and recurrent
infections

Skin

Lichen planus, scleroderma,
hyperpigmentation or
hypopigmentation, erythema,
freckling, ichthyosis, ulcerations
Flexion contractures
Vaginal scars
Onycholysis
Nail loss

Hair

Alopecia; scarring or nonscarring

Mouth

Sicca syndrome, lichen planus,
depapillation of tongue with
variegations, scalloping of
lateral margins, xerostomia,
mucocele

Joints

Diffuse myositis/tendonitis,
arthritis, contractures

Eyes

Decreased tearing, injected
sclerae, scarring conjunctivitis,
keratopathy

Liver

Increased enzymes, cholestasis,
hepatomegaly, cirrhosis

Gastrointestinal

Failure to thrive, malabsorption,
chronic diarrhea
Esophageal strictures

Lung

Cough, dyspnea, wheezing
Bronchiolitis obliterans, chronic
rales, pneumothorax, fibrosis

Hematology

Thrombocytopenia, eosinophilia,
Howell-­Jolly bodies (splenic
dysfunction)

CHRONIC GRAFT-­VERSUS-­HOST DISEASE

Chronic GVHD develops or persists >3 months after transplantation
and is the most frequent late complication of allogeneic HSCT with
an incidence of approximately 25% in pediatric patients. Chronic
GVHD is the major cause of nonrelapse mortality and morbidity in
long-­term HSCT survivors. Acute GVHD is recognized as the most
important factor predicting the development of the chronic form of
the disease. The use of matched unrelated volunteers as donors and
use of unmanipulated peripheral blood as the stem cell source have
increased the incidence and severity of chronic GVHD. Other factors
that predict occurrence of chronic GVHD include older donor and
recipient ages, female donor for male recipient, diagnosis of malignancy, and use of total body irradiation (TBI) as part of the preparative regimen.
Chronic GVHD is a disorder of immune regulation characterized by autoantibody production, increased collagen deposition
and fibrosis, and clinical symptoms similar to those seen in patients
with autoimmune diseases (Table 179.2). The predominant cytokines involved in the pathophysiology of chronic GVHD are usually

SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 179 u Graft-­Versus-­Host ­Disease, Rejection, and Venoocclusive Disease
type II cytokines such as IL-­4, IL-­5, and IL-­13. IL-­4 and IL-­5 contribute to eosinophilia and B-­cell hyperactivity with elevated IgM,
IgG, and IgE titers. Associated monoclonal gammopathies indicate
clonal dysregulation. Chronic GVHD is dependent on the development and persistence of donor T cells that are not tolerant to the
recipient. Maturation of transplanted stem cells within a damaged
thymus could lead to errors in negative selection and production
of cells that have not been tolerized to recipient antigens and are
therefore autoreactive or, more accurately, recipient reactive. This
ongoing immune reactivity results in clinical features resembling
a systemic autoimmune disease with lichenoid and sclerodermatous skin lesions, malar rash, sicca syndrome, arthritis, joint contractures, bronchiolitis obliterans, and bile duct degeneration with
cholestasis.
Patients with chronic GVHD involving only the skin and liver
have a favorable course (Figs. 179.3 and 179.4). Extensive multiorgan disease may be associated with a very poor quality of life,
recurrent infections associated with prolonged immunosuppressive
regimens to control GVHD, and a high mortality rate. Morbidity
and mortality are highest in patients with a progressive onset of
chronic GVHD that directly follows acute GVHD, intermediate in
those with a quiescent onset after resolution of acute GVHD, and
lowest in patients with de novo onset in the absence of acute GVHD.
Chronic GVHD can be classified as mild, moderate, or severe
depending on extent of involvement. Single-­agent prednisone is
the standard treatment, although other agents have been employed
with variable success. Ruxolitinib, a Janus kinase inhibitor, has been
a beneficial treatment for steroid-­dependent or refractory chronic
GVHD. In addition, ibrutinib, a Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
has been approved by the FDA for the treatment of chronic GVHD.
Treatment with imatinib mesylate, which inhibits the synthesis of
collagen, has been effective in some patients with chronic GVHD
and sclerotic features. As a consequence of prolonged immunosuppression, patients with chronic GVHD are particularly susceptible
to infections and should receive appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis,
including trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX). Chronic
GVHD resolves in most pediatric patients but may require 1-­3 years
of immunosuppressive therapy before the drugs can be withdrawn
without the disease recurring. Chronic GVHD promotes the development of secondary neoplasms, in particular in patients with Fanconi anemia, and has a significant impact on quality of life.

1359

Fig. 179.3 Chronic graft-­versus-­host disease (GVHD), lichenoid. After
bone marrow transplantation, this patient had acute GVHD and subsequently developed cutaneous scaling papules and plaques typical of lichen planus. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric
Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016. p 577.)

GRAFT FAILURE

Graft failure is a serious complication exposing patients to a high
risk of fatal infection. Primary graft failure is defined as failure
to achieve a neutrophil count of 0.5 × 109/L after transplantation.
Secondary graft failure is loss of peripheral blood counts following
initial transient engraftment of donor cells. Causes of graft failure
after autologous and allogeneic transplantation include transplantation of an inadequate stem cell dose (more frequently observed
in children given cord blood transplantation) and viral infections
such as with cytomegalovirus or human herpesvirus type 6, which
are often associated with activation of recipient macrophages. Graft
failure after allogeneic transplantation, however, is mainly caused
by immunologically mediated rejection of the graft by residual
recipient-­type T cells that survive the conditioning regimen.
Diagnosis of graft failure resulting from immunologic mechanisms is based on examination of peripheral blood and marrow
aspirate and biopsy, along with molecular analysis of chimerism
status. Persistence of lymphocytes of host origin in allogeneic
transplant recipients with graft failure indicates immunologic
rejection. The risk of immune-­mediated graft rejection is higher
in patients given HLA-­disparate, T-­cell–depleted grafts, reduced-­
intensity conditioning regimens, and transplantation of low numbers of stem cells, and in recipients who are sensitized toward
major HLA antigens or, less frequently, minor histocompatibility

versus-­
host disease. Note the extensive
Fig. 179.4 Chronic graft-­
alopecia of the scalp with dyschromia and numerous sclerodermatous
plaques of the scalp and back. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.
p 579.)

antigens. Allosensitization develops as a consequence of preceding
blood product transfusions and is observed particularly in recipients with aplastic anemia, sickle cell disease, and thalassemia. In
HSCT for nonmalignant diseases, such as mucopolysaccharidoses,
graft failure is also facilitated by the absence of previous treatment
with cytotoxic and immunosuppressive drugs. In thalassemia, graft
failure is promoted by expansion of recipient hematopoietic cells.
GVHD prophylaxis with methotrexate, an antimetabolite, and anti-­
infective prophylaxis with TMP/SMX or ganciclovir may also delay
engraftment.
Treatment of graft failure usually requires removing all potentially myelotoxic agents from the treatment regimen and attempting
a short trial of hematopoietic growth factors, such as granulocyte
colony-­stimulating factor. A second transplant, usually preceded

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1360 Part XII u Immunology
Table 179.3  Severity Grading Thresholds of Sinusoidal Obstructive Syndrome Among Children, Adolescents, and Young
Adults
MILD

MODERATE

SEVERE

VERY SEVERE

ALT, AST, GLDH (mg/dL)

<2× normal

2-­5× normal

2-­5× normal

>5× normal

Bilirubin (mg/dL)

<2

<2

≥   2

Bilirubin doubles in 48 hr

Coagulopathy (not
responsive to vitamin K
administration; INR)

<1.5

1.5-­1.9

>­2

Need for replacement of
coagulation factors

Ascites

Mild (minimal fluid by liver,
spleen or pelvis)

Moderate (<1 cm fluid)

Severe (fluid in all 3
regions with >1 cm fluid
in at least 2 regions)

Requires paracentesis

Weight gain (from
baseline)

2.5%

5–10% despite diuretic use

>10%

Persistent rise

Renal function score

KDIGO 1: serum creatinine
1.5-­1.9× baseline or ≥0.3
mg/dL (≥26.5 mmol/L)
increase or urine output
<0.5 mL/kg/hr for 6-­12 hr

KDIGO 2: serum creatinine
2.0-­2.9× baseline or urine
output <0.5 mL/kg/hr for
≥12 hr

KDIGO 3: serum creatinine Persistent need for renal
3.0× baseline or increase
replacement therapy
in serum creatinine ≥4.0-­
mg/dL (≥353.6 mmol/L)
or initiation of renal
replacement therapy or
decrease in eGFR to <35
mL/min per 1.73 m2
(patients <18 years) or
urine output <0.3 mL/kg/hr
for ≥24 hr or anuria for
≥12 hr (patients <18 years)

Encephalopathy

CAPD <9

CAPD <9

CAPD ≥9

CAPD ≥9

Persistent RT

<3 days

3-­7 days

—

>7 days

Pulmonary function

<2 L

<2 L

NIV/IMV

IMV

ALT, Alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; GLDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; INR, international normalized ratio; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global
Outcomes score; eGFR, estimated glomerular infiltration rate; CAPD, Cornell Assessment of Pediatric Delirium; RT, refractory thrombocytopenia; NIV, noninvasive ventilation; IMV,
invasive mechanical ventilation.
From Mahadeo KM, Bajwa R, Abdel-­Azim H, et al. Diagnosis, grading, and treatment recommendations for children, adolescents, and young adults with sinusoidal obstructive syndrome: An international expert position statement. Lancet Haematol. 2020;7(1):e61–e72.

by a highly immunosuppressive regimen, is frequently employed to
rescue patients experiencing graft failure. High-­intensity regimens
are generally tolerated poorly if administered within 100 days from
a first transplant because of cumulative toxicities, but this risk must
be balanced with the risk of infection from prolonged neutropenia
and lymphocytopenia.

VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE

Hepatic venoocclusive disease (VOD), also known as sinusoidal
obstruction syndrome, presents with hepatomegaly, right upper
quadrant tenderness, jaundice, coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia,
and weight gain from fluid retention and ascites (Table 179.3). It
results from endothelial damage within the liver, which can then
progress to multiorgan dysfunction. Onset is usually within 30
days of transplantation, with an incidence of approximately 15%,
depending on the intensity of the conditioning protocol. Risk factors include young age, prior hepatic disease (fibrosis, cirrhosis),

abdominal radiation, repeated transplantations, neuroblastoma,
osteopetrosis, and familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
The severe form of VOD has a high mortality rate (>80%) without
treatment.
Prophylaxis has traditionally used ursodeoxycholic acid and occasionally heparin; only defibrotide has demonstrated efficacy in treating VOD. A phase 3 study demonstrated improvement in survival and
response rate to VOD in patients treated with defibrotide. Defibrotide
is a combination of porcine oligodeoxyribonucleotides that reduces
procoagulant activity and enhances fibrinolytic properties of endothelial cells. Defibrotide is FDA approved for the treatment of VOD in
adult and pediatric patients with renal or pulmonary dysfunction after
HSCT. Defibrotide is often used as prophylaxis in Europe, with data
showing efficacy, but this use is not yet approved in the United States.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 180 u Infectious Complications of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation

Chapter 180

Infectious Complications
of Hematopoietic Stem
Cell Transplantation
Anna R. Huppler
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) recipients experience
a transient but profound state of immune deficiency. The risk of infection depends on the stage after transplantation (pre-­vs postengraftment), ongoing immunosuppression, disruption in barrier functions
(indwelling catheters, graft-­versus-­host disease [GVHD], mucositis,
and preexisting infections (Fig. 180.1). Management approaches may
include the use of prophylactic antimicrobials, preemptive antimicrobials for infection prior to symptomatic disease, or antimicrobial treatment of documented or suspected infection.

Host immune
system defect
Device risk
Allogeneic
patients

1361

Immediately after transplantation, the absence or paucity of neutrophils (neutropenia) renders patients susceptible to bacterial and
fungal infections. Consequently, consideration is given to the use of
antipseudomonal and antifungal prophylaxis during the conditioning
regimen. Evidence is moderate quality against systemic antibacterial
prophylaxis and for systemic antifungal prophylaxis, which is reflected
in published society guidelines. Even with the use of prophylactic measures, the majority of patients will develop fever and signs of infection in the early posttransplantation period. The common pathogens
include enteric gram-­negative bacteria and fungi. An indwelling central venous line, routinely employed in all children given HSCT, is a
significant risk factor for infection. Staphylococcal species and Candida
species are the most frequent pathogens in catheter-­related infections (see
Chapter 224). Multidrug-­resistant strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
and Klebsiella pneumoniae can cause infection, with prevalence highly
variable among centers. Severe lower respiratory tract disease caused by
seasonal respiratory viruses, such as influenza, respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV), parainfluenza virus, and human metapneumovirus, can occur
during the pre-­or postengraftment phase. Emerging infections, such as
SARS-­CoV-­2, can also cause severe or persistent infection in immunocompromised individuals. Published guidelines from the International
Pediatric Fever and Neutropenia Guideline Panel address the management of fever and neutropenia after HSCT (Table 180.1).

Phase I, Preengraftment,
<30 days

Phase II, Postengraftment,
30−100 days

Phase III, Late phase,
>100 days

Neutropenia, mucositis
and acute graft-versushost disease

Impaired cellular immunity
and acute and chronic graftversus-host disease

Impaired cellular and
humoral immunity and
chronic graft-versushost disease

Central line
Respiratory and enteric viruses
Herpes simplex virus†
Cytomegalovirus*†
Varicella-zoster
virus†
Epstein-Barr virus lymphoproliferative disease†
Facultative gram-negative bacilli
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Encapsulated bacteria
(e.g., pneumococcus)

Gastrointestinal tract Streptococcus species
All Candida species

Aspergillus species

Aspergillus species

Pneumocystis jiroveci
Toxoplasma gondii
Strongyloides stercoralis
0
*Without standard prophylaxis
Primarily among persons who are seropositive
before transplant

†

30

Days after transplant

100

360
High incidence (≥10 %)
Low incidence (<10 %)
Episodic and endemic
Continuous risk

Fig. 180.1 Phases of opportunistic infections among allogeneic HSCT recipients. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Infectious
Disease Society of America; American Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients [published correction appears in MMWR Recomm Rep. 2004 May 14;53(19):396]. MMWR Recomm Rep.
2000;49(RR-­10):1–CE7.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1362 Part XII u Immunology
Table 180.1  Overall Summary of Recommendations for Management of Fever and Neutropenia
INITIAL MANAGEMENT
Risk Stratification
A1. Adopt a validated risk stratification strategy and incorporate it into routine clinical management (strong recommendation, low-­quality
evidence).
Evaluation
A2. Obtain blood cultures at the onset of FN from all lumens of central venous catheters (strong recommendation, low-­quality evidence).
A3. Consider obtaining peripheral blood cultures concurrent with central venous catheter cultures (weak recommendation, moderate-­quality
evidence).
A4. Consider urinalysis and urine culture in patients in whom a clean-­catch, midstream specimen is readily available (weak recommendation,
low-­quality evidence).
A5. Obtain chest radiography only in patients with respiratory signs or symptoms (strong recommendation, moderate-­quality evidence).
Treatment
A6. In high-­risk FN:
A6a. Use monotherapy with an antipseudomonal β-­lactam, a fourth-­generation cephalosporin, or a carbapenem as empirical therapy in
pediatric high-­risk FN (strong recommendation, high-­quality evidence).
A6b. Reserve addition of a second gram-­negative agent or a glycopeptide for patients who are clinically unstable, when a resistant infection is
suspected, or for centers with a high rate of resistant pathogens (strong recommendation, moderate-­quality evidence).
A7. In low-­risk FN:
A7a. Consider initial or step-­down outpatient management if the infrastructure is in place to ensure careful monitoring and follow-­up (weak
recommendation, moderate-­quality evidence).
A7b. Consider oral antibiotic administration if the child is able to tolerate this route of administration reliably (weak recommendation,
moderate-­quality evidence).
ONGOING MANAGEMENT
Modification of Treatment
B1. In patients who are responding to initial empirical antibiotic therapy, discontinue double coverage for gram-­negative infection or empirical
glycopeptide (if initiated) after 24 to 72 hours if there is no specific microbiologic indication to continue combination therapy (strong
recommendation, moderate-­quality evidence).
B2. Do not modify the initial empirical antibacterial regimen based solely on persistent fever in children who are clinically stable (strong
recommendation, low-­quality evidence).
B3. In children with persistent fever who become clinically unstable, escalate the initial empirical antibacterial regimen to include coverage for
resistant gram-­negative, gram-­positive, and anaerobic bacteria (strong recommendation, very low-­quality evidence).
Cessation of Treatment
B4. In all patients, discontinue empirical antibiotics in patients who have negative blood cultures at 48 hours, who have been afebrile for at least
24 hours, and who have evidence of marrow recovery (strong recommendation, low-­quality evidence).
B5. In patients with low-­risk FN, consider discontinuation of empirical antibiotics at 72 hours in patients who have negative blood cultures and
who have been afebrile for at least 24 hours, irrespective of marrow recovery status, as long as careful follow-­up is ensured (weak recommendation,
moderate-­quality evidence).
EMPIRICAL ANTIFUNGAL THERAPY
Risk Stratification
C1. Patients at high risk of IFD are those with AML, high-­risk ALL, or relapsed acute leukemia, and children undergoing allogeneic HSCT. Children
with prolonged neutropenia and children receiving high-­dose corticosteroids are also at high risk of IFD. All others should be categorized as
IFD low risk (strong recommendation, low-­quality evidence).
Evaluation
C2. In terms of biomarkers to guide empirical antifungal management for prolonged (≥96 hours) FN in IFD high-­risk patients:
C2a. Consider not using serum GM (weak recommendation, moderate-­quality evidence).
C2b. Do not use β-­d-­glucan (strong recommendation, low-­quality evidence).
C2c. Do not use fungal PCR testing in blood (strong recommendation, moderate-­quality evidence).
C3. In terms of imaging for the evaluation of prolonged (≥96 hours) FN in IFD high-­risk patients:
C3a. Perform CT of the lungs (strong recommendation, low-­quality evidence).
C3b. Consider imaging of abdomen in patients without localizing signs or symptoms (weak recommendation, low-­quality evidence).
C3c. Consider not routinely performing CT of sinuses in patients without localizing signs or symptoms (weak recommendation, low-­quality
evidence).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 180 u Infectious Complications of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation

1363

Table 180.1  Overall Summary of Recommendations for Management of Fever and Neutropenia—cont’d
Treatment
C4. In IFD high-­risk patients with prolonged (≥96 hours) FN unresponsive to broad-­spectrum antibacterial agents, initiate caspofungin or liposomal
amphotericin B for empirical antifungal therapy (strong recommendation, high-­quality evidence).
C5. In IFD low-­risk patients with prolonged (≥96 hours) FN, consider withholding empirical antifungal therapy (weak recommendation, low-­quality
evidence).
ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; FN, fever and neutropenia; GM, galactomannan; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; IFD, invasive
fungal disease; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
Modified from Lehrnbecher T, Robinson P, Fisher B, et al. Guideline for the management of fever and neutropenia in children with cancer and hematopoietic stem-­cell transplantation
recipients: 2017 Update. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35(18):2082–2094. Table 1, p. 2084–2086.

HSCT recipients remain at increased risk of developing severe infections even after the neutrophil count has normalized because of prolonged depression in T-­cell number and function. The manifestations
of GVHD, as well as the associated immunosuppressive therapy, are
additional risk factors for fungal and viral opportunistic infections.
After umbilical cord blood transplant (UCBT), infections are the
consequence of both slow neutrophil engraftment and donor T-­cell
naïveté. In haploidentical transplantation, T-­cell depletion results in an
increased risk of infection in the first 4-­6 months. Recipients of this
type of transplantation, as well as those receiving UCBT, do not have
the benefit of adoptive transfer of donor-­derived, antigen-­experienced
T cells. For HSCT recipients after engraftment, invasive fungal disease (IFD), herpesviruses, and adenovirus infections represent
life-­threatening complications that significantly affect outcomes. Additional pathogens to consider include nontuberculous mycobacteria,
BK virus, Clostridium difficile, and norovirus.
IFD remains a significant cause of infectious morbidity and mortality in allogeneic HSCT recipients. Empirical treatment for IFD is
considered for HSCT patients with persistent fever despite 96 hours
of broad-­spectrum antibiotic treatment. The most common organisms
are Aspergillus and Candida species. Infections also occur with non-­
Aspergillus molds, including Mucor and Rhizopus species (among other
agents of mucormycosis), Fusarium, and Scedosporium species. Pneumocystis jiroveci is a unique, noncultivatable cause of fungal pneumonia in immunocompromised patients. Despite prompt and aggressive
administration of potent antifungal agents, proven cases of IFD carry
case fatality rates of 20–70%. IFD can present early after transplant,
although there is a shift toward presentation of infection in the postengraftment period in the presence of GVHD. The risk of developing IFD
is mainly influenced by history of previous fungal infection, duration
of neutropenia, use of corticosteroid therapy, mucosal tissue damage
(GVHD, posttransplant cytomegalovirus [CMV] infection, viral respiratory tract infections), and for candidiasis, presence of central venous
catheters.
Disseminated candidiasis presents frequently as a central venous catheter–associated infection. However, up to 50% of patients with disseminated candidiasis do not present with positive blood cultures. Patients
with and without candidemia can have infection of normally sterile
organs, including liver, spleen, kidney, brain, heart, and eye. Mortality
rates in pediatric series range from 10–25%. Echinocandins (micafungin,

A

B

caspofungin) are the initial drugs of choice for candidiasis in immunocompromised patients with pediatric data supporting reduced 14-­day
failure rates compared to initial triazole or amphotericin B therapy.
Pulmonary disease is the common presentation of invasive aspergillosis. The upper airway mucosa (nose and sinuses) can also be a site of
initial infection. Infection progresses from lung or sinus sites by direct
extension across tissue or angioinvasion resulting in hematogenous
dissemination to brain and other organs. The earliest imaging finding
is classically one or more small pulmonary nodules (Figs. 180.2 and
180.3). As a nodule enlarges, the dense central core of infarcted tissue may become surrounded by edema or hemorrhage, forming a hazy
rim known as the halo sign. When bone marrow function recovers, the
infarcted central core may cavitate, creating the crescent sign. Unfortunately, radiographic signs, including the halo sign, crescent sign, and
cavitation, have low sensitivity in pediatric patients. Clinical criteria are
used to diagnose proven or probable IFD, requiring direct or indirect
microbiologic data. Direct, culture-­based diagnosis requires invasive

Fig. 180.3 Angioinvasive aspergillosis. CT section at the level of the
lower trachea shows a consolidation with an eccentric cavitation and air
crescent sign (arrows). This finding in this neutropenic patient is highly
diagnostic of angioinvasive aspergillosis. (From Franquet T. Nonneoplastic parenchymal lung disease. In Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and
MRI of the Whole Body, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017. Fig 36.14.)

Fig. 180.2 Angioinvasive aspergillosis. A, Posteroanterior radiograph shows multiple nodules
in the lungs (arrows). B, CT section at the level of
the intermediary bronchus shows a nodule surrounded by a halo of ground-­glass attenuation
(arrows). (From Franquet T. Nonneoplastic parenchymal lung disease. In Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds.
CT and MRI of the Whole Body, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017. Fig 36.13.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1364 Part XII u Immunology
procedures, such as sinus endoscopy or lung biopsy. Indirect measures,
including fungal biomarkers, are used in HSCT patients to screen
for or diagnose probable aspergillosis. Galactomannan from serum
or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid is an adjunct to diagnostic strategies
because of a high negative predictive value for aspergillosis; however,
lack of detection of mucormycosis limits its utility as a single diagnostic test. Other limitations include poor positive predictive values due
to false-­positive test results and lack of validation in patients without
neutropenia. Another widely available biomarker, (1→3)-­β-­d-­glucan, is
insufficiently studied for routine use in pediatric patients.
Fungal infection prevention includes isolation of the patient in
a laminar airflow or positive pressure room. Universal prophylaxis
to prevent Pneumocystis pneumonia is advocated until the return of
T-­cell function in HSCT patients; the primary agent for prophylaxis is
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Alternative agents are pentamidine,
dapsone, and atovaquone. For prevention and treatment of other IFDs,
liposomal amphotericin B, azole compounds (itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, isavuconazole), and echinocandins (caspofungin,
micafungin) are used. Voriconazole represents the treatment of choice
for adult patients with invasive aspergillosis, but achieving adequate
trough levels can be challenging in young children. The agents of
mucormycosis are resistant to most azole and echinocandin medications, which makes liposomal amphotericin B the initial drug of choice.
IFD often does not respond satisfactorily to antifungal agents alone,
and infection may persist until adequate source control is achieved
with surgical debridement and immune function recovers.
Herpesviruses, including CMV, Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV), human
herpesvirus 6 (HHV-­6), herpes simplex virus (HSV-­1 and HSV-­2), and
varicella-­zoster virus (VZV) are pathogens that can cause significant
disease after HSCT. Because herpesviruses can establish latency in the
human host, symptomatic infection can occur from viral reactivation
as well as acquisition from the donor or de novo infection. Baseline susceptibility to disease and viremia before symptom development can be
established with laboratory monitoring (pretransplant donor-­recipient
serology, posttransplant viral load monitoring) and can inform decisions on prophylactic and preemptive antiviral treatment.
CMV infection remains the most common and potentially severe
viral complication in patients receiving allogeneic HSCT. Risk factors
for CMV viremia include recipient seropositivity, UCBT, and acute
GVHD. The period of maximal risk for CMV disease is 1-­4 months
after transplantation. Late presentation of CMV disease is associated
with GVHD. Until CMV-­specific T-­cell responses develop months
after transplant, CMV infection may result in a variety of syndromes,
including fever, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, hepatitis, pneumonitis, retinitis, esophagitis, gastritis, and colitis. CMV pneumonia has
been reported to occur in up to 15–20% of bone marrow transplant
recipients, with a case fatality rate of 85% in the absence of early treatment. Tachypnea, hypoxia, and nonproductive cough signal respiratory involvement. Chest radiography often reveals bilateral interstitial
or reticulonodular infiltrates, which begin in the periphery of the
lower lobes and spread centrally and superiorly. Gastrointestinal CMV
involvement may lead to ulcers of the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and colon with complications of bleeding or perforation. Fatal
CMV infections are often associated with persistent viremia and multiorgan involvement.

CMV disease has largely been prevented through prophylaxis or
preemptive approaches. Prophylaxis is based on administration of antiviral drugs to at-­risk transplanted patients for a median duration of 3
months after transplantation. The major drawbacks of this approach
are drug toxicity, late CMV disease after withdrawal of prophylaxis,
potential unnecessary treatment of patients who would not have reactivated CMV infection, and low cost-­effectiveness. Preemptive therapy
aims at treating only patients who experience CMV reactivation and
thus are at risk of developing overt disease; it starts on detection of
CMV in blood but before symptom development. The major drawback
of this strategy is the need of serial monitoring of CMV by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) in blood. First-­line therapy is usually ganciclovir, with foscarnet as an alternative for resistant strains or ganciclovir
intolerance.
EBV-­related posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD)
is a major complication in HSCT and solid-­organ transplantation. In
patients receiving HSCT, selective procedures of T-­cell depletion–
sparing B lymphocytes and use of HLA–partially matched family
and unrelated donors are risk factors for the development of PTLD.
PTLD usually presents in the first 4-­6 months after transplantation as
high-­grade, diffuse, large-­cell B-­cell lymphomas that are oligoclonal
or monoclonal. High EBV viral loads in blood by PCR predict development of PTLD. Standard treatment of PTLD includes the reduction of immunosuppression, monoclonal antibodies directed against
CD20 on B cells (rituximab), or cytotoxic chemotherapy. Prophylactic strategies with rituximab for EBV-­positive recipients during
conditioning for HSCT have also been employed. Histologic diagnosis of PTLD is required to assess for the emergence of neoplasms
in which cells are CD19+ but CD20−, thus eliminating susceptibility
to rituximab.
Disseminated adenovirus infection is a life-­threatening complication of HSCT recipients. Clinical manifestations include fever, hepatitis, enteritis, meningoencephalitis, and pneumonia. Young children or
recipients of donor cells naïve to adenovirus (T-­cell–depleted grafts or
UCBT) are at particular risk of developing this complication. Diagnosis is based on the demonstration of high viral loads by PCR in blood
or recovery of virus in tissue biopsies. Pharmacologic treatment of
adenovirus infections is with the antiviral cidofovir, which has significant renal toxicity and limited potency at controlling viral replication.
The enterally available prodrug brincidofovir showed initial promise
in allogeneic pediatric HSCT recipients with refractory adenovirus
infection but is not available clinically for this indication. Recovery of
immune system function is associated with improved survival with disseminated adenovirus infection.
In immunocompromised hosts, severe viral infections, including
PTLD and adenovirus infection, originate from a deficiency of virus-­
specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). This finding provides the
rationale for developing strategies of adoptive cell therapy to restore
virus-­specific immune competence. Multiple protocols are in clinical
trials and available at some centers for the rapid generation of specific
CTL lines of donor or third-­party origin.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 181 u Late Effects of ­Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation

Chapter 181

Late Effects of
­Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Transplantation
Rachel A. Phelan and David Margolis
Pediatric hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is considered
standard-­of-­care treatment for several malignant and nonmalignant
conditions. Treatment generally involves exposure to chemotherapy
and occasionally radiation to encourage engraftment of donor stem
cells and prevent donor and recipient rejection. The period immediately
after transplant is associated with the risk for a number of serious acute
complications, including profound immunosuppression and subsequent risk for infection, graft-­versus-­host disease (GVHD), and organ
toxicities (see Chapters 179 and 180). Fortunately, significant progress
has been made in supportive care strategies to reduce the risk of acute
complications and treat them more effectively if they do arise. This has
resulted in a growing number of pediatric patients who are now long-­
term survivors following HSCT. The estimated total number of HSCT
survivors in 2009 was 108,900, and this is expected to increase 5 times
by 2030 to over 500,000. Of these survivors, approximately 14% (64,000)
in 2030 will have received a transplant in childhood (<18 years of age).
Exposure to chemotherapy, radiation, or a combination of both, places
patients at similar long-­term risks as the pediatric cancer population; the
high doses and types of chemotherapy and radiation often amplify the
risk for issues such as ovarian failure/infertility and neurocognitive difficulties. Total body irradiation (TBI) has been shown to increase dramatically the risk for late complications after transplant. In addition, late
effects may be additive if the patient received therapy before HSCT for
their underlying malignancy. Moreover, the indication for transplant
in pediatric patients is not always related to malignancy, but rather an
underlying immunodeficiency, bone marrow failure syndrome, or metabolic disorder. These patients are potentially at risk for late effects related
to this underlying disease and require different types of monitoring.
Essentially, every organ system can be impacted by the long-­term
effects of therapy, and each must be considered when undergoing late
effects surveillance (Table 181.1). As a result of growing evidence of the
importance of lifelong care for HSCT survivors, multiple groups have
published consensus guidelines to help in caring for this patient population. As the field of survivorship continues to expand, we recommend the
following reference for real-­time evidence-­based recommendations from
the Children’s Oncology Group (see http://survivorshipguidelines.org).

ENDOCRINE EFFECTS

Children given HSCT before puberty may develop growth impairment, precluding achievement of the genetic target for adult height.
The decrease in growth velocity is similar for boys and girls and is more
frequently observed in patients given TBI as part of the preparative
regimen. Chronic GVHD and its treatment with corticosteroids may
also contribute to growth impairment.
Growth impairment of patients given TBI is mainly a result of direct
damage of cartilage plates and to the effect of TBI on the hypothalamic-­
pituitary axis, which leads to an inappropriately low production of
growth hormone (GH). GH deficiency is susceptible to at least partial
correction through administration of hormonal replacement therapy.
Annual growth evaluation should be performed in all children after
HSCT. Children showing a decreased growth velocity should be further investigated through evaluation of bone age and secretion of GH
in response to pharmacologic stimulus.
The use of TBI during the preparative regimen involves the thyroid gland in the irradiation field and may result in hypothyroidism.
Younger children are at greater risk of developing hypothyroidism.

1365

Chemotherapy-­
only preparative regimens have far fewer adverse
effects on normal thyroid function. The site of injury by irradiation
is at the level of the thyroid gland rather than at the pituitary or hypothalamus. Therapy with thyroxine is very effective for overt hypothyroidism. The cumulative incidence of hypothyroidism increases over
time, underscoring the importance of annual thyroid function studies.
Gonadal hormones are essential for normal pubertal growth, as well
as for development of secondary sexual characteristics. A significant
proportion of patients receiving TBI-­containing preparative regimens
as well as high doses of alkylating agents show delayed development
of secondary sexual characteristics, resulting from primary ovarian or
testicular failure. Laboratory evaluation of these patients reveals elevated follicle-­stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone levels with
depressed estradiol and testosterone serum levels. These patients benefit
from careful follow-­up with evaluation of annual sexual maturity rating
(Tanner) scores and endocrine function. Supplementation of gonadal
hormones is useful for primary gonadal failure and is administered
with GH to promote pubertal growth. Infertility during adulthood
remains a significant risk for these patients, especially those undergoing
traditional myeloablative conditioning for HSCT. The use of reduced-­
intensity regimens may result in sparing fertility in a large proportion of
patients, although conditioning regimens vary and studies are limited.
Bone health of HSCT survivors can also be impacted by hormonal
changes as well as lifestyle practices, such as inadequate exercise and/or
dietary intake of vitamin D. Prior exposures, including corticosteroid
use, can result in changes to bone density as well as predispose to the
development of avascular necrosis. Dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry
(DXA) scans are routinely incorporated into the care of those patients
at risk for low bone mineral density.

CARDIOVASCULAR EFFECTS

Survivors of childhood HSCT are at risk for the future development of
cardiovascular complications. This population can be prone to developing metabolic syndrome (dyslipidemia, hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
obesity), especially those with a history of TBI exposure and subsequent
hormonal derangements. Prior exposures such as anthracycline chemotherapy and chest radiation further increase the risk for cardiomyopathy as well as atherosclerosis. As a result, routine anthropometric,
imaging, and laboratory screening should be performed in survivors of
childhood HSCT to assess and monitor their cardiovascular health.

SECONDARY MALIGNANCY

The overall risk of developing a secondary form of cancer is significantly higher after HSCT than in the general population. Although few
studies have specifically analyzed pediatric patients, available evidence
indicates that the cumulative incidence of second malignancies shows
a slight, but continuous, tendency to increase over time. The development of myelodysplastic syndrome as well as secondary leukemias
must be considered in survivors of HSCT. Several other types of secondary tumors have been identified in patients given HSCT. The most
frequently diagnosed neoplasms are thyroid carcinoma, brain tumors,
and epithelial cancers. Young age, male gender, use of TBI during the
preparative regimen, chronic GVHD, and an intrinsic genetic predisposition to develop cancer (Fanconi anemia) have been reported to be
risk factors for development of secondary malignancies after HSCT.
Routine physical exams, including yearly skin in exams, in those that
received TBI are important in the care of these patients.

GRAFT-­VERSUS-­HOST DISEASE

In the posttransplant period, multiple studies have shown that quality
of life is severely impacted by the presence of GVHD, which is an issue
that is also unique to HSCT (see Chapter 179).

OTHER EFFECTS

HSCT patients can also experience complications related to their pulmonary function, renal function, dental health, and gastrointestinal
system, often related to prior exposures as well as their conditioning
regimen. It is also important to note that long-­term survivors must
be monitored for psychologic issues because of their prior and current underlying health conditions. They may need extra assistance

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1366 Part XII u Immunology
Table 181.1  Summary of Late Effects After Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation in Childhood
EXPOSURE
HSCT experience in general

LATE EFFECT*

EXPOSURE

Dental abnormalities
Renal toxicity
Hepatic toxicity
Low BMD
Avascular necrosis
Increased risk of second cancers
Adverse psychosocial/quality-­of-­
life effects
Mental health disorders, risk
behaviors
Psychosocial disability caused by
pain or fatigue

Bleomycin

Pulmonary toxicity

Cytarabine

Neurocognitive deficits
Leukoencephalopathy

Methotrexate

Neurocognitive deficits
Leukoencephalopathy
Renal toxicity
Low BMD

Corticosteroid

Cataract
Low BMD
Avascular necrosis

Cranial radiation§

Neurocognitive deficits
Leukoencephalopathy
Cerebrovascular disease
Cataract
Craniofacial abnormalities
Dental abnormalities,
xerostomia
GH deficiency
Hypothyroidism thyroid nodule
Increased obesity
Precocious puberty
Brain tumor

TRANSPLANTATION CONDITIONING
Alkylating agent
Cataract (busulfan)
Pulmonary fibrosis (busulfan)
Renal toxicity
Urinary tract toxicity
Gonadal dysfunction
Therapy-­related AML/MDS
Bladder cancer
Epipodophyllotoxin†
DNA intersecting and cross linking
agents (i.e., platinum, heavy
metal)
TBI‡

Therapy-­related AML/MDS
Ototoxicity
Renal toxicity
Gonadal toxicity

LATE EFFECT*

Spinal radiation (in addition to
Cardiac toxicity
Neurocognitive deficits
cranial dose)
Scoliosis/kyphosis,
Leukoencephalopathy
musculoskeletal problems
Cataract
AFTER
TRANSPLANTATION
(NOT
LISTED
ABOVE)
Dental abnormalities
Chronic GVHD
Xerophthalmia
GH deficiency
Xerostomia, dental
Hypothyroidism, thyroid nodule
abnormalities
Pulmonary toxicity
Pulmonary toxicity
Breast tissue hypoplasia
Gastrointestinal strictures
Cardiac toxicity
Genitourinary strictures
Renal toxicity
Skin and joint changes
Gonadal dysfunction
Immunodeficiency
Uterine vascular insufficiency
Second cancers, especially skin,
Diabetes
oral, cervical, lymphoma
Dyslipidemia
Musculoskeletal growth problems Tyrosine kinase inhibitor
Acute cardiac toxicity reported,
Second cancers
but not known to cause late

PRETRANSPLANTATION EXPOSURES (NOT LISTED ABOVE)
Anthracycline/anthraquinone
Cardiac toxicity
Therapy-­related AML/MDS

cardiotoxicity

OTHER EXPOSURES
Blood transfusions

Hepatitis C, HIV

*Focused on those late effects that can develop or persist even after cessation of therapy.
†Includes etoposide, teniposide.
‡At given total dose, risks greater for single-­fraction vs fractionated total body irradiation (TBI); single-­fraction myeloablative TBI (>500 cGy) now rarely used.
§Effects listed are those more likely to be associated with doses used in HSCT survivors (e.g., those given for leukemia treatment, <25 Gy); late effects are more likely if TBI also given.
AML/MDS, Acute myeloid leukemia/myelodysplastic syndrome; BMD, bone mineral density; GH, growth hormone; GVHD, graft-versus-host disease; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.
From Chow EJ, Anderson L, Baker KS, et al. Late Effects Surveillance Recommendations among Survivors of Childhood Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation: A Children’s Oncology
Group Report. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2016;22(5):782–795.

with school and vocational attainment. These patients are also often
at higher risk for depression and anxiety; yearly psychosocial assessments can identify survivors who need additional therapy or psychotropic medication. Parents may also have posttraumatic stress from the
experience.

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Certain patient populations who undergo HSCT are at increased risk
for late effects. Young children appear to be at a heightened risk for

late complications related to TBI, especially those related to growth,
thyroid function, and neurocognition. Patients with an underlying
genetic condition must also be monitored more closely for specific
consequences of therapy, such as specific secondary malignancies in
the Fanconi anemia population caused by an underlying DNA repair
defect and patients with sickle cell anemia and thalassemia who are
predisposed to iron overload.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Allergic Disorders
Chapter 182

Allergy and the
Immunologic Basis
of Atopic Disease
Cezmi A. Akdis and Scott H. Sicherer
Allergic or atopic patients have an altered state of reactivity to common
environmental and food antigens that do not cause clinical reactions in
unaffected people. Patients with clinical allergy usually produce immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies to the antigens that trigger their illness.
The term allergy represents the clinical expression of IgE-­mediated
allergic diseases that have a familial predisposition and that manifest as
hyperresponsiveness in target organs such as the lung, skin, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and nose. The significant increase in the prevalence
of allergic diseases in the last few decades is attributed to changes in
environmental factors such as exposure to tobacco smoke, air pollution, indoor and outdoor allergens, respiratory viruses, obesity, and
perhaps a decline in certain infectious diseases (hygiene hypothesis).
The incidence of allergic asthma and atopic dermatitis started to
grow to epidemic proportions after the 1960s. Since 2000, the prevalence of food allergy, eosinophilic esophagitis, and drug-­induced anaphylaxis has also risen to epidemic proportions. Currently more than
1 billion patients worldwide are expected to have at least one kind of
allergic disease. The hygiene hypothesis, biodiversity hypothesis and
epithelial barrier hypothesis are the three main hypotheses that propose mechanisms for the development of allergic diseases.

HYGIENE HYPOTHESIS

The relatively recent onset of the epidemics of allergic, autoimmune, and
metabolic conditions leads to the question of what might underlie their
development. A prominent hypothesis is the hygiene hypothesis, which
proposes that certain microorganisms or infections protect against
inflammatory diseases, and that their loss, due to hygiene measures,
results in an increase in allergy, asthma, and autoimmunity. Growing up
on a traditional farm has a protective effect from asthma and allergies,
which provides a prominent example of the hygiene hypothesis. Children in Amish communities in the United States, where traditional dairy
farming is practiced, are highly protected from asthma and allergies. In
contrast, Hutterite communities have a significantly higher prevalence of
asthma and allergies in children. Interestingly, they practice industrialized farming with extensive cleaning measures. Early development of a
T-­helper type 1 (Th1) response together with T-­regulatory cell (Treg)
response were proposed to play a role in prevention of allergic diseases.

BIODIVERSITY HYPOTHESIS

Allergic diseases are associated with a microbiome with increased colonization of opportunistic pathogens. The biodiversity hypothesis states that
the observed increase in allergies is due to a loss of symbiotic relationships
with bacteria and dysbiosis caused by changes in the microbiome of the
gut, skin, and respiratory system. Healthy microbiota on the surface of the
mucosal barrier regulates many aspects of epithelial barrier homeostasis,
such as the modulation of barrier permeability and expression of epithelial barrier molecules, angiogenesis, vascular permeability, local microinflammation, and mucosal tolerance. Young children at risk of developing

PART

XIII

allergies have been shown to suffer from gut microbiome dysbiosis with an
overall reduced microbiome diversity. The dysbiotic microbiota has been
characterized by an underrepresentation of certain bacterial taxa that may
produce immune regulatory and epithelial barrier healing or protective
factors, such as short-­chain fatty acids, retinoic acid, and vitamin D.
Several shortcomings of the hygiene and biodiversity hypotheses
include the fact that water sanitation was established in many western
cities in the 1920s, but allergy and asthma epidemics only started in the
1960s. The protective role of parasitic infections that increase biodiversity
has been questioned for the same reason. Many parasitic infections started
to decrease in 1910 in New York, whereas allergies started to increase
after the 1960s. Allergic asthma is still on the rise in some cities in Asia
and Africa, which have low standards of hygiene. Another limitation of
the hygiene hypothesis and biodiversity hypothesis is that probiotics are
not viable alternatives for the prevention or treatment of allergies. Moreover, studies of migrants who move from developing countries to affluent
regions demonstrate a rapid increase in asthma and allergic diseases. It
appears that domestic living conditions, increased birth by cesarean section, antibiotic usage, dietary practices, urbanization, and indoor air pollution are more prominent factors compared with general public hygiene.

EPITHELIAL BARRIER HYPOTHESIS

The epithelial barrier hypothesis is a broader hypothesis that covers
hygiene and biodiversity hypotheses and adds further insights in the
pathogenesis and recent development of allergic diseases. The defective
epithelial barrier concept also applies to many autoimmune and metabolic diseases showing increased prevalence during the last few decades,
such as diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, liver steatosis,
and obesity. There is epidemiologic evidence from humans and disease
models in laboratory animals that demonstrate that even trace amounts
of certain toxic substances can damage epithelial barriers, initiate inflammation of the epithelium, and increase microbial dysbiosis and bacterial
translocation toward the inside and beneath the epithelium. The epithelial barrier consists of four main components: the epithelial microbiota;
the epithelial cell; structural proteins, such as filaggrin, loricrin, and
involucrin and tight junctions and adherence junctions; and secreted
epithelial products, such as mucus, antimicrobial peptides and fatty
acids. Humans are exposed daily to a variety of toxins and chemicals,
and substantial data demonstrate disruption of the epithelial barrier by
allergens, certain bacteria and their toxins, fungi, viruses, laundry and
dishwasher detergents, household cleaners, surfactants, enzymes and
emulsifiers used in the food industry, cigarette smoke, particulate matter,
diesel exhaust, ozone, nanoparticles, and microplastics.
Epithelial cell activation and release of epithelial cell cytokines, such
as interleukin (IL)-­25, IL-­33, and thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP)
play a major role in the development and exacerbation of allergic diseases. Local tissue inflammation opens epithelial barriers. Open epithelial barriers in the mucosa allow the entrance of foreign substances,
including allergens, into deeper tissues. Both Th1 and T-­helper type 2
(Th2) inflammation affect the skin and mucosal epithelial barriers. Th2
cells and group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILCs-­2) play major roles utilizing IL-­13 as major cytokines in the opening of the tight junction barrier.
Microbial dysbiosis caused by transepithelial translocation of commensal microbes, colonization by opportunistic pathogens, and decreased
biodiversity are hallmarks of barrier damaged tissues. Colonization by
opportunistic pathogens in the microbiota takes place in tissues with a
defective epithelial barrier. A dysregulated subepithelial immune response,
local inflammation, and incorrect regeneration and remodeling take place
as the continuum and chronicity of the local inflammation. Migration of
inflamed cells to other affected tissues and systemic low-­level immune activation and microinflammation are additional players in the development
and exacerbation of many chronic inflammatory diseases (Fig. 182.1).

1367
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1368 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

DC
ILC2

MC

MØ
B cell

T cell

Defective epithelial
barrier healing capacity
due to inflammation

Chronic skin and mucosal
inflammation

Exposure to epithelial
barrier-damaging agents and opening
of the skin and mucosal barriers

Systemic immune response to
commensals and opportunistic
pathogens

Colonization of opportunistic
pathogens S. aureus, Moraxella,
Haemophilus, pneumococcus

Microbial translocation
to inter-and subepithelial areas

Microbial dysbiosis characterized with
decreased biodiversity and
change in commensals

Fig. 182.1 The physiopathology of the epithelial barrier hypothesis. Genetic defects in barrier-­related molecules or exposure to epithelial barrier-­
damaging agents cause an opening of the skin and mucosal tight junction barriers. This is followed by translocation of microbiota to inter-­and subepithelial areas and colonization of opportunistic pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus, Moraxella, Haemophilus and pneumococcus. An immune
response develops toward commensals and opportunistic pathogens in the gut and respiratory system and systemic inflammation takes place. In most
cases of allergic diseases, a systemic type 2 inflammation predominates, and is directed against allergens, but also commensals and opportunistic
pathogens. Anti–S. aureus antibodies show a very high prevalence in asthma, chronic sinusitis, and atopic dermatitis. This is associated with microbial
dysbiosis and decreased biodiversity of commensals. Chronic inflammation in the subepithelial area develops as the main pathogenetic feature of
these diseases. Defective epithelial barrier healing capacity due to inflammation and epigenetic changes take place, developing a vicious circle of leaky
barriers, microbial dysbiosis, and chronic inflammation. DC, Dendritic cell; IL, interleukin; ILC, innate lymphoid cells; MC, mast cell; Mø, macrophage.

KEY ELEMENTS OF ALLERGIC DISEASES
Allergens

Allergens are almost always proteins, but not all proteins are allergens.
For a protein antigen to display allergenic activity, it must induce IgE
production, which must lead to a type 1 hypersensitivity response on
subsequent exposure to the same protein. Biochemical properties of
the allergen; stimulating factors of the innate immune response around
the allergen substances at the time of exposure; stability of the allergen
in the tissues, digestive system, skin, or mucosa; and the dose and time
of stay in lymphatic organs during the interaction with the immune
system are factors that may cause an antigen to become an allergen.
This is distinguished from general antigen responses, which induce a
state of immune responsiveness without associated IgE production.
Most allergens are proteins with a molecular weight of 10-­70 kDa.
Molecules <10 kDa do not bridge adjacent IgE antibody molecules on the
surfaces of mast cells or basophils. Most molecules >70 kDa do not pass
through mucosal surfaces, a feature needed to reach antigen-­presenting
cells (APCs) for stimulation of the immune system. Allergens frequently
contain proteases, which promote skin and mucosal epithelial barrier dysfunction and increase allergen penetration into host tissues. A
relatively high dose of exposure and stability of the allergenic protein
in body fluids to reach the immune cells are important determinants of
an allergen. Low molecular weight moieties, such as drugs, can become
allergens by reacting with serum proteins or cell membrane proteins to
be recognized by the immune system. Carbohydrate structures can also

be allergens and are most relevant with the increasing use of biologics in
clinical practice; patients with cetuximab-­induced anaphylaxis have IgE
antibodies specific for galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose.

T Cells

Everyone is exposed to potential allergens. Atopic individuals respond
to allergen exposure with rapid expansion of Th2 cells that secrete cytokines, such as IL-­4, IL-­5, and IL-­13, favoring IgE synthesis and eosinophilia. Allergen-­specific IgE antibodies associated with atopic response
are detectable by serum testing or positive immediate reactions to allergen extracts on skin-­prick testing. The Th2 cytokines IL-­4 and IL-­13
play a key role in immunoglobulin isotype switching to IgE (Fig. 182.2).
IL-­5 and IL-­9 are important in the differentiation and development of
eosinophils. The combination of IL-­3, IL-­4, and IL-­9 contributes to mast
cell activation. T-­cell and eosinophil migration to allergic inflammation areas are controlled by IL-­4 and IL-­13 upregulating their adhesion
to endothelial cell walls. IL-­9 is responsible for mucus production. Th2
cytokines are important effector molecules in the pathogenesis of asthma
and allergic diseases; acute allergic reactions are characterized by infiltration of Th2 cells into affected tissues. In addition, IL-­25, IL-­33, and TSLP
secreted from epithelial cells on exposure to allergens and respiratory
viruses contribute to Th2 response and eosinophilia.
A fraction of the immune response to allergens results in activation
and proliferation of Th1 cells. Th1 cells are typically involved in the
eradication of intracellular organisms, such as mycobacteria, because

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 182 u Allergy and the Immunologic Basis of Atopic Disease

EOS
IL-4
IL-5

GM-CSF

IL-9
IL-4, IL-9

IgE

IL-13
DC

CD40L CD40

MHCTCR

Th2

B cell
IgE

IL-3

Allergen

IL-4
IL-9

Mast cell

Stem cell factor

Fig. 182.2 Role of Th2 cytokines in allergic cascade. DC, Dendritic

cell; EOS, eosinophil; GM-­
CSF, granulocyte-­
macrophage colony-­
stimulating factor; IL, interleukin.

Innate immune
response stimulating
substances

of the ability of Th1 cytokines to activate phagocytes and promote the
production of opsonizing and complement-­fixing antibodies. The Th1
component of allergen-­specific immune response contributes to chronicity and the effector phase in allergic disease. Activation and apoptosis of epithelial cells induced by Th1 cell–secreted interferon-­γ (IFN-­γ),
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, and Fas-­ligand constitute an essential
pathogenetic event for the formation of eczematous lesions in atopic
dermatitis and bronchial epithelial cell shedding in asthma.
Chronic lesions of allergic reactions are characterized by infiltration of
Th1 and Th17 cells. This is important because Th1 cytokines such as IFN-­
γ can potentiate the function of allergic inflammatory effector cells such as
eosinophils, thereby contributing to disease severity. Th17 and Th22 cells
link the immune response to tissue inflammation; IL-­17A and IL-­17F and
IL-­22 are their respective prototype cytokines. Although both T-­helper cell
subsets play roles in immune defense to extracellular bacteria, IL-­17 augments inflammation, whereas IL-­22 plays a tissue-­protective role. Cytokines in the IL-­17 family act on multiple cell types, including epithelial cells
and APCs, to cause the release of chemokines, antimicrobial peptides, and
proinflammatory cytokines to enhance inflammation and antimicrobial
responses. In addition, Th9 cells produce IL-­9, but not other typical Th1,
Th2, and Th17 cytokines, and constitute a distinct population of effector T
cells that promotes tissue inflammation. Figure 182.3 depicts the complex
cytokine cascades involving Th1, Th2, Th9, Th17, and Th22 cells.
Tregs are a subset of T cells thought to play a critical role in expression of allergic and autoimmune diseases. These cells have the ability to
suppress effector T cells of Th1, Th2, Th9, Th17, and Th22 phenotypes
(Fig. 182.4). Tregs express CD4+CD25+ surface molecules and immunosuppressive cytokines such as IL-­10, IL-­35, and transforming growth
factor-­β (TGF-­β1). The forkhead box/winged-­helix transcription factor
gene FOXP3 is expressed specifically by CD4+CD25+ Tregs and programs their development and function. Adoptive transfer of Tregs inhibits the development of airway eosinophilia and protects against airway
hyperreactivity in animal models of asthma. T-­cell response to allergens
in healthy individuals shows a wide range, from no detectable response
to involvement of active peripheral tolerance mechanisms mediated by
different subsets of Tregs. Individuals who are not allergic even though
they are exposed to high doses of allergens, such as beekeepers and cat
Polarization
signals

Antigen

Micromilieu: vitamins,
cytokines, histamine,
adenosine, aryl hydrocarbons

naive
T cell

DC

Differentiation
cytokines:

1369

IL-21, IL-18,
IL-27

IL-4

IL-4
TGF-

TGF-, IL-6, IL-1
IL-21, IL-23

TGF-
IL-6

IL-21

Th1

Th2

Th9

Th17

Th22

TFH

Functions:

Intracellular
pathogens,
apoptosis of
tissue cells

Helminths,
allergic
inflammation,
IgE, chronic
eosinophilic
inflammation

Mucus
production,
tissue
inflammation

Extracellular
pathogens,
chronic
neutrophilic
inflammation

Tissue
inflammation

Antibody
synthesis

Effector
cytokines:

IFN-

IL-6, IL-8, IL-17A,
IL-17F, IL-22, IL-26

IL-22

IL-21

IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-13, IL-9, IL-10
IL-25, IL-31, IL-33

Fig. 182.3 Effector T-­cell subsets. Following antigen presentation by dendritic cells (DCs), naïve T cells differentiate into Th1, Th2, Th9, Th17,

Th22, and follicular helper (TFH) effector subsets. Their differentiation requires cytokines and other cofactors that are released from DCs and also
expressed in the micromilieu. T-­cell activation in the presence of interleukin-­4 (IL-­4) enhances differentiation and clonal expansion of Th2 cells, perpetuating the allergic response. IFN-­γ, Interferon-­γ; TGF-­β, transforming growth factor-­β. (From Akdis M, Palomares O, van de Veen W, et al. TH17
and TH22 cells: A confusion of antimicrobial response with tissue inflammation versus protection. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012;129:1438–1449.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1370 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Suppression
of Th17 effector cells

Suppression
of Th1
effector cells

Suppression
of Th2
effector cells

Fig. 182.4 Control of allergen-­specific immune

responses. FoxP3+, CD4+, CD25+, and Tr1 cells
contribute to the control of allergen-­
specific immune responses in several major ways: suppression
of dendritic cells (DCs) that support the generation
of effector T cells; suppression of Th1, Th2, and
Th17 cells; suppression of allergen-­
specific IgE,
and induction of IgG4 and/or IgA; suppression of
mast cells, basophils, and eosinophils; interaction
with resident tissue cells and remodeling; and suppression of effector T-­cell migration to tissues. IL,
Interleukin. (From Akdis CA, Akdis M. Mechanisms
and treatment of allergic disease in the big picture of regulatory T cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2009;123:735–746.)

B cell

Th1

Suppression of effector
T cell migration to tissues
T reg

Th2

Endothelial cells

Basophil

Eosinophil

DC

Remodeling in
the tissues
Direct and indirect
suppressive effects
on mast cells, basophils,
and eosinophils

owners, show a detectable allergen-­specific IgG4 response accompanied
by IL-­10–producing Tregs. It is thought that CD4+CD25+ Tregs play
an important role in mitigating the allergic immune response, and that
the lack of such cells may predispose to the development of allergic diseases. Patients with pathogenic variants in the human FOXP3 gene lack
CD4+CD25+ Tregs and develop severe immune dysregulation, with polyendocrinopathy, food allergy, and high serum IgE levels (XLAAD/IPEX
disease) (see Chapter 165.4). In addition to Treg cells, IL-­10–secreting
and allergen-­specific Breg cells increase during allergen-­specific immunotherapy and may play a role in allergen tolerance.

Innate Lymphoid Cells

Immune responses in populations of lymphoid cells that lack rearranged
T-­and B-­cell antigen receptors and surface markers for myeloid and
lymphoid lineages, such as T, B, and natural killer (NK) cells, show similarities to Th1, Th2, and Th17/Th22 types of immune responses. These
latter cells are defined as ILC1s, ILC2s, and ILC3s, respectively, based
on their transcription factors and cytokine production patterns. ILC1s
mainly produce IFN-­γ; ILC2s produce IL-­5, IL-­9, and IL-­13; and ILC3s
produce IL-­17 and IL-­22 without any need of antigen/allergen exposure.
Strong evidence indicates that ILCs play substantial roles in protection
against infection and the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases, such
as asthma, allergic diseases, and autoimmune diseases. ILCs control the
mucosal environment through close interaction with epithelial cells and
other tissue cells, cytokine production, and induction of chemokines that
recruit suitable cell populations to initiate and promote distinct types
of immune response development and tissue inflammation. ILC2s are
likely involved in the induction of asthma, allergic rhinitis, eosinophilic
esophagitis, and atopic dermatitis through activation by epithelium-­
derived cytokines (e.g., IL-­33, IL-­25, TSLP) and interaction with other
immune cells. IL-­10–secreting ILCs with an immune regulatory function have been reported. These cells develop from ILC2s and play suppressive roles in allergic inflammation, particularly through IL-­10.

Antigen-­Presenting Cells

Induction of IgG4
Suppression of IgE

Th17

Dendritic cells (DCs), Langerhans cells, monocytes, and macrophages
have the ability to present allergens to T cells, thereby modulating allergic inflammation by controlling the type of T-­cell development. APCs
are a heterogeneous group of cells that share the property of antigen
presentation in the context of the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) and are found primarily in lymphoid organs and the skin. DCs
and Langerhans cells are unique in their ability to prime naïve T cells

Mast cells

Suppression of
inflammatory
dendritic cells.
Induction of
IL-10-producing
dendritic cells

and are responsible for the primary immune response, or the sensitization phase of allergy. Monocytes and macrophages are thought to
contribute to activating memory T-­cell responses on reexposure to
allergen, which characterizes the elicitation phase of allergy.
Peripheral DCs residing in sites such as the skin, intestinal lamina
propria, and lung are relatively immature. These immature DCs take up
antigens in tissues and then migrate to the T-­cell areas in locally draining lymph nodes. The DCs undergo phenotypic and functional changes
during migration, characterized by increased expression of MHC class
I, MHC class II, and co-­stimulatory molecules that react with CD28
expressed on T cells. In the lymph nodes, they directly present processed
antigens to resting T cells to induce their proliferation and differentiation.
Mature DCs have been designated as myeloid or plasmacytoid on
the basis of their ability to favor Th1 or Th2 differentiation, respectively.
The critical factor for polarization to Th1 cells is the level of IL-­12 produced by myeloid DC. In contrast, plasmacytoid DCs have low levels
of IL-­12. Plasmacytoid DCs particularly play a role in antiviral immunity by rapid production of high amounts of IFN-­α and help B cells for
antibody production. There is considerable interest in the role of TSLP,
which is overexpressed in the mucosal surfaces and skin of atopic individuals. TSLP enhances Th2 differentiation by inducing expression of
OX40L on immature myeloid DCs in the absence of IL-­12 production.
Tissue macrophages are also acting as APCs. They show two main effector subsets in tissues, namely the M1 and M2 macrophages. M1 macrophages are classically activated, typically by IFN-­γ or lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) like innate immune response stimulating substances, and produce proinflammatory cytokines, phagocytize microbes, and initiate an
immune response. M1 macrophages produce nitric oxide (NO) or reactive
oxygen intermediates (ROIs) to protect against bacteria and viruses. M2
macrophages are alternatively activated by allergen exposure and certain
cytokines such as IL-­4, IL-­10, or IL-­13. M2 macrophages will produce
either polyamines to induce proliferation or proline to induce collagen
production. These macrophages are associated with wound healing and
tissue repair remodeling and activation of Th2 cells and ILC2s.
Presence of allergen-­specific IgE on the cell surfaces of APCs is a
unique feature of atopy. Importantly, the formation of high-­affinity IgE
receptor I (FcεRI)/IgE/allergen complexes on APC surfaces greatly facilitates allergen uptake and presentation. The clinical importance of this
phenomenon is supported by the observation that FcεRI-­positive Langerhans cells bearing IgE molecules are a prerequisite for skin-­applied,
aeroallergen provocation of eczematous lesions in patients with atopic
dermatitis. The role of the low-­affinity IgE receptor II (FcεRII, CD23)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 182 u Allergy and the Immunologic Basis of Atopic Disease
on monocytes/macrophages is less clear, although under certain conditions it apparently can also facilitate antigen capture. Cross linking of
FcεRII, as well as FcεRI, on monocytes/macrophages leads to the release
of inflammatory mediators. There is a critical role for DCs in induction
of oral tolerance; tolerogenic DCs are compartmentalized within the
mucosa and present antigen through a mechanism designed to produce
a Th1/Treg-­suppressive response that ablates allergen-­specific T cells.

Immunoglobulin E and Its Receptors

The acute allergic response depends on IgE and its ability to bind selectively to the α chain of the high-­affinity FcεRI or the low-­affinity FcεRII
(CD23). Cross linking of receptor-­bound IgE molecules by allergen initiates a complex intracellular signaling cascade, followed by the release
of various mediators of allergic inflammation from mast cells and
basophils. The FcεRI molecule is also found on the surface of antigen-­
presenting DCs (e.g., Langerhans cells), but differs from the structure
found on mast cells/basophils in that the FcεRI molecule found on DCs
lacks the β chain. CD23 is found on B cells, eosinophils, platelets, and
DCs. Cross linking and FcεRI aggregation on mast cells and basophils
can also lead to anaphylaxis (see Chapter 174). Differential expression
of tyrosine kinases responsible for positive and negative regulation of
mast cell/basophil degranulation are thought to be responsible for this
aberrant allergic response.
The induction of IgE synthesis requires two major signals. The first signal (signal 1) initiates IL-­4 or IL-­13 activation of germline transcription at
the ε Ig locus, which dictates isotype specificity. The second signal (signal
2) involves the engagement of CD40 on B cells by CD40 ligand expressed
on T cells. This engagement results in activation of the recombination
machinery, resulting in DNA switch recombination. Interactions between
several co-­stimulatory molecule pairs (CD28 and B7; lymphocyte function–associated antigen-­1 and intercellular adhesion molecule-­1; CD2 and
CD58) can further amplify signal 1 and signal 2 to enhance IgE synthesis.
Factors that inhibit IgE synthesis include Th1-­type cytokines (IL-­12, IFN-­
α, IFN-­γ), IL-­10 from Tregs, Breg cells, and regulatory DCs and microbial
DNA containing CpG (cytosine-­phosphate-­guanine) repeats.

Eosinophils

Allergic diseases are characterized by peripheral blood and tissue eosinophilia. Eosinophils participate in both innate and adaptive immune
responses and, like mast cells, contain dense intracellular granules that
are sources of inflammatory proteins (see Fig. 169.1). These granule
proteins include major basic protein, eosinophil-­derived neurotoxin,
peroxidase, and cationic protein. Eosinophil granule proteins damage
epithelial cells, induce airway hyperresponsiveness, and cause degranulation of basophils and mast cells. Major basic protein released from
eosinophils can bind to an acidic moiety on the M2 muscarinic receptor
and block its function, thereby leading to increased acetylcholine levels
and the development of increased airway hyperreactivity. Eosinophils
are also a rich source of prostaglandins and leukotrienes (LTs); in particular, cysteinyl LT C4 contracts airway smooth muscle and increases
vascular permeability. Other secretory products of eosinophils include
cytokines (IL-­4, IL-­5, TNF-­α), proteolytic enzymes, and ROIs, all of
which significantly enhance allergic tissue inflammation.
Several cytokines regulate the function of eosinophils in allergic disease. Eosinophils develop and mature in the bone marrow from myeloid
precursor cells activated by IL-­3, IL-­5, and granulocyte-­macrophage
colony-­
stimulating factor (GM-­
CSF). Allergen exposure of allergic
patients causes resident hematopoietic CD34 cells to express the IL-­5
receptor. The IL-­5 receptor activation induces eosinophil maturation,
causing eosinophils to synthesize granule proteins, prolonging their
survival, potentiating degranulation of eosinophils, and stimulating
release of eosinophils from the bone marrow. GM-­CSF also enhances
proliferation, cell survival, cytokine production, and degranulation of
eosinophils. Certain chemokines, such as RANTES (regulated on activation, normal T-­cell expressed and secreted), macrophage inflammatory
protein-­1α (MIP-­1α), and eotaxins are important for recruiting eosinophils into local allergic tissue inflammatory reactions. Eotaxins mobilize
IL-­5–dependent eosinophil colony–forming progenitor cells from the
bone marrow. These progenitors are rapidly cleared from the blood and
either return to the bone marrow or are recruited to inflamed tissue sites.

1371

Mast Cells

Mast cells are derived from CD34 hematopoietic progenitor cells that arise
in bone marrow. On entering the circulation, they travel to peripheral tissue, where they undergo tissue-­specific maturation. Mast cell development
and survival relies on interactions between the tyrosine kinase receptor
c-­kit expressed on the surface of mast cells and the fibroblast-­derived c-­kit
ligand, the stem cell factor. Unlike mature basophils, mature mast cells do
not typically circulate in the blood. They are instead widely distributed
throughout connective tissues, where they often lie adjacent to blood vessels and beneath epithelial surfaces that are exposed to the external environment, such as the respiratory tract, GI tract, and skin. So placed, mast
cells are positioned anatomically to participate in allergic reactions. At least
two subpopulations of human mast cells are recognized: mast cells with
tryptase and mast cells with both tryptase and chymase. Mast cells with
tryptase are the predominant type found in the lung and small intestinal
mucosa, whereas mast cells with both tryptase and chymase are the predominant type found in skin, the GI submucosa, and blood vessels.
Mast cells contain, or produce on appropriate stimulation, a diverse
array of mediators that have different effects on allergic inflammation
and organ function. They include preformed granule-­associated mediators (histamine, serine proteases, proteoglycans) and membrane-­derived
lipid, cytokine, and chemokine mediators arising from de novo synthesis
and release. The most important mast cell–derived lipid mediators are
the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase metabolites of arachidonic acid,
which have potent inflammatory activities. The major cyclooxygenase
product of mast cells is prostaglandin D2, and the major lipoxygenase
products are the sulfidopeptide LTs: LTC4 and its peptidolytic derivatives
LTD4 and LTE4. Mast cells also can produce cytokines that promote Th2-­
type responses (IL-­4, IL-­13, GM-­CSF) and inflammation (TNF-­α, IL-­6)
and regulate tissue remodeling (TGF, vascular endothelial cell growth
factor). Immunologic activation of mast cells and basophils typically
begins with cross-­linkage of IgE bound to the FcεRI with multivalent
allergen. Mast cell surface FcεRI is increased by IL-­4 and IgE. Surface
levels of FcεRI decrease in patients receiving treatment with anti-­IgE
antibody that lowers serum IgE, which is of potential therapeutic interest.

MECHANISMS OF ALLERGIC TISSUE
INFLAMMATION

IgE-­
mediated immune responses can be classified chronologically
according to three reaction patterns. The early-­phase response is the
immediate response after allergen is introduced into target organs.
This response is characterized by mast cell degranulation and release
of preformed mediators, occurring within an immediate time frame of
1-­30 minutes after allergen exposure and resolving within 1-­3 hours.
Acute reactions are associated with increased local vascular permeability, which leads to leakage of plasma proteins, tissue swelling, and
increased blood flow, as well as itching, sneezing, wheezing, and acute
abdominal cramps in the skin, nose, lung, and GI tract, respectively,
depending on the targeted organ.
A second, late-­phase response can occur within hours of allergen
exposure, reaching a maximum at 6-­12 hours and resolving by 24
hours. Late-­phase responses are characterized in the skin by edema,
redness, and induration; in the nose by sustained nasal blockage; and
in the lung by airway obstruction and persistent wheezing. In general,
late-­phase responses are associated with early infiltration of neutrophils and eosinophils, followed by basophils, monocytes, macrophages,
and Th2-­type cells. Recruitment of inflammatory cells from the circulation requires increased expression of adhesion molecules on their cell
surfaces and expression of their ligand on endothelial cells, which are
under the control of cytokines. Several hours after allergen exposure,
TNF-­α released by activated mast cells induces the vascular endothelial
expression of cell adhesion molecules, and this change leads to transendothelial migration of various inflammatory cells. Preferential accumulation of eosinophils occurs through interactions between selective
adhesion molecules on the eosinophil cell surface (e.g., α4β1-­integrin or
very late antigen-­4); vascular cell adhesion molecule-­1 surface expression can be enhanced by IL-­4 and IL-­13 on endothelial cells. ILC2s
receive signals from the epithelial cells, such as IL-­33, TSLP, and IL-­25,
and are activated and start to release their cytokines IL-­5 and IL-­13 to
initiate a type 2 immune response.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1372 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Chemokines are chemotactic cytokines that play a central role in
tissue-­directed migration of inflammatory cells. RANTES, MIP-­1α,
monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-­3, and MCP-­4 are chemoattractants for eosinophils and mononuclear cells, whereas eotaxins are
relatively selective for eosinophils. These chemoattractants have been
detected in epithelium, macrophages, lymphocytes, and eosinophils at
sites of late-­phase responses and allergic tissue inflammation. Blockade
of these chemokines leads to significant reduction in tissue-­directed
migration of allergic effector cells.
In the third reaction pattern, chronic allergic disease, tissue inflammation can persist for days to years. Several factors contribute to persistent tissue inflammation, including recurrent exposure to allergens
and microbial agents. The repeated stimulation of allergic effector cells
such as mast cells, basophils, eosinophils, and Th2 cells contributes to
unresolved inflammatory conditions. Additionally, Th2-­type cytokines
(IL-­3, IL-­5, GM-­CSF) secreted during allergic reactions can prolong
survival of allergic effector cells by delaying apoptosis. Local differentiation of tissue-­infiltrating eosinophil precursors induced by IL-­5
results in self-­generation of eosinophils, further sustaining damage of
local tissue. Tissue remodeling leading to irreversible changes in target
organs is also a feature of chronic allergic disease. In asthma, remodeling involves thickening of the airway walls and submucosal tissue, as
well as smooth muscle hypertrophy and hyperplasia, which are associated with a decline in lung function. This is an unexpected role for
eosinophils in airway remodeling as well as chronic inflammation. In
atopic dermatitis, lichenification is an obvious manifestation of skin
remodeling.
Generally, it is considered that a type 2 immune response underlines
a majority of asthma cases, atopic dermatitis, chronic rhinosinusitis,
and allergic rhinitis as a general characteristic of an immune/inflammatory response. Type 2 immune response involves Th2 cells, type 2 B
cells, ILC2, IL-­4–secreting NK T cells, basophils, eosinophils, and mast
cells and their major cytokines. From a complex network of cytokines,
IL-­4, IL-­5, IL-­9, and IL-­13 are mainly secreted from the immune system cells, and IL-­25, IL-­31, IL-­33, and TSLP from tissue cells, particularly epithelial cells. Many asthma-­related antigens, such as protease
allergens, fungal extracts, and viral infection, trigger IL-­33, TSLP, and
IL-­25 production from epithelial cells and various immune cells and
induce eosinophilic asthma–like airway inflammation through activation of lung ILC2s.
IL-­31 plays a role in pruritus in atopic dermatitis. Th2 cytokines
do not only maintain allergic inflammation but also influence tissue
remodeling by activating resident cells in target organs; IL-­4, IL-­9, and
IL-­13 induce mucus hypersecretion and metaplasia of mucus cells;
IL-­4 and IL-­13 stimulate fibroblast growth and synthesis of extracellular matrix proteins; and IL-­5 and IL-­9 increase subepithelial fibrosis.
TGF-­β produced by eosinophils and fibroblasts can also enhance subepithelial fibrosis. IL-­11 expressed by eosinophils and epithelial cells
contributes to subepithelial fibrosis, in addition to enhancing deposition of collagen and the accumulation of fibroblasts. The resulting
tissue injury amplifies further epithelial injury through proinflammatory cytokine release, extracellular matrix deposition in target organs,
and angiogenesis. Genetic predisposition to aberrant injury-­repair
responses may contribute to chronicity of illness. Once the allergic
immune response is established, it can be self-­perpetuating due to a
general type 2 immune response and can lead to chronic disease in
genetically predisposed individuals. The subsequent infiltration of Th1
cells and Th17 cells enhances the inflammatory potential of allergic
effector cells and contributes to chronic tissue inflammatory responses
through the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. In
addition, an autoimmune response might be playing a causative role
in allergic inflammation resulting from possible mechanisms through
IgE autoantibodies, IgG autoantibodies, and Th1-­cell and Th17-­cell
autoreactivity.

GENETIC BASIS OF ATOPY

Allergic diseases are complex genetic conditions susceptible to environmental triggers. Several major groups of genes are associated with
allergic diseases: genes that regulate systemic expression of atopy

(increased IgE synthesis, eosinophilia, mast cell responses) and that are
usually expressed among various allergic diseases, genes that control
barrier function in specific target organs (e.g., skin in atopic dermatitis,
lung in asthma, GI tract in food allergy), and genes encoding pattern-­
recognition receptors of the innate immune system that engage microbial pathogens and influence adaptive immune responses (Fig. 182.5).
Once allergic responses have been initiated, a genetic predisposition
to chronic allergic inflammation and aberrant injury-­repair responses
contribute to tissue remodeling and persistent disease.
Atopic diseases have a strong familial predisposition, with approximately 60% heritability found in twin studies of asthma and atopic
dermatitis. The 5q23-­35 region comprises several genes implicated in
allergic disease pathogenesis, including genes coding for Th2 cytokines
(IL-­3, IL-­4, IL-­5, IL-­9, IL-­13, GM-­CSF). Among these, IL4 is a well-­
studied potential candidate gene. A nucleotide change at position 589
of the IL4 promoter region is associated with the formation of a unique
binding site for nuclear factor for activated T cells (NF-­AT) transcription factor, increased IL-­4 gene transcription, higher NF-­AT binding
affinity, and increased IgE production. Similarly, IL13 coding region
variants have been associated with asthma and atopic dermatitis. An
association has been found between atopy and a gain-­of-­function polymorphism on chromosome 16, which codes for the α subunit of the
IL-­4R. This finding is consistent with the important role of IL-­4, IL-­13,
and their receptors in the immunopathogenesis of allergic diseases.
Genome-­wide searches have also linked atopy to chromosome region
11q13. The gene encoding the β subunit of FcεRI-­β has been proposed
to be the candidate gene in this region. The β subunit gene modifies the
FcεRI activity on mast cells, and several variants of FcεRI-­β are associated with asthma and atopic dermatitis. Chromosome 6 contains genes
coding for human leukocyte antigen class I and class II molecules,
which regulate the specificity and intensity of the immune responses to
specific allergens. IgE responses to specific allergens, such as ragweed
antigen Amb a V and mite allergen Der p I, have been linked to specific
MHC class II loci. TNF-­α, a key cytokine that contributes to the influx
of inflammatory cells, is also located on chromosome 6. TNF-­α polymorphisms are associated with asthma. A recent genome-­wide association study showed that genetic polymorphisms in the gene encoding
IL-­33, which is a major activator of ILC2s, and its receptor IL-­1RL1
(ST2) are strongly linked to asthma development.
Barrier dysfunction has a key role in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases. Genetic linkage studies of atopic dermatitis have demonstrated
the importance of chromosome 1q21, which contains a cluster of genes
involved in epidermal differentiation. Filaggrin is a protein that is
essential in the formation of the stratum corneum. Null pathogenic
variants of the filaggrin gene are strongly associated with early-­onset
and severe atopic dermatitis. Pathogenic variants in the gene encoding
the serine protease inhibitor SPINK5 has been shown to cause Netherton disease, a single-­gene disorder associated with erythroderma,
food allergy, and high serum IgE levels. A common polymorphism
in SPINK5 (in particular, Glu420Lys) increases the risk of developing atopic dermatitis and asthma. SPINK5 is expressed in the outer
epidermis and is thought to be critical to neutralizing the proteolytic
activity of Staphylococcus aureus and common allergens such as Der
p I, which use these proteases to penetrate the skin to induce allergic
responses. Barrier dysfunction is involved in other allergic diseases,
such as asthma and rhinosinusitis, but likely involves other barrier
genes, such as those encoding tight junctions. Epithelial tight junctions
form a strong barrier on the apical side of mucosal epithelial cells and
stratum granulosum of the skin. Epithelial tight junction defects shown
in asthma and atopic dermatitis have been linked to two mechanisms,
such as polymorphisms in certain claudin molecules or epigenetic regulation of the tight junction molecules. Epithelial cells obtained from
asthmatic tissues cannot form a strong barrier in cultures. Chemical
inhibition of histone deacetylases strengthens the barrier development
capacity of these epithelial cells.
Candidate genes associated with asthma susceptibility have been
identified by positional cloning: GPRA (G-­protein–coupled receptor for asthma susceptibility on chromosome 7p14), ADAM-­33 (a
disintegrin and metalloproteinase 33 on chromosome 20p), and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 182 u Allergy and the Immunologic Basis of Atopic Disease

1373

Asthma
AB13BP, ACO1,
ATG3, BTNL2, C11orf71, C1orf100,
C5orf56, CDHR3,CDK2,CHCHD9, COL22A1,
CRB1, CRCT1, CTNNA3, DENND1B, EDIL3, FAM19A2
GAB1, GSDMA, HPSE2, IGSF3, IKZF4, IL15RA, IL2RA,
IL2RB, IL5RA, IL6R, KIAA1271, KLF6, KLHL5, LOC338591,
LOC729675, MKLN1, NDFIP1, NOTCH4, ORMDL3, PBX2,
PCDH20, PDE4D, PRKCQ, PRKG1, PSAP, PTHLH, PYHIN1,
RBM17, RORA, SCG3, SIM2, SLC22A5, SLC30A8, SPATS2L,
T, TLE4, TNS1, VAV3, XKR6, XPR1, ZNF432, ZNF614,
ZNF665, ZNF841

Atopic
dermatitis

C6orf10
TLR1,
TSLP,
WDR36
IL1RL1

ACTL9, ADO,
BAT1, CARD11,
CCDC80, CREBL1,
CYP24A1, EGR2,
FLG, GLB1, GPSM3,
KIF3A, LOC100505634,
LOC100630917,
MIR1208, NCF4,
NLRP10, OR10A3,
OVOL1, PFDN4,
TNXB, ZNF365

GSDMB,
IKZF3, IL33,
RANBP6,
SMAD3
Rhinitis

IL18R1

CLEC16A,
ZBTB10

IL18RAP

CROCC, DAB2,
DHRS7, ENTPD6,
ETS1, FOXA1, GATA3,
GLI3, IL1RL2, IL21R,
NFATC2, PEX14,
PLCL1, PPM1A,
PTGER4, SEMA6A,
TPD52, TTC6

LRRC32
EMSY,
HLA-C

TMEM232,
ID2, IL4R
ADAD1, BCL6,
CAMK4, MICA,
TLR6, TLR10

ANAPC1, COL21A1,
FAM114A1, HLA-B, IL21,
KIAA1109, MICB, MIR574,
MYC, PVT1, SGK493

LPP

HLA region,
SLC25A46
IL13,
RAD50
IL2, STAT6

Atopy

ABL2, CDH13, CRIM1,
DARC, DNAH5, DOCK10,
EPS15, FCER1A, HCG27,
HLA-A, HLA-G, LOC730217,
NAB2, OPRK1, OR10J3,
OR6X1, SUCLG2, SYNPO2,
TLN1, TMEM108, WWP2,
ZNF71
Serum lgE

Fig. 182.5 Overlapping sets of genes have been reported in genome-­wide association studies (GWASs) for asthma, rhinitis, serum immunoglobu-

lin E (IgE) levels, atopy, and atopic dermatitis, supporting a common genetic element within the mechanisms predisposing individuals toward different allergic disease phenotypes. GWASs have also identified many genes in association with only one allergic disease phenotype; these most likely
represent the tissue-­specific component of each allergic disease (e.g., FLG in the epidermal barrier in atopic dermatitis). More GWASs have been
conducted analyzing genetic variants associated with asthma than with other allergic diseases. In the future it is likely that more risk variants for other
allergic diseases will be identified. Genes reported in more than one GWAS are shown in bold font. The genes reported for SNPs detected to be
significantly associated (P ≤ 1 × 10−5) with each allergic disease phenotype were obtained by searching the National Human Genome Research Institute GWAS catalog. (From Holloway JW. The genetics of allergic disease and asthma. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds. Pediatric
Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021. Fig. 3.3, p 22.)

DPP10 (dipeptidyl peptidase 10 on chromosome 2q14). The functions of these genes do not fit into classical pathways of atopy and
therefore provide new insights into asthma pathogenesis. GPRA
encodes a G-­protein–coupled receptor, with isoforms expressed in
bronchial epithelial cells and smooth muscle in asthmatic persons,
suggesting an important role for these tissues in asthma. ADAM-­
33 is expressed in bronchial smooth muscle and has been linked
to bronchial hyperresponsiveness. DPP10 encodes a dipeptidyl
dipeptidase that can remove the terminal 2 peptides from certain
proinflammatory chemokines, a change that may modulate allergic
inflammation.

Pattern-­recognition receptors of the innate immune system, which
are expressed by epithelial cells and DCs, are associated with disease
susceptibility. These receptors recognize specific microbial components. Polymorphisms in CD14 (engages endotoxin), Toll-­like receptor
2 (which engages S. aureus), and T-­cell immunoglobulin domain and
mucin domain (which engage hepatitis A virus) correlate with asthma
and/or atopic dermatitis susceptibility. Dysregulation of these frontline
immune defense systems would permit abnormal response to common
environmental allergens.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 182 u Allergy and the Immunologic Basis of Atopic Disease
Bibliography
Akdis CA. Does the epithelial barrier hypothesis explain the increase in allergy, autoimmunity and other chronic conditions? Nat Rev Immunol. 2021;32(22):749–751.
Akdis CA, Arkwright PD, Brüggen MC, et al. Type 2 immunity in the skin and lungs.
Allergy. 2020;75(7):1582–1605.
Bachert C, Akdis CA. Phenotypes and emerging endotypes of chronic rhinosinusitis.
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2016;4(4):621–628.
Celebi Sözener Z, Cevhertas L, Nadeau K, Akdis M, Akdis CA. Environmental factors
in epithelial barrier dysfunction. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;145(6):1517–1528.
Cevhertas L, Ogulur I, Maurer DJ, et al. Advances and recent developments in asthma in 2020. Allergy. 2020;75(12):3124–3146.
Kortekaas Krohn I, Shikhagaie MM, Golebski K, et al. Emerging roles of innate lymphoid cells in inflammatory diseases: Clinical implications. Allergy.
2018;73(4):837–850.
Kuo IH, Yoshida T, De Benedetto A, et al. The cutaneous innate immune response in
patients with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013;131:266–278.
Liu AH, Anderson 3rd WC, Dutmer CM, et al. Advances in asthma 2015: across the
lifespan. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016;138(2):397–404.
Mjösberg J, Spits H. Human innate lymphoid cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2016;138(5):1265–1276.

1373.e1

Morita H, Kubo T, Rückert B, Ravindran A, et al. Induction of human regulatory innate lymphoid cells from group 2 innate lymphoid cells by retinoic acid. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2019;143(6). 2190–2201.e9.
Palomares O, Akdis M, Martín-­Fontecha M, Akdis CA. Mechanisms of immune
regulation in allergic diseases: the role of regulatory T and B cells. Immunol Rev.
2017;278(1):219–236.
Tang TS, Bieber T, Williams HC. Does “autoreactivity” play a role in atopic dermatitis? J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012;129:1209–1215.
Van de Veen W, Stanic B, Yaman G, et al. IgG4 production is confined to human IL-­
10-­producing regulatory B cells that suppress antigen-­specific immune responses.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013;131:1204–1212.
Vercelli D. Remembrance of things past: HLA genes come back on the allergy stage. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 129:846–847
Wang M, Tan G, Eljaszewicz A, et al. Laundry detergents and detergent residue after
rinsing directly disrupt tight junction barrier integrity in human bronchial epithelial cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019;143(5):1892–1903.
Zabielinski M, McLeod MP, Aber C, et al. Trends and antibiotic susceptibility
patterns of methicillin-­
resistant and methicillin-­
sensitive Staphylococcus
aureus in an outpatient dermatology facility. JAMA Dermatol. 2013;149(4):427–
432.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1374 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

Chapter 183

Diagnosis of Allergic
Disease
Supinda Bunyavanich, Jacob Kattan, and
Scott H. Sicherer
ALLERGY HISTORY

Obtaining a complete history from the allergic patient involves eliciting a description of all symptoms along with their timing and duration,
exposure to common allergens, and responses to previous therapies.
Because patients often suffer from more than one allergic disease, the
presence or absence of other allergic diseases, including allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, asthma, food allergy, eosinophilic esophagitis, atopic
dermatitis, and drug allergy, should be determined. A family history
of allergic disease is common and is one of the most important factors
predisposing a child to the development of allergies. The risk of allergic
disease in a child approaches 50% when one parent is allergic and 66%
when both parents are allergic, with maternal history of atopy having a
greater effect than paternal history.
Several characteristic behaviors are often seen in allergic children.
Because of nasal pruritus and rhinorrhea, children with allergic rhinitis often perform the allergic salute by rubbing their nose upward
with the palm of their hand. This repeated maneuver may give rise
to the nasal crease, a horizontal wrinkle over the bridge of the nose.
Characteristic vigorous rubbing of the eyes with the thumb and side of
the fist is frequently observed in children with allergic conjunctivitis.
The allergic cluck is produced when the tongue is placed against the
roof of the mouth to form a seal and withdrawn rapidly in an effort to
scratch the palate. The presence of other symptoms, such as fever, unilateral nasal obstruction, and purulent nasal discharge, suggests other
diagnoses.
The timing of onset and the progression of symptoms are relevant.
The onset of recurrent or persistent nasal symptoms coinciding with
placement in a daycare center might suggest recurrent infection rather
than allergy. When patients present with a history of episodic acute
symptoms, it is important to review the setting in which symptoms
occur as well as the activities and exposures that immediately precede
their onset. Symptoms associated with lawn mowing suggest allergy
to grass pollen or fungi, whereas if symptoms occur in homes with
pets, animal dander sensitivity is an obvious consideration. Reproducible reactions after ingestion of a specific food raise the possibility of
food allergy. When symptoms wax and wane but evolve gradually and
are more chronic in duration, a closer look at whether the timing and
progression of symptoms correlate with exposure to a seasonal aeroallergen is warranted.
Aeroallergens, such as pollens and fungal spores, are prominent
causes of allergic disease. The concentrations of these allergens in outdoor air fluctuate seasonally. Correlating symptoms with seasonal pollination patterns of geographically relevant plants and trees along with
information provided by local pollen counts can aid in identifying the
allergen. Throughout most of the United States, trees pollinate in the
early spring, grasses pollinate in the late spring and early summer, and
weeds pollinate in late summer through the fall. The presence of fungal spores in the atmosphere follows a seasonal pattern in the northern United States, with spore counts rising with the onset of warmer
weather and peaking in late summer months, only to recede again with
the first frost through the winter. In warmer regions of the southern
United States, fungal spores and grass pollens may cause symptoms on
a perennial basis.
Rather than experiencing seasonal symptoms, some patients suffer allergic symptoms year-­round. In these patients, sensitization to
perennial allergens usually found indoors, such as dust mites, animal

dander, cockroaches, and fungi, warrants consideration. Species of
certain fungi, such as Aspergillus and Penicillium, are found indoors,
whereas Alternaria is found in both indoor and outdoor environments.
Cockroach and rodent allergens are often problematic in urban environments. Patients sensitive to perennial allergens often also become
sensitized to seasonal allergens and experience baseline symptoms
year-­round with worsening during the pollen seasons.
The age of the patient is an important consideration in identifying
potential allergens. Infants and young children are often first sensitized
to allergens that are in their environment on a continuous basis, such
as dust mites, animal dander, and fungi. Sensitization to seasonal allergens usually takes several seasons of exposure to develop and is thus
unlikely to be a significant trigger of symptoms in infants and toddlers.
Food allergies are more common in infants and young children,
resulting primarily in cutaneous, gastrointestinal, and, less frequently,
respiratory and cardiovascular symptoms. Symptoms of immediate or
IgE-­mediated hypersensitivity food reactions typically develop within
minutes to 2 hours after ingestion of the offending food. Symptoms
of non–IgE-­mediated food allergies are often delayed or chronic (see
Chapter 192).
Complete information from previous evaluations and prior treatments for allergic disease should be reviewed, including impact of
changes in local environment (e.g., home vs school), response to medications, elimination diets, and duration and impact of allergen immunotherapy (if applicable). Improvement in symptoms with medications
or avoidance strategies used to treat allergic disease provides additional
evidence for an allergic process.
A thorough environmental survey should be performed, focusing
on potential sources of allergen and/or irritant exposure, particularly
when respiratory symptoms (upper/lower) are reported. The age and
type of the dwelling, how it is heated and cooled, the use of humidifiers
or air filtration units, and any history of water damage should be noted.
Forced air heating may stir up dust mite, fungi, and animal allergens.
The irritant effects of wood-­burning stoves, fireplaces, and kerosene
heaters may provoke respiratory symptoms. Increased humidity or
water damage in the home is often associated with greater exposure
to dust mites and fungi. Carpeting serves as a reservoir for dust mites,
fungi, and animal dander. The number of domestic pets and their
movements about the house should be ascertained. Special attention
should be focused on the bedroom, where a child spends a significant
proportion of time. The age and type of bedding, the use of dust mite
covers on pillows and mattresses, the number of stuffed animals, type
of window treatments, and the accessibility of pets to the room should
be reviewed. The number of smokers living in the home, and what and
where they smoke is useful information. Activities that might result
in exposure to allergens or respiratory irritants such as paint fumes,
cleansers, sawdust, or glues should be identified. Similar information
should be obtained in other environments where the child spends long
periods, such as a relative’s home or school setting.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

In patients with asthma, spirometry should be performed. If respiratory distress is observed, pulse oximetry should be performed.
The child presenting with a chief complaint of rhinitis or rhinoconjunctivitis should be observed for mouth breathing, paroxysms of
sneezing, sniffing/snorting, throat clearing, and rubbing of the nose
and eyes (representing pruritus; see Chapter 184). Infants should be
observed during feeding for nasal obstruction severe enough to interfere with feeding or for more obvious signs of aspiration or gastroesophageal reflux. The frequency and nature of coughing that occurs
during the interview and any positional change in coughing or wheezing should be noted. Children with asthma should be observed for
congested or wet cough, tachypnea at rest, retractions, and audible
wheezes, which may worsen with crying. Patients with atopic dermatitis should be monitored for repetitive scratching and the extent of skin
involvement.
Because children with severe asthma as well as those receiving
chronic or frequent oral corticosteroids may experience growth suppression, an accurate height should be plotted at regular intervals. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 183 u Diagnosis of Allergic Disease
use of inhaled glucocorticoids in prepubertal children is associated
with a small initial decrease in attained height (1 cm) that may persist as a reduction in adult height. Poor weight gain in a child with
chronic chest symptoms should prompt consideration of cystic fibrosis. Anthropometric measures are also important to monitor in those
on restricted diets because of multiple food allergies or eosinophilic
esophagitis. Blood pressure should be measured to evaluate for steroid-­
induced hypertension. The patient with acute asthma may present with
pulsus paradoxus, defined as a drop in systolic blood pressure during
inspiration >10 mm Hg. Moderate to severe airway obstruction is indicated by a decrease of >20 mm Hg. An increased heart rate may be the
result of an asthma flare or the use of a β-­agonist or decongestant. Fever
is not caused by allergy alone and should prompt consideration of an
infectious process, which may exacerbate asthma.
Parents are often concerned about blue-­gray to purple discolorations
beneath their child’s lower eyelids, which can be attributed to venous
stasis and are referred to as allergic shiners (Fig. 183.1). They are found
in up to 60% of allergic patients and almost 40% of patients without
allergic disease. Thus “shiners” may suggest, but are not diagnostic of,
allergic disease. In contrast, the Dennie-­Morgan folds (Dennie lines)
are a feature of atopy (see Fig. 183.1). These are prominent infraorbital
skin folds that extend in an arc from the inner canthus beneath and
parallel to the lower lid margin.
In patients with allergic conjunctivitis, involvement of the eyes is
typically bilateral (see Chapter 188). Examination of the conjunctiva
reveals varying degrees of lacrimation, conjunctival injection, and
edema. In severe cases, periorbital edema involving primarily the lower
eyelids or chemosis (conjunctival edema that is gelatinous in appearance) may be observed. The classic discharge associated with allergic
conjunctivitis is usually described as “stringy” or “ropy.” In children
with vernal conjunctivitis, a more severe, chronic phenotype, examination of the tarsal conjunctiva may reveal cobblestoning. Keratoconus,
or protrusion of the cornea, may occur in patients with vernal conjunctivitis or periorbital atopic dermatitis as a result of repeated trauma
produced by persistent rubbing of the eyes. Children treated with high-­
dose or chronic corticosteroids are at risk for development of posterior
subcapsular cataracts.

The external ear should be examined for eczematous changes in
patients with atopic dermatitis, including the postauricular area and
base of the earlobe. Because otitis media with effusion is common
in children with allergic rhinitis, pneumatic otoscopy should be performed to evaluate for the presence of fluid in the middle ear and to
exclude infection.
Examination of the nose in allergic patients may reveal the presence of a nasal crease. Nasal patency should be assessed, and the nose
examined for structural abnormalities affecting nasal airflow, such as
septal deviation, turbinate hypertrophy, and nasal polyps. Decrease
or absence of the sense of smell should raise concern about chronic
sinusitis or nasal polyps. Nasal polyps in children should raise concerns of cystic fibrosis. The nasal mucosa in allergic rhinitis is classically described as pale to purple compared with the beefy-­red mucosa
of patients with nonallergic rhinitis. Allergic nasal secretions are typically thin and clear. Purulent secretions suggest another cause of rhinitis. The frontal and maxillary sinuses should be palpated to identify
tenderness to pressure that might be associated with acute sinusitis.
Examination of the lips may reveal cheilitis caused by drying of
the lips from continuous mouth breathing or repeated licking of the
lips in an attempt to replenish moisture and relieve discomfort (lip
licker’s dermatitis). Tonsillar and adenoidal hypertrophy along with
a history of impressive snoring raises the possibility of obstructive
sleep apnea. The posterior pharynx should be examined for the presence of postnasal drip and posterior pharyngeal lymphoid hyperplasia
(“cobblestoning”).
Chest findings in asthmatic children vary significantly and may
depend on disease duration, severity, and activity. In a child with well-­
controlled asthma, the chest should appear entirely normal on examination between asthma exacerbations. Examination of the same child
during an acute episode of asthma may reveal hyperinflation, tachypnea, use of accessory muscles (retractions), wheezing, and decreased
air exchange with a prolonged expiratory time. Tachycardia may be
caused by the asthma exacerbation or accompanied by jitteriness after
treatment with β-­agonists. Decreased airflow or rhonchi and wheezes
over the right chest may be noted in children with mucus plugging
and right middle lobe atelectasis. The presence of cyanosis indicates
severe respiratory compromise. Unilateral wheezing after an episode
of coughing and choking in a small child without a history of previous
respiratory illness suggests foreign body aspiration. Wheezing limited
to the larynx in association with inspiratory stridor may be seen in
older children and adolescents with vocal cord dysfunction. Digital
clubbing is rarely seen in patients with uncomplicated asthma and
should prompt further evaluation to rule out other potential chronic
diagnoses, such as cystic fibrosis.
The skin of the allergic patient should be examined for evidence of
urticaria/angioedema or atopic dermatitis (see Chapters 189 and 186).
Xerosis, or dry skin, is the most common skin abnormality of allergic
children. Keratosis pilaris, often found on facial cheeks and extensor
surfaces of the upper arms and thighs, is a benign condition characterized by skin-­colored or slightly pink papules caused by keratin plugs
lodged in the openings of hair follicles. Examination of the skin of the
palms and soles may reveal thickened skin and exaggerated palmar and
plantar creases (hyperlinearity) in children with moderate to severe
atopic dermatitis.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
In Vitro Tests

Fig. 183.1 Bilateral Dennie-­
Morgan folds. Several linear wrinkles

beneath the lower eyelashes (arrow) associated with bilateral allergic
shiners: dark circles beneath the lower eyelid (arrowheads). (From Blanc
S, Bourrier T, Albertini M, et al. Dennie-­Morgan fold plus dark circles:
suspect atopy at first sight. J Pediatr. 2015;166:1541.)

1375

Allergic diseases are often associated with increased numbers of eosinophils circulating in the peripheral blood and invading the tissues and
secretions of target organs. Eosinophilia, defined as the presence of >500
eosinophils/μL in peripheral blood, is the most common hematologic
abnormality of allergic patients. Seasonal increases in the number of circulating eosinophils may be observed in sensitized patients after exposure to
allergens such as tree, grass, and weed pollens. The number of circulating
eosinophils can be suppressed by certain infections and systemic corticosteroids. In certain pathologic conditions, such as drug reactions, eosinophilic pneumonias, and eosinophilic esophagitis, significantly increased
numbers of eosinophils may be present in the target organ in the absence

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1376 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 183.1  Differential Diagnosis of Childhood Eosinophilia
PHYSIOLOGIC
Prematurity
Infants receiving hyperalimentation
Hereditary
INFECTIOUS
Parasitic (with tissue-­invasive helminths, e.g., trichinosis,
strongyloidiasis, pneumocystosis, filariasis, cysticercosis, cutaneous
and visceral larva migrans, echinococcosis)
Bacterial (brucellosis, tularemia, cat-­scratch disease,
Chlamydia)
Fungal (histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis)
Mycobacterial (tuberculosis, leprosy)
Viral (HIV-­1, HTLV-­1, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, Epstein-­Barr
virus)
PULMONARY
Allergic (rhinitis, asthma)
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-­Strauss
syndrome)
Loeffler syndrome
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Eosinophilic pneumonia (chronic, acute)
Pulmonary interstitial eosinophilia
DERMATOLOGIC
Atopic dermatitis
Pemphigus
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Infantile eosinophilic pustular folliculitis
Eosinophilic fasciitis (Schulman syndrome)
Eosinophilic cellulitis (Wells syndrome)
Kimura disease (angiolymphoid hyperplasia with
eosinophilia)

HEMATOLOGIC/ONCOLOGIC
Neoplasm (lung, gastrointestinal, uterine)
Leukemia/lymphoma
Myelofibrosis
Myeloproliferative (FIP1L1-­PDGFRA positive) hypereosinophilic
syndrome
Lymphatic hypereosinophilic syndrome
Systemic mastocytosis
IMMUNOLOGIC
T-­cell immunodeficiencies
Hyper-­IgE (Job) syndromes
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS)
Sarcoidosis
Graft-­versus-­host disease
Drug hypersensitivity including drug reaction with eosinophilia and
systemic symptoms (DRESS)
Postirradiation
Postsplenectomy
ENDOCRINE
Addison disease
Hypopituitarism
CARDIOVASCULAR
Loeffler disease (fibroplastic endocarditis)
Congenital heart disease
Hypersensitivity vasculitis
Eosinophilic myocarditis
GASTROINTESTINAL
Benign proctocolitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases (EGID)

FIP1L1-­PDGFRA, FIP1-­like 1–platelet-­derived growth factor receptor α; HTLV, human T-­lymphotropic virus 1.

of peripheral blood eosinophilia. Increased numbers of eosinophils are
observed in a wide variety of disorders in addition to allergy; eosinophil
counts >1,500 without an identifiable etiology should suggest one of the
two hypereosinophilic syndromes (Table 183.1; see Chapter 169).
Nasal and bronchial secretions may be examined for the presence of
eosinophils and neutrophils. The presence of eosinophils in the sputum
of patients with atopic asthma is frequently seen. An increased number
of eosinophils in a smear of nasal mucus with Hansel stain is a more sensitive indicator of nasal allergies than peripheral blood eosinophilia and
can aid in distinguishing allergic rhinitis from other causes of rhinitis.
An elevated IgE value is often found in the serum of allergic patients,
because IgE is the primary antibody associated with immediate hypersensitivity reactions. IgE values are measured in international units
(IU), with 1 IU equal to 2.4 ng of IgE. Serum IgE levels gradually rise
over the first years of life to peak in the teen years and decrease steadily
thereafter. Additional factors, such as genetic influences, gender, certain diseases, and exposure to cigarette smoke and allergens, also affect
serum IgE levels. Total serum IgE levels may increase 2-­to 4-­fold during and immediately after the pollen season and then gradually decline
until the next pollen season. Comparison of total IgE levels among
patients with allergic diseases reveals that those with atopic dermatitis
tend to have the highest levels, whereas patients with allergic asthma
generally have higher levels than those with allergic rhinitis. Although
average total IgE levels are higher in populations of allergic patients
than in comparable populations without allergic disease, the overlap
in levels is such that the diagnostic value of a total IgE level is poor.
Approximately half of patients with allergic disease have total IgE levels
in the normal range. However, measurement of total IgE is indicated
when the diagnosis of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is

suspected because total serum IgE concentration >1,000 ng/mL is a
criterion for diagnosis of this disorder (see Chapter 283.1). Total serum
IgE may also be elevated in several nonallergic diseases (Table 183.2).
The presence of IgE specific for a particular allergen can be documented in vivo by skin testing or in vitro by the measurement of
allergen-­specific IgE (sIgE) levels in the serum (Table 183.3). The
first test for documenting the presence of sIgE was called the radioallergosorbent test (RAST) because it used a radiolabeled anti-­IgE
antibody. RAST has been replaced by an improved generation of automated enzymatic sIgE immunoassays. These immunoassays typically
use solid-­phase supports to which allergens of an individual allergen
extract are bound. A small amount of the patient’s serum is incubated
with the allergen-­coated support. The allergen-­coated support bound
to the patient’s sIgE is then incubated with enzyme-­conjugated antihuman IgE. Incubation of this sIgE–antihuman IgE complex with a fluorescent substrate of the conjugated enzyme results in the generation of
fluorescence that is proportional to the amount of sIgE in the serum
sample. The amount of sIgE is calculated by interpolation from a standard calibration curve and reported in arbitrary mass units (kilo-­IU of
allergen-­specific antibody per unit volume of sample, kUA/L). Laboratory reports may specify classes, counts, or units, but quantification of
results in kUA/L is most useful. sIgE immunoassays are available for
foods, environmental allergens, insect venoms, natural rubber latex,
and a small number of β-­lactam drugs. The sensitivity and specificity of immunoassays for particular allergens vary widely from 30–95%.
These immunoassays are not diagnostic for allergy and should not be
used for allergy screening. Only targeted sIgE levels for specific antigens should be measured when there is a clinical indication to suspect
a specific allergy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 183 u Diagnosis of Allergic Disease
Table 183.2  Nonallergic Diseases Associated with Increased Serum IgE Concentrations
PARASITIC INFESTATIONS
Ascariasis
Capillariasis
Echinococcosis
Fascioliasis
Filariasis
Hookworm
Onchocerciasis
Malaria
Paragonimiasis
Schistosomiasis
Strongyloidiasis
Trichinosis
Visceral larva migrans

NEOPLASTIC DISEASES
Hodgkin disease
IgE myeloma
Bronchial carcinoma
OTHER DISEASES AND DISORDERS
Alopecia areata
Bone marrow transplantation
Burns
Cystic fibrosis
Dermatitis, chronic acral
Erythema nodosum, streptococcal infection
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Kawasaki disease
Liver disease
Medication related
Nephritis, drug-­induced interstitial
Nephrotic syndrome
Pemphigus, bullous
Polyarteritis nodosa, infantile
Primary pulmonary hemosiderosis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis

INFECTIONS
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Candidiasis, systemic
Coccidioidomycosis
Cytomegalovirus mononucleosis
HIV type 1 infections
Infectious mononucleosis (Epstein-­Barr virus)
Leprosy
Pertussis
Viral respiratory infections
IMMUNODEFICIENCY
Autosomal dominant hyper-­IgE syndrome (STAT3 variants)
Autosomal recessive hyper-­IgE syndrome (DOCK8, TYK2 variants)
IgA deficiency, selective
Nezelof syndrome (cellular immunodeficiency with immunoglobulins)
Thymic hypoplasia (DiGeorge anomaly)
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome

Table 183.3  Determination of Allergen-­Specific IgE by Skin Testing vs In Vitro Testing
VARIABLE

SKIN TEST*

sIgE ASSAY

Risk of allergic reaction

Yes (especially ID)

No

Relative sensitivity

High

High

Affected by antihistamines

Yes

No

Affected by corticosteroids

Usually not

No

Affected by extensive dermatitis or
dermatographism

Yes

No

Broad selection of antigens

Fewer

Yes

Immediate results

Yes

No

Expensive

No

Yes

Lability of allergens

Yes

No

Results evident to patient

Yes

No

*Skin testing may be the prick test or intradermal (ID) injection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1377

1378 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Component testing refers to diagnostic tests where sIgE is measured
to specific proteins that comprise allergens (e.g., Ara h 2 from peanut,
Bet v 1 from birch pollen), rather than to a mixture of the allergens
extracted from the source. Testing sIgE to component allergens may
add additional diagnostic value by differentiating immune responses
that are directed toward clinically relevant allergenic proteins.

In Vivo Tests

Allergen skin testing is the primary in vivo procedure for the diagnosis of allergic disease. Mast cells with sIgE antibodies attached to high-­
affinity receptors on their surface reside in the skin of allergic patients.
The introduction of minute amounts of an allergen into the skin of
the sensitized patient results in cross linking of IgE antibodies on the
mast cell surface, thereby triggering local mast cell activation. Once
activated, these mast cells release a variety of preformed and newly
generated mediators that act on surrounding tissues. Histamine is the
mediator most responsible for the immediate wheal and flare reactions observed in skin testing. Examination of the site of a positive skin
test result reveals a pruritic wheal surrounded by erythema. The time
course of these reactions is rapid in onset, reaching a peak within 10-­20
minutes and usually resolving over the next 30 minutes.
Skin testing is performed using the prick/puncture technique. With
this technique, a small drop of allergen is applied to the skin surface,
and a tiny amount is introduced into the epidermis by lightly pricking
or puncturing the outer layer of skin through the drop of extract with a
small needle or other device. When the skin-­prick test (SPT) result is
negative but the history suggestive, selective skin testing (for vaccines,
venom, drugs, and aeroallergens) using the intradermal technique
may be performed. This technique involves using a 26-­gauge needle
to inject 0.01-­0.02 mL of an allergen extract diluted 1,000-­to 10-­fold
into the dermis of the arm. Intradermal skin tests are not recommended
for use with food allergens because of the risk of triggering anaphylaxis.
Irritant rather than allergic reactions can occur with intradermal skin
testing if higher concentrations of extracts are used. Although skin-­
prick testing is less sensitive than intradermal skin testing, positive SPT
results tend to correlate better with clinical symptoms.
The number of skin tests performed should be individualized, with
the allergens suggested by the history. A positive and negative control
SPT, using histamine and saline, respectively, is performed with each
set of skin tests. A negative control is necessary to assess for dermatographism, in which reactions are caused merely by applying pressure to overly sensitive skin. A positive control is necessary to establish
the presence of a cutaneous response to histamine. Medications with
antihistaminic properties, in addition to adrenergic agents such as
ephedrine and epinephrine, suppress skin test responses and should be
avoided for appropriate intervals (approximately five half-­lives) before
skin testing. Prolonged courses of systemic corticosteroids may suppress cutaneous reactivity by decreasing the number of tissue mast cells
as well as their ability to release mediators.
Whether identified via serologic or skin testing, detection of sIgE
denotes a sensitized state (i.e., atopy or a tendency toward development of allergic disease) but is not equivalent to a clinically relevant
allergic diagnosis. Many children with positive tests have no clinical symptoms on exposure to the allergen. Increasingly strong test

results (higher serum sIgE results or larger SPT wheal sizes) generally correlate with increasing likelihood of clinical reactivity (but not
severity). Neither serologic testing nor skin testing for allergy is predictive of reaction severity or threshold of reactivity, and these tests
will be negative when the allergy is not IgE mediated, such as in food
protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome. The limitations of these test
modalities underscore the need for a detailed medical history that can
guide the selection and interpretation of test results. Large panels of
indiscriminately performed screening tests may provide misleading
information and are not recommended.
Both serum sIgE tests and SPT are sensitive and have similar diagnostic properties. The benefits of the serologic immunoassays are that
performance is not limited by the presence of skin disease (i.e., active
atopic dermatitis) or medication use (i.e., antihistamines). Advantages of skin testing are that they provide rapid results to the patient/
family during the clinic visit, do not require venipuncture, and are
less costly.
Under certain circumstances, provocation testing is performed to
examine the association between allergen exposure and the development of symptoms. The bronchial provocation test most frequently
performed clinically is the methacholine challenge, which causes
potent bronchoconstriction of asthmatic but not of normal airways; it
is performed to document the presence and degree of bronchial hyperreactivity in a patient with suspected asthma. After baseline spirometry
values are obtained, increasing concentrations of nebulized methacholine are inhaled until a drop occurs in lung function, specifically a 20%
decrease in FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in the first second of expiration), or the patient is able to tolerate the inhalation of a set concentration of methacholine, typically 25 mg/mL.
Oral food challenges are performed to determine whether a specific
food causes symptoms or whether a suspected food can be added to
the diet. Food challenges are performed when the history and results
of skin tests and immunoassays for sIgE are insufficient to clarify the
diagnosis of an allergy. These challenges may be performed in an open
single-­blind, double-­blind, or double-­blind placebo-­controlled manner and involve the ingestion of gradually increasing amounts of the
suspected food at set intervals until the patient either experiences a
reaction or tolerates a normal portion (i.e., one serving size) of the
food openly. Although the double-­blind placebo-­controlled food challenge is currently the gold standard test for diagnosing food allergy, it is
typically only performed in research studies due to the time and labor-­
intensive nature of this method. Because of the potential for significant
allergic reactions, oral food challenges should be performed only in an
appropriately equipped facility with personnel experienced in the performance of food challenges and the treatment of anaphylaxis, including cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is required to confirm the diagnosis of eosinophilic esophagitis. One or more biopsy specimens
from the proximal and distal esophagus must show eosinophil-­
predominant inflammation. With few exceptions, 15 eosinophils per
high-­power field (peak value) is considered a minimum threshold for
the diagnosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 183 u Diagnosis of Allergic Disease
Bibliography
Adkinson Jr NF, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al., eds. Middleton’s allergy: principles &
practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders; 2019.
Cevhertas L, Ogulur I, Maurer DJ, et al. Advances and recent developments in asthma in 2020. Allergy. 2020;75(12):3124–3146.
Dykewicz MS, Wallace DV, Amrol DJ, et al. Rhinitis 2020. A practice parameter update. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;146(4):721–767.
Gonsalves NP, Aceves SS. Diagnosis and treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;145(1):1–7.
Hew M, Menzies-­
Gow A, Hull JH, et al. Systematic Assessment of Difficult-­
to-­
Treat Asthma: Principles and Perspectives. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract.
2020;8(7):2222–2233.

1378.e1

Khan DA, Banerji A, Blumenthal K et al. Drug allergy: A 2022 practice parameter
Update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2022;150(6)1333–1393.
Nowak-­Wegrzyn A, Berin MC, Mehr S. Food Protein-­Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020;8(1):24–35.
Rodrigues J, Kuruvilla ME, Vanijcharoenkarn K, Patel N, Hom MM, Wallace
DV. The spectrum of allergic ocular diseases. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.
2021;126(3):240–254.
Sicherer SH, Warren CM, Dant C, Gupta RS, Nadeau KC. Food Allergy from
Infancy Through Adulthood. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020;8(6):1854–
1864.
Worm M, Vieths S, Mahler V. An update on anaphylaxis and urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2022;150(6):1265–1278.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 184 u Allergic Rhinitis

Chapter 184

Allergic Rhinitis
Tamara T. Perry and Scott H. Sicherer
Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a common chronic disease affecting 20–30% of
children. AR is an inflammatory disorder of the nasal mucosa marked
by nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, and itching, often accompanied by
sneezing and conjunctival inflammation. Its recognition as a major
chronic respiratory disease of children derives from its high prevalence, detrimental effects on quality of life and school performance,
and comorbidities. Children with AR often have related conjunctivitis,
sinusitis, otitis media, serous otitis, hypertrophic tonsils and adenoids,
and eczema. Childhood AR is associated with a threefold increase in
risk for asthma at an older age. Over the past 50 years an upsurge in AR
has been observed throughout the world, with some symptom surveys
reporting incidence rates approaching 40%. Heritability of allergic conditions attests to genetic factors, but the increase stems from changes
in the environment, diet, and the microbiome. The symptoms may
appear in infancy, with the diagnosis generally established by the time
the child reaches age 6 years. The prevalence peaks late in childhood.
Risk factors include family history of atopy and serum IgE higher
than 100 IU/mL before age 6 years. Early life exposures and/or their
absence have a profound influence on the development of the allergic
phenotype. The risk increases in children who are exposed to tobacco
smoke prenatally, and above all before the infants reach 1 year, and
those with heavy exposure to indoor allergens. A critical period exists
early in infancy when the genetically susceptible child is at greatest risk
of sensitization. Delivery by cesarean section is associated with AR and
atopy in children with a parental history of asthma or allergies. This
association may be explained by the lack of exposure to the maternal
microbiota through fecal/vaginal flora during delivery.
Children between 2 and 3 years old who have elevated anticockroach
and antimouse IgE are at increased risk of wheezing, AR, and atopic dermatitis. The occurrence of three or more episodes of rhinorrhea in the
first year of life is associated with AR at age 7 years. Favorably, the exposure to dogs, cats, and endotoxin early in childhood protects against the
development of atopy. Prolonged breastfeeding, not necessarily exclusive, is beneficial. There is also a decreased risk of asthma, AR, and atopic
sensitization with early introduction to wheat, rye, oats, barley, fish, and
eggs. However, reduced diversity of the intestinal microbiota during
infancy is associated with increased risk of allergic disease at school age.

ETIOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION

Two factors necessary for expression of AR are sensitivity to an allergen and the presence of the allergen in the environment. AR classification as seasonal or perennial is giving way to the designations
intermittent and persistent. The two sets of terms are based on different suppositions, but inhalant allergens are the main cause of all
forms of AR irrespective of terminology. AR may also be categorized as
mild-­intermittent, moderate-­severe intermittent, mild-­persistent,
and moderate-­severe persistent (Fig. 184.1). The symptoms of intermittent AR occur on <4 days per week or for <4 consecutive weeks.
In persistent AR, symptoms occur on >4 days per week and/or for >4
consecutive weeks. The symptoms are considered mild when they are
not troublesome, the sleep is normal, there is no impairment in daily
activities, and there is no incapacity at work or school. Severe symptoms result in sleep disturbance and impairment in daily activities and
school performance.
In temperate climates, airborne pollen responsible for exacerbation of intermittent AR appear in distinct phases: trees pollinate in the
spring, grasses in the early summer, and weeds in the late summer. In
temperate climates, mold spores persist outdoors only in the summer,
but in warm climates they persist throughout the year. Symptoms of

1379

intermittent AR typically cease with the appearance of frost. Knowledge of the time of symptom occurrence, the regional patterns of pollination and mold sporulation, and the patient’s allergen-­specific IgE
(sIgE) is necessary to recognize the cause of intermittent AR. Persistent AR is most often associated with the indoor allergens: house dust
mites, animal danders, mice, and cockroaches. Cat and dog allergies
are of major importance in the United States. The allergens from saliva
and sebaceous secretions may remain airborne for a prolonged time.
The ubiquitous major cat allergen, Fel d 1, may be carried on cat owners’ clothing into such “cat-­free” settings as schools and hospitals.

PATHOGENESIS

The exposure of an atopic host to an allergen leads to the production
of sIgE, which is strongly associated with eczema throughout childhood and with asthma and rhinitis after age 4 years. The clinical reactions on reexposure to the allergen have been designated as early-­phase
and late-­phase allergic responses. Bridging of the IgE molecules on
the surface of mast cells by allergen initiates the early-­phase allergic
response, characterized by degranulation of mast cells and release of
preformed and newly generated inflammatory mediators, including
histamine, prostaglandin 2, and the cysteinyl leukotrienes. The late-­
phase allergic response appears 4-­8 hour following allergen exposure.
Inflammatory cells, including basophils, eosinophils, neutrophils, mast
cells, and mononuclear cells, infiltrate the nasal mucosa. Eosinophils
release proinflammatory mediators, including cysteinyl leukotrienes,
cationic proteins, eosinophil peroxidase, and major basic protein, and
serve as a source of interleukin (IL)-­3, IL-­5, granulocyte-­macrophage
colony-­stimulating factor, and IL-­13. Repeated intranasal introduction
of allergens causes “priming,” which is a more brisk response even with
a lesser provocation. Over the course of an allergy season, a multifold
increase in submucosal mast cells takes place. These cells, once thought
to have a role exclusively in the early-­phase allergic response, have an
important function in sustaining chronic allergic disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms of AR may be ignored or mistakenly attributed to a respiratory infection. Older children blow their noses, but younger children
tend to sniff and snort. Nasal itching brings on grimacing, twitching,
and picking of the nose that may result in epistaxis. Children with AR
often perform the allergic salute, an upward rubbing of the nose with
an open palm or extended index finger. This maneuver relieves itching
and briefly unblocks the nasal airway. It also gives rise to the nasal
crease, a horizontal skin fold over the bridge of the nose. The diagnosis
of AR is based on symptoms in the absence of an upper respiratory
tract infection and structural abnormalities. Typical complaints include
Intermittent symptoms
• 4 days/week
• or 4 weeks at a time

Persistent symptoms
• 4 days a week
• and/or  4 weeks at a time

Mild
• Normal sleep
• Normal daily activities
• Normal work and school
• No troublesome symptoms

Moderate-to-severe
One or more items
• Abnormal sleep
• Impairment of daily activities,
sport and leisure
• Difficulties caused at school
or work
• Troublesome symptoms

Fig. 184.1 Global Allergic Rhinitis and Its Impact on Asthma (ARIA)

classification of allergic rhinitis. Every box can be subclassified further
into seasonal or perennial on the basis of timing of symptoms or when
causative and allergen therapeutic factors are considered. For example,
a UK patient with grass pollen allergy might have moderate-­severe persistent seasonal rhinitis in June and July and may be suitable for specific
allergen immunotherapy. (From Scadding GK, Durham SR, Mirakian R,
et al. BASCI guidelines for the management of allergic and non-­allergic
rhinitis. Clin Exp Allergy. 2008;38:19–42.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1380 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
intermittent nasal congestion, itching, sneezing, clear rhinorrhea, and
conjunctival irritation. Symptoms increase with greater exposure to
the responsible allergen. The patients may lose their sense of smell and
taste, though this has also been noted as a symptom of mild COVID-­19
or other viral upper respiratory infections. Some experience headaches,
wheezing, and coughing. Preschoolers with chronic wheezing and rhinitis experience more severe wheezing than children without rhinitis.
Nasal congestion is often more severe at night, inducing mouth breathing and snoring, interfering with sleep, and rousing irritability.
Signs on physical examination include abnormalities of facial development, dental malocclusion, the allergic gape (continuous open-­
mouth breathing), chapped lips, allergic shiners (dark circles under
the eyes; see Fig. 183.1), and the transverse nasal crease. Conjunctival
edema, itching, tearing, and hyperemia are frequent findings. A nasal
exam performed with a source of light and a speculum may reveal clear
nasal secretions; edematous, boggy, and bluish mucus membranes with
little or no erythema; and swollen turbinates that may block the nasal
airway. It may be necessary to use a topical decongestant to perform
an adequate examination. Thick, purulent nasal secretions indicate the
presence of infection.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Evaluation of AR entails a thorough history, including details of the
patient’s environment and diet and a family history of allergic conditions (e.g., eczema, asthma, AR), physical examination, and laboratory evaluation. The history and laboratory findings provide clues
to the provoking factors. Symptoms such as sneezing, rhinorrhea,
nasal itching, and congestion and lab findings of elevated IgE, sIgE
antibodies, and positive allergy skin test results typify AR. Intermittent AR differs from persistent AR by history and skin test results.
Nonallergic rhinitides give rise to sporadic symptoms; their causes
are often unknown. Nonallergic inflammatory rhinitis with eosinophils imitates AR in presentation and response to treatment, but
without elevated IgE antibodies. Vasomotor rhinitis is characterized
by excessive responsiveness of the nasal mucosa to physical stimuli.
Other nonallergic conditions, such as infectious rhinitis, structural
problems (e.g., nasal polyps, septal deviation), rhinitis medicamentosa (caused by overuse of topical vasoconstrictors), hormonal
rhinitis associated with pregnancy or hypothyroidism, neoplasms,
vasculitides, and granulomatous disorders may mimic AR (Table
184.1 and Fig. 184.2). Occupational risks for rhinitis include exposure to allergens (grain dust, insects, latex, enzymes) and irritants
(wood dust, paint, solvents, smoke, cold air).

COMPLICATIONS

AR is associated with complications and comorbid conditions. Undertreated AR detracts from the quality of life, aggravates asthma, and
enhances its progression. Children with AR experience frustration
over their appearance. Allergic conjunctivitis, characterized by itching, redness, and swelling of the conjunctivae, has been reported in
at least 20% of the population and >70% of patients with AR, most
frequently in older children and young adults. The two conditions
share pathophysiologic mechanisms and epidemiologic characteristics (see Chapter 188). Chronic sinusitis is a common complication of
AR, sometimes associated with purulent infection, but most patients
have negative bacterial cultures despite marked mucosal thickening,
and sinus opacification. The inflammatory process is characterized by
marked eosinophilia.
Aspirin-­
exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD) is characterized by the presence of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis,
asthma, and aspirin sensitivity. The pathophysiology of AERD is not
fully understood and symptoms often respond poorly to therapy such
as leukotriene modifiers, intranasal or systemic steroids, and aspirin
desensitization. Surgical removal of nasal polyps is also a common
intervention; however, the rate of recurrence is high with frequent
regrowth of polyps. New biologic therapies are available for patients
with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis and patients with
AERD may benefit from the addition of these new therapies.

Table 184.1  Causes of Rhinitis
ALLERGIC RHINITIS
Seasonal
Perennial
Perennial with seasonal exacerbations
NONALLERGIC RHINITIS
Structural/Mechanical Factors
Deviated septum/septal wall anomalies
Hypertrophic turbinates
Adenoidal hypertrophy
Foreign bodies
Nasal tumors
Benign
Malignant
Choanal atresia
CSF leakage
Infectious
Acute infections
Chronic infections
Congenital syphilis
Inflammatory/Immunologic
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Sarcoidosis
Midline granuloma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sjögren syndrome
Nasal polyposis
Physiologic
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Atrophic rhinitis
Hormonally induced
Hypothyroidism
Pregnancy
Oral contraceptives
Menstrual cycle
Exercise
Atrophic
Drug induced
Rhinitis medicamentosa
Oral contraceptives
Antihypertensive therapy
Aspirin
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Cocaine
Reflex induced
Gustatory rhinitis
Chemical or irritant induced
Posture reflexes
Nasal cycle
Environmental factors
Odors
Temperature (cold air)
Weather/barometric pressure
Occupational (irritants)
OTHER
Nonallergic rhinitis with eosinophilia syndrome
Perennial nonallergic rhinitis (vasomotor rhinitis)
Emotional factors
From Skoner DP. Allergic rhinitis: definition, epidemiology, pathophysiology, detection,
and diagnosis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001;108(1 Suppl);108:S2–S8.

Rhinitis that coexists with asthma may be taken too lightly or completely overlooked. Up to 78% of patients with asthma have AR, and
38% of patients with AR have asthma. Aggravation of AR coincides
with exacerbation of asthma, and treatment of nasal inflammation
reduces bronchospasm, asthma-­related emergency department visits,
and hospitalizations. Postnasal drip associated with AR commonly
causes persistent or recurrent cough. Eustachian tube obstruction

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 184 u Allergic Rhinitis

1381

Rhinitis
Positive skin-prick
test and/or nasal
allergen challenge

Negative skin-prick
test and nasal
allergen challenge

Allergic

Nonallergic
Occupational
(allergic and nonallergic)

Infective

Acute rhinosinusitis

Noninfective

Chronic rhinosinusitis
Exclude predisposing
causes
• Cystic fibrosis
• Primary ciliary dyskinesia
• Immunodeficiency
• Immunopathology
• Polyps

Nonallergic rhinitis
with eosinophilia

Immunopathologic
findings

Consider aspirin,
entopy (local nasal IgE)

• Eosinophilic granulomatosis
with polyangiitis
• Granulomatosis with
polyangiitis
• Sarcoidosis
• Relapsing polychondritis
• Systemic lupus
erythematosus

Structural abnormalities

Hormonal

Drug-induced

Others

• Deviated septum
• Nasal valve dysfunction
• Nasal polyps
• Foreign body
• Adenoidal hypertrophy
• Choanal atresia
• Cerebrospinal fluid leak
• Nasal or CNS tumors

• Pregnancy
• Menstrual cycle
• Puberty
• Hormone
replacement
therapy
• Acromegaly
• Hypothyroidism

• Oral contraceptive
• Rhinitis medicamentosa
• Antihypertensives
• Cocaine use
• Aspirin or NSAID

• Noninfective,
nonallergic rhinitis
• Neurogenic (gustatory,
emotional, cold-air
induced)
• Atrophic
• Gastroesophageal
reflux
• Idiopathic

Fig. 184.2 Diagnostic algorithm for rhinitis. Nasal allergen challenge is a research procedure and is not undertaken routinely. CNS, Central
nervous system; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug. (From Greiner AN, Hellings PW, Rotiroti G, Scadding GK. Allergic rhinitis. Lancet.
2011;378:2112–2120.)

and middle ear effusion are frequent complications. Chronic allergic
inflammation causes hypertrophy of adenoids and tonsils that may
be associated with eustachian tube obstruction, serous effusion, otitis
media, and obstructive sleep apnea. AR is linked to snoring in children.
The association between rhinitis and sleep abnormalities and subsequent daytime fatigue is well documented and may require multidisciplinary intervention.
The Pediatric Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire
(PRQLQ) is suitable for children 6-­12 years old, and the Adolescent
Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire (ARQLQ) is appropriate for patients 12-­17 years old. Children with rhinitis have anxiety
and physical, social, and emotional issues that affect learning and the
ability to integrate with peers. The disorder contributes to headaches
and fatigue, limits daily activities, and interferes with sleep. There is
evidence of impaired cognitive functioning and learning that may be
exacerbated by the adverse effects of sedating medications. AR causes
an estimated 824,000 missed school days and 4,230,000 days of decline
in quality-­of-­life activities. Patients with AR report an impairment in
the activities of daily living similar to patients with moderate to severe
asthma. Some (but not many) patients improve during their teenage
years, only to develop symptoms again as young adults. Symptoms
often abate in the fifth decade of life.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Epicutaneous skin tests provide the best method for detection of sIgE,
with a positive predictive value (PPV) of 48.7% for epidemiologic diagnosis of AR. Skin tests are inexpensive and sensitive, and the risks and
discomfort are minimal. Responses to seasonal respiratory allergens
are rare before two seasons of exposure, and children <1 year old seldom display positive skin test responses to these allergens. To avoid
false-­negative results, montelukast should be withheld for 1 day, most

sedating antihistamine preparations for 3-­4 days, and nonsedating
antihistamines for 5-­7 days. Serum immunoassays for sIgE provide a
suitable alternative (PPV of 43.5%) for patients with dermatographism
or extensive dermatitis, those taking medications that interfere with
mast cell degranulation, others at high risk for anaphylaxis, and some
who cannot cooperate with the procedure. Presence of eosinophils in
the nasal smear supports the diagnosis of AR, and neutrophils suggest
infectious rhinitis. Eosinophilia and measurements of total serum IgE
concentrations have relatively low sensitivity.

TREATMENT

Guideline-­directed management has been shown to improve disease
control. Global Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA)
provides an evidence-­
based approach to treatment and includes
quality-­of-­life measures useful for the evaluation of symptoms and
the assessment of the response to therapy. Safe effective prevention
and relief of symptoms are the current goals of treatment. Specific
measures to limit indoor allergen exposure may reduce the risk of
sensitization and symptoms of allergic respiratory disease. Sealing
the patient’s mattress, pillow, and covers in allergen-­proof encasings
reduces the exposure to mite allergen. Bed linen and blankets should be
washed every week in hot water (>54.4°C [130°F]). The only effective
measure for avoiding animal allergens in the home is the removal of the
pet. Avoidance of pollen and outdoor molds can be accomplished by
staying in a controlled environment. Air conditioning allows for keeping windows and doors closed, reducing the pollen exposure. High-­
efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters lower the counts of airborne
mold spores.
Oral antihistamines help reduce sneezing, rhinorrhea, and ocular
symptoms. Administered as needed, antihistamines provide acceptable treatment for mild-­intermittent disease. Antihistamines have been

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1382 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 184.2  Oral Allergic Rhinitis Treatments (Prescription, Examples)
GENERIC/BRAND

STRENGTH

FORMULATIONS

DOSING

SECOND-­GENERATION ANTIHISTAMINES
Desloratadine
Clarinex Reditabs*

2.5 mg, 5 mg

Orally disintegrating tablet

Children 6-­11 mo of age: 1 mg
once daily

Clarinex Tablets

5 mg

Tabs

Children 12 mo to 5 yr: 1.25 mg
once daily

Clarinex Syrup

0.5 mg/mL

Syrup

Children 6-­11 yr: 2.5 mg once daily
Adults and adolescents ≥12 yr:
5 mg once daily

LEUKOTRIENE ANTAGONIST†
Montelukast
Singulair

10 mg

Tablets

6 mo to 5 yr: 4 mg daily

Singulair Chewables*

4 mg, 5 mg

Chewable tablets

6-­14 yr: 5 mg daily

Singulair Oral Granules

4 mg/packet

Oral granules

>14 yr: 10 mg daily

*Contains phenylalanine
†As advised by the FDA, montelukast should be used to treat allergic rhinitis only in patients who are not treated effectively with or cannot tolerate other alternative therapies.
Dosing recommendations taken in part from Kleinman K, McDaniel L, Molloy M for the Johns Hopkins Hospital. The Harriet Lane Handbook. 22nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

classified as first generation (relatively sedating) or second generation
(relatively nonsedating). Antihistamines usually are administered by
mouth but are also available for topical ophthalmic and intranasal use.
Both first-­and second-­generation antihistamines are available as nonprescription drugs. Second-­generation antihistamines are preferred
because they cause less sedation. Preparations containing pseudoephedrine, typically in combination with other agents, are used for
relief of nasal and sinus congestion and pressure and other symptoms
such as rhinorrhea, sneezing, lacrimation, itching eyes, oronasopharyngeal itching, and cough. These are not considered first-­line agents
and should be used with caution. Pseudoephedrine is available without prescription generally in fixed combination with other agents such
as first-­generation antihistamines (brompheniramine, chlorpheniramine, triprolidine), second-­generation antihistamines (desloratadine,
fexofenadine, loratadine), antipyretics (acetaminophen, ibuprofen),
antitussives (guaifenesin, dextromethorphan), and an anticholinergic
(methscopolamine). Pseudoephedrine is an oral vasoconstrictor distrusted for causing irritability and insomnia and for its association with
infant mortality. Because younger children (2-­3 years) are at increased
risk of overdosage and toxicity, some manufacturers of oral nonprescription cough and cold preparations have voluntarily revised their
product labeling to warn against the use of preparations containing
pseudoephedrine for children <4 years old. Pseudoephedrine is misused as a starting material for the synthesis of methamphetamine and
methcathinone. Tables 184.2, 184.3, and 184.4 provide examples of prescription, nonprescription, and combined oral agents, respectively, for
treatment of AR. Oral leukotriene receptor antagonists are not recommended for initial treatment of AR because of reduced efficacy compared to other agents and serious neuropsychiatric events that have
been reported with montelukast.
The anticholinergic nasal spray ipratropium bromide is effective for the treatment of serous rhinorrhea (Table 184.5). Intranasal
decongestants (oxymetazoline and phenylephrine) should be used
for <5 days and should not to be repeated more than once a month
to avoid rebound nasal congestion. Sodium cromoglycate (available
as nonprescription drug) is effective but requires frequent administration, every 4 hours. Leukotriene-­modifying agents have a modest
effect on rhinorrhea and nasal blockage (see Chapter 185 for additional indications and side effects). Nasal saline irrigation is a good
adjunctive option with all other treatments of AR. Patients with more
persistent, severe symptoms require intranasal corticosteroids, the

most effective therapy for AR, which may also be beneficial for concomitant allergic conjunctivitis (Table 184.6). These agents reduce
the symptoms of AR with eosinophilic inflammation, but not those
of rhinitis associated with neutrophils or free of inflammation. Beclomethasone, triamcinolone, and flunisolide are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, as well as from the respiratory tract; budesonide,
fluticasone, mometasone, and ciclesonide offer greater topical activity with lower systemic exposure. More severely affected patients may
benefit from simultaneous treatment with oral antihistamines and
intranasal corticosteroids.
Allergen-­specific immunotherapy is a well-­defined treatment for
IgE-­mediated allergic disease. It may be administered by subcutaneous or sublingual routes. Sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT) has been
used successfully in Europe and South America and is now approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Allergy immunotherapy
(AIT) is an effective treatment for AR and allergic conjunctivitis. In
addition to reducing symptoms, it may change the course of allergic
disease and induce allergen-­specific immune tolerance. Immunotherapy should be considered for children in whom IgE-­mediated allergic
symptoms cannot be adequately controlled by avoidance and medication, especially in the presence of comorbid conditions. Immunotherapy for AR prevents the onset of asthma. Moreover, progress in
molecular characterization of allergens raises the possibility of defined
vaccines for allergen immunotherapy. Omalizumab (anti-­IgE antibody) is effective for difficult-­to-­control asthma and is likely to have
a beneficial effect on coexisting AR. Dupilumab (IL-­4 antagonist) is
approved in adults for the treatment of chronic rhinosinusitis with
nasal polyposis and has shown improvement in nasal symptoms scores
as well as improvements in lung function among patients with AERD.
Typically, treatment of AR with oral antihistamines and nasal corticosteroids provides sufficient relief for most patients with coexisting
allergic conjunctivitis. If it fails, additional therapies directed primarily at allergic conjunctivitis may be added (see Chapter 188). Intranasal
corticosteroids are of some value for the treatment of ocular symptoms,
but ophthalmic corticosteroids remain the most potent pharmacologic
agents for ocular allergy, although they carry the risk of adverse effects
such as delayed wound healing, secondary infection, elevated intraocular pressure, and formation of cataracts. Ophthalmic corticosteroids
are only suited for the treatment of allergic conjunctivitis that does not
respond to the medications previously discussed. Sound practice calls
for the assistance of an ophthalmologist.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 184 u Allergic Rhinitis

1383

Table 184.3  Oral Allergic Rhinitis Treatments (Nonprescription, Examples)
GENERIC/BRAND

STRENGTH

FORMULATIONS

DOSING

Chlor-­Trimeton
OTC

4 mg

Tablets

2-­5 yr: 1 mg every 4-­6 hr (max 6 mg/day)
6-­11 yr: 2 mg every 4-­6 hr (max 12 mg/day)

Chlor-­Trimeton Syrup
OTC

2 mg/5 mL

Syrup

>12 yr: 4 mg every 4-­6 hr (max 24 mg/day)

Children’s Zyrtec Allergy Syrup OTC

1 mg/mL

Syrup

6-11­ mo: 2.5 mg daily

Children’s Zyrtec
Chewable OTC

5 mg, 10 mg

Chewable tablets

12-­23 mo: initial 2.5 mg once daily; dosage
may be increased to 2.5 mg twice daily

Zyrtec Tablets OTC

5 mg, 10 mg

Tablets

2-­5 yr: 2.5 mg/day; may be increased to
max of 5 mg/day given either as a single
dose or divided into two doses

Zyrtec Liquid Gels OTC

10 mg

Liquid-­filled gels

≥6 yr: 5-­10 mg/day as a single dose or
divided into two doses

Levocetirizine
Xyzal

5 mg
0.5 mg/mL

Tablet
Oral solution

6 mo-­5 yr: 1.25 mg daily in the evening
6-­11 yr: 2.5 mg daily in the evening
≥12 yr: 5 mg daily in the evening

Clarinex

0.5 mg/mL

Oral solution

6-­11 mo: 1 mg daily
1-­5 yr: 1.25 mg daily
6-­11 yr: 2.5 mg daily

Clarinex

5 mg

Tablet

≥12 yr 5 mg daily

Fexofenadine HCl OTC

30 mg, 60 mg, 180 mg

Tablet

6-­11 yr: 30 mg twice daily
12-­adult: 60 mg twice daily; 180 mg daily

Children’s Allegra OTC
ODT*

30 mg

ODTs

6-­11 yr: 30 mg twice daily

Children’s Allegra Oral Suspension OTC

30 mg/5 mL

Suspension

>2-­11 yr: 30 mg every 12 hr

Allegra OTC

Tabs 30, 60, 180 mg

Tablet

>12 yr-­adult: 60 mg every 12 hr; 180 mg
daily

Children’s Claritin OTC

5 mg/5 mL

Syrup

2-­5 yr: 5 mg daily
6-­adult: 10 mg daily

Alavert OTC ODT*

10 mg
10 mg
10 mg
5 mg
1 mg/mL

ODTs
Tablets
Liquid-­filled caps
Chewable tablets
Syrup

2-­5 yr: 5 mg daily
>6 yr: 10 mg once daily or 5 mg twice daily

FIRST-­GENERATION H1 ANTAGONISTS
Chlorpheniramine maleate

SECOND-­GENERATION H1 ANTAGONISTS
Cetirizine

Desloratadine

Loratadine

*Contains phenylalanine.
ODT, Orally disintegrating tablet; OTC, over the counter.
Dosing recommendations taken in part from Kleinman K, McDaniel L, Molloy M for the Johns Hopkins Hospital. The Harriet Lane Handbook. 22nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

Table 184.4  Combined Antihistamine + Sympathomimetic (Examples)
GENERIC

STRENGTH

FORMULATIONS

DOSING

Chlorpheniramine maleate
Phenylephrine HCl
Sudafed Sinus & Allergy

4 mg
10 mg

Tablets

>12 yr: 1 tablet every 4 hr, not to
exceed 6 tablets per day

Cetirizine + pseudoephedrine
Zyrtec-­D 12 hour

5 mg cetirizine + 120 mg
pseudoephedrine

Extended-­release tablet

>12 yr: 1 tablet every 12 hr

Dosing recommendations taken in part from Kleinman K, McDaniel L, Molloy M for the Johns Hopkins Hospital. The Harriet Lane Handbook. 22nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1384 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 184.5  Miscellaneous Intranasal Sprays
INDICATIONS (I), MECHANISM(S) OF ACTION (M),
AND DOSING

DRUG

COMMENTS, CAUTIONS, ADVERSE EVENTS,
AND MONITORING

Ipratropium bromide

I: Symptomatic relief of rhinorrhea
M: Anticholinergic

Atrovent inhalation aerosol is contraindicated in
patients with hypersensitivity to soy lecithin
Safety and efficacy of use beyond 4 days in
patients with the common cold have not been
established
Adverse effects: Epistaxis, nasal dryness, nausea

Atrovent nasal spray (0.06%)

Colds (symptomatic relief of rhinorrhea):
5-­12 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril tid
≥12 yr and adults: 2 sprays in each nostril tid-­qid

Azelastine

I: Treatment of rhinorrhea, sneezing, and nasal pruritus
M: Antagonism of histamine H1 receptor

Astelin

6-­12 yr: 1 spray bid
>12 yr: 1-­2 sprays bid

Cromolyn sodium

I: AR
M: Inhibition of mast cell degranulation

NasalCrom

>2 yr: 1 spray tid-­qid; max 6 times daily

Oxymetazoline
Afrin
Nostrilla

I: Symptomatic relief of nasal mucosal congestion
M: Adrenergic agonist, vasoconstricting agent
0.05% solution: instill 2-­3 sprays into each nostril bid; therapy
should not exceed 3 days

Excessive dosage may cause profound CNS
depression
Use in excess of 3 days may result in severe
rebound nasal congestion
Do not repeat more than once a month
Use with caution in patients with hyperthyroidism,
heart disease, hypertension, or diabetes
Adverse effects: Hypertension, palpitations, reflex
bradycardia, nervousness, dizziness, insomnia,
headache, CNS depression, convulsions,
hallucinations, nausea, vomiting, mydriasis,
elevated intraocular pressure, blurred vision

Phenylephrine

I: Symptomatic relief of nasal mucosal congestion
M: Adrenergic, vasoconstricting agent

Neo-­Synephrine

2-­6 yr: 1 drop every 2-­4 hr of 0.125% solution as needed
Note: Therapy should not exceed 3 continuous days
6-­12 yr: 1-­2 sprays or 1-­2 drops every 4 hr of 0.25% solution as
needed
Note: Therapy should not exceed 3 continuous days
>12 yr: 1-­2 sprays or 1-­2 drops every 4 hr of 0.25% to 0.5%
solution as needed; 1% solution may be used in adults with
extreme nasal congestion
Note: Therapy should not exceed 3 continuous days

Use in excess of 3 days may result in severe
rebound nasal congestion
Do not repeat more than once a month
0.16% and 0.125% solutions are not commercially
available
Adverse effects: Reflex bradycardia, excitability,
headache, anxiety, dizziness

May cause drowsiness
Adverse effects: Headache, somnolence, bitter
taste

Not effective immediately; requires frequent
administration

bid, 2 times daily; CNS, central nervous system; tid, 3 times daily; qid, 4 times daily.

Table 184.6  Intranasal Inhaled Corticosteroids
INDICATIONS (I), MECHANISM(S) OF ACTION
(M), AND DOSING

DRUG
Beclomethasone
OTC

I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Beconase AQ (42 μg/spray)
Qnasl (80 μg/spray)
OTC

6-­12 yr: 1 spray in each nostril bid; may increase if
needed to 2 sprays in each nostril bid
>12 yr: 1 or 2 sprays in each nostril bid

Flunisolide
OTC

6-­14 yr: 1 spray in each nostril tid or 2 sprays in each
nostril bid; not to exceed 4 sprays/day in each
nostril
≥15 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril bid (morning and
evening); may increase to 2 sprays tid; maximum
dose: 8 sprays/day in each nostril (400 μg/day)

COMMENTS, CAUTIONS, ADVERSE EVENTS, AND
MONITORING
Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth
Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 184 u Allergic Rhinitis

1385

Table 184.6  Intranasal Inhaled Corticosteroids—cont’d
INDICATIONS (I), MECHANISM(S) OF ACTION
(M), AND DOSING

DRUG
Triamcinolone
Nasacort AQ (55 μg/spray)
OTC
Fluticasone propionate
(available as generic
preparation)
OTC

I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Flonase (50 μg/spray)
OTC

≥4 yr: 1-­2 sprays in each nostril qd

Fluticasone furoate
Veramyst (27.5 μg/spray)

2-­12 yr:
Initial dose: 1 spray (27.5 μg/spray) per nostril qd (55
μg/day)
Patients who do not show adequate response may
use 2 sprays per nostril qd (110 μg/day)
Once symptoms are controlled, dosage may be
reduced to 55 μg qd
Total daily dosage should not exceed 2 sprays in
each nostril (110 μg)/day
≥12 yr and adolescents:
Initial dose: 2 sprays (27.5 μg/spray) per nostril qd
(110 μg/day)
Once symptoms are controlled, dosage may be
reduced to 1 spray per nostril qd (55 μg/day)
Total daily dosage should not exceed 2 sprays in
each nostril (110 μg)/day

Mometasone

I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Nasonex (50 μg/spray)

2-­12 yr: 1 spray in each nostril qd
>12 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril qd

Budesonide
OTC

I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Rhinocort Aqua (32 μg/spray)
OTC

6-­12 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril qd
>12 yr: up to 4 sprays in each nostril qd (max dose)

Ciclesonide

I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Omnaris
Zetonna (50 μg/spray)

2-­12 yr: 1-­2 sprays in each nostril qd
>12 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril qd

Azelastine/fluticasone
(137 μg azelastine/50 μg
fluticasone)
Dymista

≥6 yr: 1 spray in each nostril bid

COMMENTS, CAUTIONS, ADVERSE EVENTS, AND
MONITORING
Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth

2-­6 yr: 1 spray in each nostril qd
6-­12 yr: 1-­2 sprays in each nostril qd
≥12 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril qd
I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Ritonavir significantly increases fluticasone serum
concentrations and may result in systemic corticosteroid
effects
Use fluticasone with caution in patients receiving
ketoconazole or other potent cytochrome P450 3A4
isoenzyme inhibitor
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth

Mometasone and its major metabolites are undetectable in
plasma after nasal administration of recommended doses
Preventive treatment of seasonal AR should begin 2-­4 wk
before pollen season
Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth
Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth
Before initial use, gently shake, then prime the pump by
actuating 8 times
If the product is not used for 4 consecutive days, gently
shake and reprime with 1 spray or until a fine mist appears
Shake bottle gently before using
Blow nose to clear nostrils
Keep head tilted downward when spraying
Insert applicator tip 1/4 to 1/2 inch into nostril, keeping
bottle upright, and close off the other nostril
Breathe in through nose
While inhaling, press pump to release spray

OTC, Over the counter; AR, allergic rhinitis; qd, once daily; bid, 2 times daily; tid, 3 times daily.

PROGNOSIS

Therapy with nonsedating antihistamines and topical corticosteroids,
when taken appropriately, improves health-­related quality-­of-­life measures in patients with AR. The reported rates of remission among children are 10–23%. Pharmacotherapy that will target cells and cytokines

involved in inflammation and treat allergy as a systemic process is on the
horizon, and more selective targeting of drugs based on the development
of specific biomarkers and genetic profiling may soon be realized.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 184 u Allergic Rhinitis
Bibliography
Burks AW, Calderon MA, Casale T, et al. Update on allergy immunotherapy: American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology/European Academy of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology/PRACTALL consensus report. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2013;131:1288–1296.
Codispoti CD, Bernstein DI, Levin L, et al. Early-­life mold and tree sensitivity is associated with allergic eosinophilic rhinitis at 4 yr of age. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2015;114:193–198.e4.
Cox LS. Sublingual immunotherapy for allergic rhinitis—is 2-­year treatment sufficient for long-­term benefit? JAMA. 2017;317(6):591–593.
Dykewicz MS, Wallace DV, Amrol DJ, et al. Rhinitis 2020: A practice parameter update. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;146(4):721–767.
Federal Drug Administration. Singulair (montelukast) and all montelukast generics:
strengthened boxed warning – due to restricting use for allergic rhinitis. https://w
ww.fda.gov/safety/medical-­product-­safety-­information/singulair-­montelukast-­
and-­all-­montelukast-­generics-­strengthened-­boxed-­warning-­due-­restricting-­use.
Garcia-­Aymerich J, Benet M, Saeys Y, et al. Phenotyping asthma, rhinitis and eczema
in MeDALL population-­based birth cohorts: an allergic comorbidity cluster. Allergy. 2015;70:973–984.
Kim JM, Lin SY, Suarez-­Cuervo C, et al. Allergen-­specific immunotherapy for
pediatric asthma and rhinoconjunctivitis: a systematic review. Pediatrics.
2013;131(6):1155–1167.
Laidlaw TM, Mullol J, Fan C, et al. Dupilumab improves nasal polyp burden and
asthma control in patients with CRSwNP and AERD. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract. 2019;7:2462.

1385.e1

Lin SY, Erekosima N, Kim JM, et al. Sublingual immunotherapy for the treatment of allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and asthma: a systematic review. JAMA.
2013;309:1278–1288.
Patil VK, Kurukulaaratchy RJ, Venter C, et al. Changing prevalence of wheeze, rhinitis and allergic sensitisation in late childhood: Findings from 2 Isle of Wight birth
cohorts 12 yr apart. Clin Exp Allergy. 2015;45:1430–1438.
Roberts G, Xatzipsalti M, Borrego LM, et al. Paediatric rhinitis: position paper of the
European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. Allergy. 2013;68:1102–
1116.
Scadding GK. Optimal management of allergic rhinitis. Arch Dis Child. 2015;100:576–
582.
Schmitt J, Schwarz K, Stadler E, et al. Allergy immunotherapy for allergic rhinitis effectively prevents asthma: results from a large retrospective cohort study. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2015;136:1511–1516.
The Medical Letter. Allergic rhinitis. Med Lett Drugs Ther. 2017;59:71–80.
Valenta R, Campana R, Focke-­Tejkl M, et al. Vaccine development for allergen-­
specific immunotherapy based on recombinant allergens and synthetic allergen
peptides: lessons from the past and novel mechanisms of action for the future. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016;137:351–357.
Wallace DV, Dykewicz MS, Oppenheimer J, et al. Pharmacologic treatment of seasonal allergic rhinitis: synopsis of guidance from the 2017 joint task force on practice parameter. Ann Intern Med. 2017;167:876–881.
Westman M, Lupinek C, Bousquet J, et al. Early childhood IgE reactivity to
pathogenesis-­related class 10 proteins predicts allergic rhinitis in adolescence. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015;135. 1199-­1206.e1–1199-­1206.e11.
Wheatly LM, Togias A. Allergic rhinitis. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(15):456–462.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1387
bronchiolitis in the first year of life is a significant predisposing factor
for asthma at age 5 years. This association implies that host features
affecting immunologic host defense, inflammation, and the extent of
airways injury from ubiquitous viral pathogens underlie susceptibility to recurrent wheezing in early childhood. Other airways exposures
can also exacerbate ongoing airways inflammation, increase disease
severity, and drive asthma persistence. Home allergen exposures in
sensitized individuals can initiate airways inflammation and hypersensitivity to other irritant exposures and are causally linked to disease
severity, exacerbations, and persistence. Consequently, eliminating
the offending allergen(s) can lead to resolution of asthma symptoms.
Environmental tobacco smoke and common air pollutants can aggravate airways inflammation and increase asthma severity. Cold, dry air;
hyperventilation from physical play or exercise; and strong odors can
trigger bronchoconstriction. Although many exposures that trigger
and aggravate asthma are well recognized, the causal environmental
features underlying the development of host susceptibilities to the various common airway exposures are not as well defined. Living in rural
or farming communities may be a protective environmental factor.

Parental asthma*
Allergy
• Atopic dermatitis (eczema)*
• Allergic rhinitis
• Food allergy
• Inhalant allergen sensitization*
• Food allergen sensitization
Severe lower respiratory tract infection
• Pneumonia
• Bronchiolitis requiring hospitalization
Wheezing apart from colds
Male sex
Low birthweight
Environmental tobacco smoke exposure
Reduced lung function at birth
Formula feeding rather than breastfeeding

EPIDEMIOLOGY

*Major risk factors.

Asthma is a common chronic disease, causing considerable morbidity.
In 2020 >7 million children (∼11% of U.S. children) had been diagnosed with asthma, with 70% of this group reporting current asthma.
Male gender and living in poverty are demographic risk factors for
having childhood asthma in the United States. About 13% of males
vs 9% of females have had asthma, and ∼15% of all children living in
poor families (family income less than poverty threshold) have asthma.
Childhood asthma is among the most common causes of childhood
emergency department (ED) visits, hospitalizations, and missed school
days. In the United States in 2019, childhood asthma accounted for
>750,000 ED visits, nearly 75,000 hospitalizations, and 178 deaths.
However, there are ethnic disparities in asthma outcomes, with nearly
three times more deaths as a result of asthma in Black non-­Hispanic vs
White non-­Hispanic children.
Worldwide, childhood asthma appears to be increasing in prevalence, despite considerable improvements in our management and
pharmacopeia to treat asthma. Although childhood asthma may have
plateaued in the United States after 2008, numerous studies conducted
in other countries have reported an increase in asthma prevalence of
approximately 50% per decade. Globally, childhood asthma prevalence varies widely in different locales. A study of childhood asthma
prevalence in 233 centers in 97 countries (International Study of
Asthma and Allergies in Childhood, Phase 3) found a wide range in
the prevalence of current wheeze in 6–7-­year-­old children (2.4–37.6%)
and 13–14-­year-­old children (0.8–32.6%). Asthma prevalence correlated well with reported allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and atopic eczema
prevalence. Childhood asthma seems more prevalent in modern metropolitan locales and more affluent nations, and is strongly linked with
other allergic conditions. In contrast, children living in rural areas of
developing countries and farming communities with domestic animals
are less likely to experience asthma and allergy.
Approximately 80% of all asthmatic patients report disease onset
before 6 years of age. However, of all young children who experience
recurrent wheezing, only a minority go on to have persistent asthma in
later childhood. Early childhood risk factors for persistent asthma have
been identified (Table 185.1) and have been described as major (parent
asthma, eczema, inhalant allergen sensitization) and minor (allergic
rhinitis, wheezing apart from colds, ≥4% peripheral blood eosinophils,
food allergen sensitization) risk factors. Allergen sensitization (allergy)
in young children with recurrent cough and/or wheeze is the strongest
identifiable factor for the persistence of childhood asthma.

Types of Childhood Asthma

There are two common types of childhood asthma based on different
natural courses: (1) recurrent wheezing in early childhood, primarily
triggered by common respiratory viral infections, that usually resolves
during the preschool/lower school years and (2) chronic asthma associated with allergy that persists into later childhood and often adulthood

Table 185.1  Early Childhood Risk Factors for Persistent
Asthma

(Table 185.2). School-­age children with mild to moderate persistent
asthma generally improve as teenagers. About 40% of these children,
most of whom have milder disease, will develop intermittent disease.
Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) controller therapy for children with persistent asthma does not alter the likelihood of outgrowing asthma in later
childhood; however, reduced lung growth and progressive decline in
lung function can be features of persistent, problematic disease.
Asthma is also classified by disease severity (e.g., intermittent or
persistent [mild, moderate, or severe]) or control (e.g., well, not well,
or very poorly controlled), especially for asthma management purposes.
Because most children with asthma can be well controlled with conventional management guidelines, children with asthma can also be characterized according to treatment response and medication requirements as
(1) easy to control (well controlled with low levels of controller therapy);
(2) difficult to control (not as well controlled with multiple and/or high
levels of controller therapies); (3) exacerbators (despite being controlled,
continue to have severe exacerbations); and (4) refractory asthma (continue to have poorly controlled asthma despite multiple and high levels
of controller therapies; see Table 185.2). Different airways pathologic
processes, causing airways inflammation, AHR, and airways congestion
and blockage, are believed to underlie these different types of asthma.

PATHOGENESIS

Airflow obstruction in asthma is the result of numerous pathologic
processes. In the small airways, airflow is regulated by smooth muscle
encircling the airway lumen; bronchoconstriction of these bronchiolar
muscular bands restricts or blocks airflow. A cellular inflammatory infiltrate and exudates distinguished by eosinophils, but also including other
inflammatory cell types (neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes, mast
cells, basophils), can fill and obstruct the airways and induce epithelial
damage and desquamation into the airway’s lumen. T lymphocytes and
other immune cells that produce proallergic, proinflammatory cytokines
(interleukin [IL]-­4, IL-­5, IL-­13), and chemokines (eotaxins) mediate
this inflammatory process. Hypersensitivity or susceptibility to a variety
of provocative exposures or triggers (Table 185.3) can lead to airways
inflammation, AHR, edema, basement membrane thickening, subepithelial collagen deposition, smooth muscle and mucous gland hypertrophy, and mucus hypersecretion, which are all processes that contribute
to the clinical manifestations of asthma. Although most children with
asthma manifest this proallergic “type 2” immunity and inflammation,
other pathologic pathways can underlie asthma.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Asthma is characterized by repeated episodes of intermittent dry
coughing and expiratory wheezing. Older children and adults report

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1388 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.2  Asthma Patterns in Childhood, Based on
Natural History and Asthma Management
TRANSIENT NONATOPIC WHEEZING
Common in early preschool years
Recurrent cough/wheeze, primarily triggered by common respiratory
viral infections
Usually resolves during the preschool and lower school years,
without increased risk for asthma in later life
Reduced airflow at birth, suggestive of relatively narrow airways; AHR
near birth; improves by school age
PERSISTENT ATOPY-­ASSOCIATED ASTHMA
Begins in early preschool years
Associated with atopy in early preschool years
• Clinical (e.g., atopic dermatitis in infancy, allergic rhinitis, food allergy)
• Biologic (e.g., early inhalant allergen sensitization, increased
serum IgE, increased blood eosinophils)
• Highest risk for persistence into later childhood and adulthood
Lung function abnormalities
• Those with onset before 3 yr of age acquire reduced airflow by school
age
• Those with later onset of symptoms, or with later onset of allergen
sensitization, are less likely to experience airflow limitation in childhood

Table 185.3  Asthma Triggers
COMMON VIRAL INFECTIONS OF THE RESPIRATORY TRACT
AEROALLERGENS IN SENSITIZED ASTHMATIC PATIENTS
Indoor Allergens
• Animal dander
• Dust mites
• Cockroaches
• Molds
Seasonal Aeroallergens
• Pollens (trees, grasses, weeds)
• Seasonal molds
AIR POLLUTANTS
• Environmental tobacco smoke
• Ozone
• Nitrogen dioxide
• Sulfur dioxide
• Particulate matter
• Wood-­ or coal-­burning smoke
• Mycotoxins
• Endotoxin
• Dust

ASTHMA WITH DECLINING LUNG FUNCTION
Children with asthma with progressive increase in airflow limitation
Associated with hyperinflation in childhood, male gender

STRONG OR NOXIOUS ODORS OR FUMES
• Perfumes, hairsprays
• Cleaning agents

ASTHMA MANAGEMENT TYPES
(From national and international asthma management guidelines)

OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURES
• Farm and barn exposures
• Formaldehydes, cedar, paint fumes
• Rhinitis
• Sinusitis
• Gastroesophageal reflux

Severity Classification*
• Intrinsic disease severity while not taking asthma medications
Intermittent
Persistent
• Mild
• Moderate
• Severe
Control Classification*
• Clinical assessment while asthma being managed and treated
Well controlled
Not well controlled
Very poorly controlled
Management Patterns
• Easy-­to-­control: well controlled with low levels of daily controller
therapy
• Difficult-­to-­control: inadequately controlled with multiple and/or
high levels of controller therapies
• Frequent exacerbators: have severe exacerbations
• Refractory: continue to have poorly controlled asthma despite
multiple and high levels of controller therapies
*From National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3
(EPR3): Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma, NIH Pub No 07-­
4051, Bethesda, MD, 2007, US Department of Health and Human Services; National
Institutes of Health; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Health; National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute; National Asthma Education and Prevention Program.
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-­pro/guidelines/current/asthma-­guidelines/full-­report.
AHR, Airways hyperresponsiveness.

associated shortness of breath and chest congestion and tightness;
younger children may report intermittent, nonfocal chest pain.
Respiratory symptoms can be worse at night, associated with sleep,
especially during prolonged exacerbations triggered by respiratory
infections or inhalant allergens. Daytime symptoms, often linked with
physical activities (exercise-­induced) or play, are reported with greatest frequency in children. Other asthma symptoms in children can be
subtle and nonspecific, including self-­imposed limitation of physical
activities, general fatigue (possibly resulting from sleep disturbance),

DRUGS
• Aspirin and other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
• β-­Blocking agents
OTHER
• Cold dry air
• Exercise
• Crying, laughter, hyperventilation
• Comorbid conditions

and difficulty keeping up with peers in physical activities. Asking about
previous experience with asthma medications (bronchodilators and/or
corticosteroids) may provide a history of symptomatic improvement
with treatment that supports the diagnosis of asthma. Lack of improvement with bronchodilator and corticosteroid therapy is inconsistent
with underlying asthma and should prompt more vigorous consideration of asthma-­masquerading conditions.
Asthma symptoms can be triggered by numerous common events or
exposures: physical exertion and hyperventilation (laughing), cold or
dry air, and airways irritants (see Table 185.3). Exposures that induce
airways inflammation, such as infections with common respiratory
pathogens (rhinovirus, RSV, enterovirus, coronavirus, metapneumovirus, parainfluenza virus, influenza virus, adenovirus, Mycoplasma
pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae), and inhaled allergens in sensitized children, also increase AHR to dry, cold air and irritant exposures.
An environmental history is essential for optimal asthma management.
The presence of risk factors, such as a history of other allergic conditions (allergic rhinitis, allergic conjunctivitis, atopic dermatitis, food
allergies), parental asthma, and/or symptoms apart from colds, supports the diagnosis of asthma. During routine clinic visits, children
with asthma typically present without abnormal signs, emphasizing the
importance of the medical history in diagnosing asthma. Some may
exhibit a dry, persistent cough. The chest findings are often normal.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1389
Deeper breaths with forced exhalation can sometimes elicit otherwise
undetectable wheezing. In clinic, quick resolution (within 10 minutes)
or convincing improvement in symptoms and signs of asthma with
administration of an inhaled short-­acting β-­agonist (SABA; e.g., albuterol) is supportive of the diagnosis of asthma.
Asthma exacerbations can be classified by their severity based on symptoms, signs, and functional impairment (Table 185.4). Coughing and
shortness of breath are common. Expiratory wheezing and a prolonged
exhalation phase can usually be appreciated by auscultation. Decreased
breath sounds in some of the lung fields, commonly the right lower posterior lung field, are consistent with regional hypoventilation caused by
airways obstruction. Rhonchi and crackles (or rales) can sometimes be
heard, resulting from excess mucus production and inflammatory exudate
in the airways. The combination of segmental crackles and poor breath
sounds can indicate lung segmental atelectasis that is difficult to distinguish from bronchial pneumonia and can complicate acute asthma management. In severe exacerbations the greater extent of airways obstruction
causes labored breathing and respiratory distress, which manifests as inspiratory and expiratory wheezing, increased prolongation of exhalation,
poor air entry, suprasternal and intercostal retractions, nasal flaring, and
accessory respiratory muscle use. In extremis, airflow may be so limited
that wheezing cannot be heard (silent chest).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Many childhood respiratory conditions can present with symptoms and
signs like those of asthma (Table 185.5). Along with asthma, other common

causes of chronic, intermittent coughing include gastroesophageal reflux
(GER) and rhinosinusitis. Both GER and chronic sinusitis can be challenging to diagnose in children. Often, GER is clinically silent in children, and
children with chronic sinusitis do not report sinusitis-­specific symptoms,
such as localized sinus pressure and tenderness. In addition, both GER and
rhinosinusitis are often comorbid with childhood asthma and, if not specifically treated, may make asthma difficult to manage.
In early life, consideration of congenital and anatomic conditions is
essential. Chronic coughing and wheezing can indicate recurrent aspiration, tracheobronchomalacia (congenital anatomic abnormality of
airways), vascular ring/sling, foreign body aspiration, cystic fibrosis, or
bronchopulmonary dysplasia.
In older children and adolescents, vocal cord dysfunction (VCD)
can manifest as intermittent daytime wheezing, most often in the
setting of exercise (Table 185.6). The vocal cords involuntarily close
inappropriately during inspiration and sometimes exhalation, producing shortness of breath, coughing, throat tightness, and often audible
laryngeal wheezing and/or stridor. In most cases of VCD, spirometric lung function testing reveals truncated and inconsistent inspiratory and expiratory flow-­volume loops, a pattern that differs from the
reproducible pattern of airflow limitation in asthma that improves with
bronchodilators. VCD can coexist with asthma. Hypercarbia and severe
hypoxia are uncommon in uncomplicated VCD. Flexible rhinolaryngoscopy in the patient with symptomatic VCD can reveal paradoxical
vocal cord movements with anatomically normal vocal cords. Before
the diagnosis, patients with VCD are often treated unsuccessfully

Table 185.4  Formal Evaluation of Asthma Exacerbation Severity in the Urgent or Emergency Care Setting*
MILD

MODERATE

SEVERE

SUBSET: RESPIRATORY
ARREST IMMINENT

While at rest (infant: stops
feeding)
Sits upright
Words
Usually agitated

Extreme dyspnea
Anxiety
Upright, leaning forward
Unable to talk
Drowsy or confused

SYMPTOMS
Breathlessness

While walking

Talks in…
Alertness

Can lie down
Sentences
May be agitated

While at rest (infant: softer,
shorter cry, difficulty feeding)
Prefers sitting
Phrases
Usually agitated

Increased
Usually not

Increased
Commonly

Often >30 breaths/min
Usually

Moderate; often only
end-­expiratory
<100
Absent
<10 mm Hg

Loud; throughout
exhalation
100-­120
May be present
10-­25 mm Hg

Usually loud; throughout
inhalation and exhalation
>120
Often present
>25 mm Hg (adult)
20-­40 mm Hg (child)

Approx. 40–69% or
response lasts <2 hr
≥60 mm Hg (test not
usually necessary)

<40%

<42 mm Hg (test not
usually necessary)
90–95% (test not usually
necessary)

≥42 mm Hg; possible
respiratory failure
<90%

SIGNS
Respiratory rate†
Use of accessory muscles;
suprasternal retractions
Wheeze
Pulse rate (beats/min)‡
Pulsus paradoxus

FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT
Peak expiratory flow (value ≥70%
predicted or personal best)
Pao2 (breathing air)
Normal (test not usually
necessary)
and/or
Pco2
<42 mm Hg (test not
usually necessary)
Sao2 (breathing air) at sea
>95% (test not usually
level
necessary)

Paradoxical
thoracoabdominal
movement
Absence of wheeze
Bradycardia
Absence suggests
respiratory muscle
fatigue
<25%§

<60 mm Hg; possible
cyanosis

Hypoxia despite oxygen
therapy

Hypercapnia (hypoventilation) develops more readily in young children than in adults and adolescents.
*Notes:

• The presence of several parameters, but not necessarily all, indicates the general classification of the exacerbation.
• Many of these parameters have not been systematically studied, especially as they correlate with each other; thus they serve only as general guides.
• The emotional impact of asthma symptoms on the patient and family is variable but must be recognized and addressed and can affect approaches to treatment and follow-­up.

†Normal breathing rates in awake children by age: <2 mo, <60 breaths/min; 2-­12 mo, <50 breaths/min; 1-­5 yr, <40 breaths/min; 6-­8 yr, <30 breaths/min.
‡Normal pulse rates in children by age: 2-­12 mo, <160 beats/min; 1-­2 yr, <120 beats/min; 2-­8 yr, <110 beats/min.
§Peak expiratory flow testing may not be needed in very severe attacks.

Adapted from National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR3). Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma, NIH Pub No 07-­4051,
Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; National Institutes of Health; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; National Asthma Education and Prevention
Program: 2007. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-­pro/guidelines/current/asthma-­guidelines/full-­report.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1390 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.5  Differential Diagnosis of Childhood Asthma
UPPER RESPIRATORY TRACT CONDITIONS

PERIPHERAL AIRWAYS CONDITIONS
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (chronic lung disease of preterm infants)

Allergic rhinitis*
Chronic rhinitis*
Sinusitis*
Adenoidal or tonsillar hypertrophy
Nasal foreign body
LARGE/CENTRAL AIRWAYS CONDITIONS
Laryngotracheobronchomalacia*
Laryngotracheobronchitis (e.g., pertussis)*
Laryngeal web, cyst, or stenosis
Exercise-­induced laryngeal obstruction
Vocal cord dysfunction*
Vocal cord paralysis
Tracheoesophageal fistula
Vascular ring, sling, or external mass compressing on the airway (e.g.,
tumor)
Endobronchial or mediastinal tumor
Foreign body aspiration*
Chronic bronchitis from environmental tobacco smoke exposure*
Repaired tracheoesophageal fistula
Toxic inhalations

Viral bronchiolitis*
Gastroesophageal reflux*
Causes of bronchiectasis
• Cystic fibrosis
• Immunodeficiency
• Allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses (e.g., aspergillosis)
• Chronic aspiration
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Bronchiolitis obliterans
Interstitial lung diseases
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (acute or chronic)
Loeffler syndrome
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with angiitis
Eosinophilic pneumonia
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
Pulmonary hemosiderosis
Tuberculosis
Pneumonia
Pulmonary edema (e.g., congestive heart failure)
Pulmonary vascular congestions (congenital or acquired heart disease)
Vasculitis
Sarcoidosis
Visceral larva migrans
Medications associated with chronic cough
• Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
• β-­Adrenergic antagonists
• Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors
• Daptomycin

*More common asthma masqueraders.

Table 185.6  Features Distinguishing Paradoxical Vocal Cord Motion Disorder from Asthma
FEATURE

PVCM

ASTHMA

Incidence
Age and sex
Triggers
History of allergy
Family history
Sensation of tightness
Inspiratory stridor
Sputum production
Nocturnal awakening with symptoms
Response to bronchodilators and steroids
Hypoxemia
Eosinophilia
Chest radiograph

Less common
Young, female
Usually exercise or emotional stress
Usually absent
Usually absent
Throat
More common, heard loudly over larynx
Rare
Rare
No response
Rare
Rare
Usually normal

Residual volume and total lung capacity
Flow volume loop
Bronchial provocation test
Laryngoscopy

Normal
Flattening of inspiratory loop
May be positive
Inspiratory adduction of the anterior two
thirds of vocal folds with posterior chink

More common
Any
Many triggers
May be present
May be present
Chest
Rare
Common
Common
Good response
Common
Common in allergic asthma
May show hyperinflation and
peribronchial thickening
May be increased
Obstructive pattern
Usually positive
Usually normal

PVCM, Paradoxical vocal cord motion.
Modified from Ibrahim WH, Gheriani HA, Almohamed AA, Raza T. Paradoxical vocal cord motion disorder: Past present and future. Post Grad Med J. 2007;83:164–172. Table 2, p 168.

with multiple different classes of asthma medications. This condition
can be well managed with specialized speech therapy training in the
relaxation and control of vocal cord movement. Furthermore, treatment of underlying causes of vocal cord irritability (e.g., high GER/
aspiration, allergic rhinitis, rhinosinusitis, asthma) can improve VCD.
During acute VCD exacerbations, relaxation breathing techniques in

conjunction with inhalation of heliox (a mixture of 70% helium and
30% oxygen) can relieve vocal cord spasm and VCD symptoms.
In some locales, hypersensitivity pneumonitis (farming communities,
homes of bird owners), pulmonary parasitic infestations (rural areas of developing countries), or tuberculosis may be causes of chronic coughing and/
or wheezing. Rare mimics of asthma in childhood are noted in Table 185.5.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1391
Chronic pulmonary diseases often produce clubbing (e.g., in cystic fibrosis), but clubbing is a very unusual finding in childhood asthma.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory tests such as blood eosinophil counts and allergen-­specific
IgE testing may be useful for ascertaining allergy, but are not diagnostic
for asthma itself. Lung function tests can help to confirm the diagnosis
of asthma and to determine disease severity.

criteria used to determine asthma severity and control in asthma management guidelines sponsored by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and the Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA).
Such measures of airflow alone are not diagnostic of asthma, because
numerous other conditions can cause airflow limitation. In addition, approximately 50% of children with mild to moderate persistent
asthma will have normal spirometric values when well. Bronchodilator

Pulmonary Function Testing

Forced expiratory airflow measures are helpful in diagnosing and
monitoring asthma and in assessing efficacy of therapy. Lung function
testing is particularly helpful in children with asthma who are poor
perceivers of airflow obstruction, or when physical signs of asthma do
not occur until airflow obstruction is severe.
Many asthma guidelines promote spirometric measures of airflow and
lung volumes during forced expiratory maneuvers as standard for asthma
assessment. Spirometry is a helpful objective measure of airflow limitation
(Fig. 185.2). It is an essential assessment tool in children who are at risk
for severe asthma exacerbations and those who have poor perception of
asthma symptoms. Valid spirometric measures depend on a patient’s ability to properly perform a full, forceful, and prolonged expiratory maneuver,
usually feasible in children >4-­5 years old (with some younger exceptions).
In asthma, airways blockage results in reduced airflow with forced exhalation (see Fig. 185.2). Because asthmatic patients typically have hyperinflated lungs, forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) can be simply
adjusted for full expiratory lung volume (the forced vital capacity [FVC])
with an FEV1/FVC ratio, which is generally an FEV1/FVC ratio below the
lower limit of normal (Table 185.7). Normative values for these measures
of lung function have been determined for children by height, gender, and
age. Abnormally low FEV1 as a percentage of predicted norms is one of six

Table 185.7  Lung Function Abnormalities in Asthma
Spirometry (in clinic)*†:
Airflow limitation
• Low FEV1 (relative to percentage of predicted norms), although
many children with asthma have normal FEV1
• FEV1/FVC ratio below the lower limit of normal for age
Bronchodilator response (to inhaled β-­agonist) assesses reversibility
of airflow limitation
Reversibility is determined by an increase in either FEV1 >9–12% or
predicted FEV1 >10% after inhalation of a short-­acting β-­agonist
(SABA)‡
Exercise challenge
• Worsening in FEV1 ≥15%‡
Daily peak expiratory flow (PEF)* or FEV1 monitoring: day-­to-­day
and/or am-­to-­pm variation ≥20%‡
*PEF variability is insensitive, while being highly specific for asthma.
†Of note, >50% of children with mild to moderate asthma will have a normal FEV and
1
will not have a significant bronchodilator response.
‡Main criteria consistent with asthma.
FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 sec; FVC, forced vital capacity; ICS, inhaled
corticosteroid; ppb, parts per billion.

Peak flow
6
FVC
Subject 1

4

4
A
B

Expiratory flow
volume loop

C
2

D
E

0

Volume (L)

Flow (L/sec)

FEV1

3
Subject 2

2

1
100

50

0
1

2

4

Inspiratory flow
volume loop

3
4
Time (sec)

5

6

7

Subject 1: A non-asthmatic child
FEV1  3.4 (100% of predicted)
FVC  3.8 (100% of predicted)
FEV1/FVC  0.86

Vital capacity (%)

Subject 2: An asthmatic child
FEV1  2.1 (62% of predicted)
FVC  3.7 (97% of predicted)
FEV1/FVC  0.57

6

A

2

B

Fig. 185.2 Spirometry. A, Spirometric flow-­volume loops. Loop A is an expiratory flow-­volume loop of a nonasthmatic person without airflow limi-

tation. Loops B through E are expiratory flow-­volume loops in asthmatic patients with increasing degrees of airflow limitation (B is mild; E is severe).
Note the “scooped” or concave appearance of the asthmatic expiratory flow-­volume loops; with increasing obstruction, there is greater “scooping.”
B, Spirometric volume-­time curves. Subject 1 is a nonasthmatic person; subject 2 is an asthmatic patient. Note how the FEV1 and FVC lung volumes
are obtained. The FEV1 is the volume of air exhaled in the first second of a forced expiratory effort. The FVC is the total volume of air exhaled during
a forced expiratory effort, or forced vital capacity. Note that subject 2’s FEV1 and FEV1:FVC ratio are smaller than subject 1’s ratio, demonstrating
airflow limitation. Also, subject 2’s FVC is very close to what is expected.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1392 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.8  Interpretations of FeNO Test Results for Asthma Diagnosis in Nonsmoking Individuals Not Taking Corticosteroids
FeNO LEVEL
<25 PPB (<20 IN CHILDREN
AGE 5-­12 YR)

25-­50 PPB (20-­35 IN CHILDREN
AGE 5-­12 YR)

>50 PPB (>35 IN CHILDREN
AGE 5-­12 YR)

• Recent or current corticosteroid use
• Alternative diagnoses
• Phenotype less likely to benefit from ICS
• Noneosinophilic asthma
• COPD
• Bronchiectasis
• CF
• Vocal cord dysfunction
• Rhinosinusitis
• Smoking
• Obesity

• Evaluate in clinical context
• Consider other diagnoses
• Consider other factors influencing result
• Eosinophilic asthma less likely

• Eosinophilic airways inflammation likely
• Phenotype more likely to respond to ICS
• Allergic asthma
• Eosinophilic bronchitis

CF, Cystic fibrosis; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; FeNO, fractional exhaled nitric oxide; ICS, inhaled corticosteroid; ppb, parts per billion.
From NAEPPCC Expert Panel Working Group: 2020 Focused Updates to the Asthma Management Guidelines: A Report from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program
Coordinating Committee Expert Panel Working Group. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;146(6):1217–1269. Table II.

response to an inhaled β-­agonist (e.g., albuterol) is greater in asthmatic
patients than nonasthmatic persons; an improvement in FEV1 ≥12% is
consistent with asthma. However, many children will not demonstrate
an improvement with bronchodilator when well. Bronchoprovocation
challenges can be helpful in diagnosing asthma. Asthmatic airways are
hyperresponsive and therefore more sensitive to inhaled methacholine,
mannitol, and cold or dry air. The degree of AHR to these exposures correlates to some extent with asthma severity and airways inflammation.
Although bronchoprovocation challenges are carefully dosed and monitored in an investigational setting, their use is rarely practical in general
practice. Exercise challenges (aerobic exertion or “running” for 6-­8 minutes) can help to identify children with exercise-­induced bronchospasm
(EIB). Although the airflow response of nonasthmatic persons to exercise is to increase functional lung volumes and improve FEV1 slightly
(5–10%), exercise often provokes airflow obstruction in persons with
inadequately treated asthma. Accordingly, in asthmatic patients, FEV1
typically decreases during or after exercise by >15% (see Table 185.7).
The onset of EIB usually begins within 5 minutes, reaching a peak at 15
minutes after vigorous exercise, and often spontaneously resolves within
30-­60 minutes. Studies of exercise challenges in school-­age children
typically identify an additional 5–10% with EIB and previously unrecognized asthma. There are two caveats regarding exercise challenges: (1)
treadmill challenges in the clinic are not completely reliable and can miss
exertional asthma that can be demonstrated on the playing field and (2)
exercise challenges can induce severe exacerbations in at-­risk patients.
Careful patient selection for both bronchoprovocation and exercise challenges and preparedness for severe asthma exacerbations are required.
Peak expiratory flow (PEF) monitoring devices provide simple
and inexpensive home-­use tools to measure airflow and can be helpful in some circumstances. Like spirometry in clinics, poor perceivers
of asthma may benefit by monitoring PEFs at home to assess their
airflow as an indicator of asthma control or problems. PEF devices
vary in the ability to detect airflow obstruction; they are less sensitive
and reliable than spirometry to detect airflow obstruction, such that,
in some patients, PEF values decline only when airflow obstruction
is severe. Therefore PEF monitoring should be started by measuring
morning and evening PEFs (best of three attempts) for several weeks
for patients to practice the technique, to determine diurnal variation
and a “personal best,” and to correlate PEF values with symptoms
(and ideally spirometry). Diurnal variation in PEF >20% is consistent
with asthma (see Table 185.7). If PEF monitoring is employed, morning measurements are preferable when peak flows are typically lower.

Exhaled Nitric Oxide

Fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) is a noninvasive measure of
allergic/eosinophilic airways inflammation measured in exhaled breath
(Table 185.8). FeNO can be used in children as young as 5 years to help
distinguish asthma from other airways diseases that are mediated by

nonallergic/noneosinophilic inflammation, such as GER, VCD, and cystic fibrosis. FeNO can substantiate the diagnosis of asthma in untreated
patients, complement the assessment of asthma control, predict response
to ICS and biologic therapy, assess adherence with ICS therapy, predict
loss of control with ICS tapering, and predict future asthma exacerbations. However, an elevated FeNO level alone is not diagnostic of asthma
and can be seen in children with allergic rhinitis without asthma.

Additional Tests to Consider

Other tests, such as allergy testing to assess sensitization to inhalant
allergens (skin testing or allergen specific IgE levels) and peripheral
blood total eosinophil counts, are markers of allergic “type 2” immunity and inflammation and can help with the management and prognosis of asthma. In a comprehensive U.S. study of 5–12-­year-­old asthmatic
children, the Childhood Asthma Management Program (CAMP), 88%
of patients had inhalant allergen sensitization according to results of
allergy skin-­prick testing.

Radiology

The findings of chest radiographs (posteroanterior and lateral views) in
children with asthma often appear to be normal, aside from subtle and
nonspecific findings of hyperinflation (e.g., flattening of the diaphragms)
and peribronchial thickening (Fig. 185.3). Chest radiographs can help
identify abnormalities that are hallmarks of asthma mimics (retained
foreign body, vascular rings, aspiration pneumonitis, hyperlucent lung
fields in bronchiolitis obliterans) and complications during asthma
exacerbations (atelectasis, pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax). Some
lung abnormalities can be better appreciated with high-­resolution, thin-­
section chest CT scans. Bronchiectasis, which is sometimes difficult to
appreciate on chest radiograph but is clearly seen on CT scan, implicates
an asthma mimic such as cystic fibrosis, allergic bronchopulmonary
mycoses (aspergillosis), ciliary dyskinesias, or immune deficiencies.

TREATMENT

National and international guidelines have been published to help
promote evidence-­
based asthma management. These include the
NIH-­sponsored National Asthma Education and Prevention Program
(NAEPP) Expert Panel Report 4 (EPR4), Guidelines for the Diagnosis
and Management of Asthma,* and The Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention (GINA), 2022.† NAEPP and GINA guidelines
are generally consistent in their management recommendations for
children with asthma, with some key differences that are noted in this
chapter.
The key components to optimal asthma management are specified (Fig. 185.4). Management of asthma should have the following
* https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/asthma-management-guidelines-2020-updates
† https://ginasthma.org/gina-reports/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1393

A

B

Fig. 185.3 Frontal (A) and lateral (B) radiographs of a 4-­year-­old with asthma show pulmonary hyperinflation, flattening of the diaphragms, and
minimal peribronchial thickening. No asthmatic complication is apparent.

Recurrent/chronic cough, wheeze, chest tightness and/or shortness of breath
• Symptoms
• Exacerbations
• Risk factors
Diagnosis
• Triggers
• Lung function
• Differential diagnosis
Asthma
Management
• Assessment and
monitoring

• Assess severity
• Monitor control
• Med adverse effects

• Education

• Key elements

• Control environmental factors
and co-morbid conditions

• Environmental controls
• Co-morbidities

• Medications

• Long-term controllers
• Quick relievers
• Assessment
• Management
• High-risk features
• Home asthma action plan

• Exacerbations

Optimal goal: Well controlled asthma
• Reduce impairment

• Prevent chronic symptoms
• Prevent sleep disturbance
• Infrequent SABA need
• Maintain (near) normal lung function
• Maintain normal activity

• Reduce risk

• Prevent exacerbations
• Reduce exacerbation severity/duration
• Prevent reduced lung growth
• No (minimal) adverse effects of therapy

Fig. 185.4 The key elements to optimal asthma management. SABA, Short-­acting β-­agonist.
components: (1) assessment and monitoring of disease activity, (2)
education to enhance patient and family knowledge and skills for self-­
management, (3) identification and management of precipitating factors and comorbid conditions that worsen asthma, and (4) appropriate
selection of medications to address the patient’s needs. The long-­term
goals of asthma management are to attain and maintain asthma control, to reduce risk of severe exacerbations, and to minimize impairment of daily activities.

Component 1: Regular Assessment and Monitoring

Regular assessment and monitoring are based on the concepts of
asthma severity, asthma control, and responsiveness to therapy.

Asthma severity is the intrinsic intensity of disease, and assessment is generally most accurate in patients not receiving controller
therapy. Therefore assessing asthma severity directs the initial level
of therapy. The two general categories are intermittent asthma and
persistent asthma, the latter being further subdivided into mild,
moderate, and severe. In contrast, asthma control is dynamic and
refers to the day-­to-­day variability of an asthmatic patient. In children receiving controller therapy, assessment of asthma control is
important in adjusting therapy and is categorized into three levels: well controlled, not well controlled, and very poorly controlled.
Responsiveness to therapy is the ease or difficulty with which
asthma control is attained by treatment.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1394 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Classification of asthma severity and control is based on the
domains of impairment and risk. These domains do not necessarily
correlate with each other and may respond differently to treatment.
Childhood asthma is often characterized by minimal day-­to-­day
impairment, with the potential for frequent, severe exacerbations
most often triggered by viral infections. The NIH and GINA guidelines have distinct criteria for three childhood age-­groups, 0-­4 years
(GINA 0-­5 years), 5-­11 years (GINA 6-­11 years), and ≥12 years,
for the evaluation of both severity (Table 185.9) and control (Table
185.10). The level of asthma severity or control is based on the most
severe impairment or risk category. In assessing asthma severity,
impairment consists of an assessment of the patient’s recent symptom frequency (daytime and nighttime, with subtle differences in
numeric cutoffs between the three age-­groups), SABA use for quick
relief, ability to engage in normal or desired activities, and airflow
compromise evaluated by spirometry in children ≥5 years. Risk refers
to the likelihood of developing severe asthma exacerbations. Of note,
even in the absence of frequent symptoms, persistent asthma can be
diagnosed and long-­term controller therapy initiated. For children
≥5 years, two exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids (OCSs) in
1 year, and for infants and preschool-­age children who have risk factors for asthma (see earlier) and four or more episodes of wheezing
over the past year that lasted longer than 1 day and affected sleep, or
two or more exacerbations in 6 months requiring systemic corticosteroids, qualifies them as having persistent asthma.

Asthma management can be optimized through regular clinic
visits every 2-­6 weeks until good asthma control is achieved. For
children on controller medication therapy, management is tailored
to the child’s level of control. The NIH guidelines provide tables
for evaluating asthma control for the three age-­groups (see Table
185.10). In evaluation of asthma control, as in severity assessment,
impairment includes an assessment of the patient’s symptom frequency (daytime and nighttime), SABA use for quick relief, ability
to engage in normal or desired activities, and for older children,
airflow measurements. Validated asthma control questionnaires
such as the Asthma Control Test (ACT, for adults and children ≥12
years), the Childhood ACT (C-­ACT, for children 4-­11 years), and
the Test for Respiratory and Asthma Control in Kids (TRACK,
for children <4 years) can also be used to assess level of control. An
ACT score of ≥20 indicates a child with well-­controlled asthma, a
value of 16-­19 indicates not well-­controlled asthma, and ≤15 indicates very poorly controlled asthma. For the C-­ACT, a score ≥20
indicates well controlled, 13-­19 indicates not well controlled, and ≤12
indicates very poorly controlled. For the TRACK, a score of less than
80 points suggests that a child’s breathing problems might not be
controlled.
Assessment of risk, in addition to considering severity and frequency
of exacerbations requiring systemic corticosteroids, includes tracking
the lung growth of older children to identify those with reduced and/
or progressive loss of lung function, and monitoring adverse effects of

Table 185.9  Assessing Asthma Severity*
CLASSIFICATION OF ASTHMA SEVERITY
PERSISTENT
INTERMITTENT
COMPONENTS OF SEVERITY
Impairment
Daytime symptoms
Nighttime awakenings
Age 0-­4 yr
Age ≥5 yr
Short-­acting β2-­agonist use for
symptoms (not for EIB
prevention)
Interference with normal activity
Lung function
FEV1 % predicted, age ≥5 yr
FEV1/FVC ratio†:
Age 5-­11 yr
Age ≥12 yr

MODERATE

SEVERE

≤2 days/wk

>2 days/wk but not daily

Daily

Throughout the day

0
≤2×/mo
≤2 days/wk

1-­2×/mo
3-­4×/mo
>2 days/wk but not daily, and
not more than 1× on any day

3-­4×/mo
>1×/wk but not nightly
Daily

>1×/wk
Often 7×/wk
Several times per day

None

Minor limitation

Some limitation

Extreme limitation

Normal FEV1 between
exacerbations
>80% predicted

≥80% predicted

60–80% predicted

<60% predicted

>85%
Normal

>80%
Normal

75–80%
Reduced 5%

<75%
Reduced >5%

Risk
Exacerbations requiring systemic corticosteroids
Age 0-­4 yr
0-­1/yr (see notes)
Age ≥5 yr

MILD

0-­1/yr (see notes)

≥2 exacerbations in 6 mo requiring systemic CS
or
≥4 wheezing episodes/yr lasting >1 day and risk factors for persistent asthma
≥2/yr (see notes)
≥2/yr (see notes)
≥2/yr (see notes)

Consider severity and interval since last exacerbation.
Frequency and severity may fluctuate over time for patients in any severity category.
Relative annual risk of exacerbations may be related to FEV1.
*Notes:

• Level of severity is determined by both impairment and risk. Assess impairment domain by patient’s/caregiver’s recall of previous 2-­4 wk. Symptom assessment for longer
periods should reflect a global assessment, such as inquiring whether a patient’s asthma is better or worse since the last visit. Assign severity to the most severe category
in which any feature occurs.
• At present, there are inadequate data to correspond frequencies of exacerbations with different levels of asthma severity. For treatment purposes, patients who had ≥2
exacerbations requiring oral systemic corticosteroids in the past 6 mo, or ≥4 wheezing episodes in the past year, and who have risk factors for persistent asthma, may be
considered the same as patients who have persistent asthma, even in the absence of impairment levels consistent with persistent asthma.
†Normal FEV /FVC: 8-­19 yr, 85%; 20-­39 yr, 80%.
1

FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 sec; FVC, forced vital capacity; CS, corticosteroid; EIB, exercise-­induced bronchospasm.
Adapted from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR3). Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma—Summary Report
2007. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120(Suppl):S94–S138.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1395
Table 185.10  Assessing Asthma Control and Adjusting Therapy in Children*
CLASSIFICATION OF ASTHMA CONTROL
COMPONENTS OF CONTROL
Impairment
Symptoms

WELL CONTROLLED

NOT WELL CONTROLLED

VERY POORLY CONTROLLED

≤2 days/wk but not more than
once on each day

>2 days/wk or multiple times on
≤2 days/wk

Throughout the day

≤1×/mo
≤1×/mo
≤2×/mo
≤2 days/wk

>1×/mo
≥2×/mo
1-­3×/wk
>2 days/wk

>1×/wk
≥2×/wk
≥4×/wk
Several times per day

None

Some limitation

Extremely limited

>80% predicted or personal
best
>80%

60–80% predicted or personal
best
75–80%

<60% predicted or personal best

>80% predicted or personal
best

60–80% predicted or personal
best

<60% predicted or personal best

0
≤0.75
≥20

1-­2
≤1.5
16-­19

3-­4
N/A
≤15

Nighttime awakenings:
Age 0-­4 yr
Age 5-­11 yr
Age ≥12 yr
Short-­acting β2-­agonist use for
symptoms (not for EIB
pretreatment)
Interference with normal activity
Lung function:
Age 5-­11 yr:
FEV1 (% predicted or peak flow)
FEV1/FVC:
Age ≥12 yr:
FEV1 (% predicted or peak flow)

<75%

Validated questionnaires†:
Age ≥12 yr:
ATAQ
ACQ
ACT

Risk
Exacerbations requiring systemic corticosteroids:
Age 0-­4 yr
0-­1/yr
2-­3/yr
>3/yr
Age ≥5 yr
0-­1/yr
≥2/yr (see notes)
Consider severity and interval since last exacerbation.
Treatment-­related adverse effects
Medication side effects can vary in intensity from none to very troublesome and worrisome; the level
of intensity does not correlate to specific levels of control but should be considered in the overall
assessment of risk
Reduction in lung growth or
Evaluation requires long-­term follow-­up care
progressive loss of lung function
RECOMMENDED ACTION FOR TREATMENT
Maintain current step
Regular follow-­up every 1-­6 mo
to maintain control
Consider step down if well
controlled for at least 3 mo

Step up‡ (1 step) and reevaluate
in 2-­6 wk
If no clear benefit in 4-­6 wk,
consider alternative diagnoses
or adjusting therapy
For side effects, consider alternative options

Consider short course of oral
corticosteroids
Step up§ (1-­2 steps) and reevaluate
in 2 wk
If no clear benefit in 4-­6 wk,
consider alternative diagnoses
or adjusting therapy
For side effects, consider alternative
options

*Notes:

• The stepwise approach is meant to assist, not replace, the clinical decision-­making required to meet individual patient needs.
• The level of control is based on the most severe impairment or risk category. Assess impairment domain by caregiver’s recall of previous 2-­4 wk. Symptom assessment
for longer periods should reflect a global assessment, such as inquiring whether the patient’s asthma is better or worse since the last visit.
• At present, there are inadequate data to correspond frequencies of exacerbations with different levels of asthma control. In general, more frequent and intense
exacerbations (e.g., requiring urgent, unscheduled care, hospitalization, or intensive care unit admission) indicate poorer disease control. For treatment purposes, patients
who had ≥2 exacerbations requiring oral systemic corticosteroids in the past year may be considered the same as patients who have not well-­controlled asthma, even in
the absence of impairment levels consistent with not well-­controlled asthma.
†Validated questionnaires for the impairment domain (the questionnaires do not assess lung function or the risk domain) and definition of minimal important difference (MID) for

each:

• ATAQ, Asthma Therapy Assessment Questionnaire; MID = 1.0.
• ACQ, Asthma Control Questionnaire; MID = 0.5.
• ACT, Asthma Control Test; MID not determined.
‡ACQ values of 0.76-­1.40 are indeterminate regarding well-­controlled asthma.
§Before step-­up therapy: (1) review adherence to medications, inhaler technique, and environmental control and (2) if alternative treatment option was used in a step, discontinue it

and use preferred treatment for that step.
FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 sec; FVC, forced vital capacity; EIB, exercise-­induced bronchospasm; N/A, not available.
Adapted from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR 3). Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma—Summary Report
2007. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120(Suppl):S94–S138.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1396 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
medications. The degree of impairment and presence of risk are used
to determine the patient’s level of asthma control as well controlled, not
well controlled, or very poorly controlled. Children with well-­controlled
asthma have daytime symptoms ≤2 days/week and need a rescue bronchodilator ≤2 days/week, an FEV1 of >80% of predicted (and FEV1/
FVC ratio >80% for children 5-­11 years), no interference with normal
activity, and <2 exacerbations in the past year and an ACT score of
≥20. The impairment criteria vary slightly depending on age-­group.
Children whose status does not meet all the criteria of well-­controlled
asthma are determined to have either not well-­controlled or very poorly
controlled asthma, which is determined by the single criterion with the
poorest rating.
Two to four asthma checkups per year are recommended for reassessing and maintaining good asthma control. Lung function testing (spirometry) is recommended at least annually and more often if
asthma is poorly perceived, is inadequately controlled, and/or lung
function is abnormally low.

Component 2: Patient Education

Asthma education that focuses on home management and medication adherence is critical for optimal clinical care of children with
asthma (Table 185.11). Asthma education should consider sociocultural and ethnic factors and provide an open forum for concerns
about asthma and its treatment. Families should be active participants
in the development of treatment goals and selection of medications.
Self-­management skills should be reevaluated regularly (e.g., inhaler
medication technique).
During initial patient visits, a basic understanding of the pathogenesis of asthma (chronic inflammation and AHR underlying a
clinically intermittent presentation) can help children with asthma
and their parents understand the importance of recommendations
aimed at reducing airways inflammation to achieve and maintain
good asthma control. It is helpful to specify the expectations of good
asthma control resulting from optimal asthma management (see Fig.
184.4). Addressing concerns about potential adverse effects of asthma
pharmacotherapeutic agents, especially their risks relative to their
benefits, is essential in achieving long-­term adherence with asthma
pharmacotherapy and environmental control measures.
All children with asthma should benefit from a written Asthma Action
Plan (Fig. 185.5). This plan has two main components: (1) a daily “routine” management plan describing regular asthma medication use and
other measures to keep asthma under good control and (2) an action
plan to manage worsening asthma, describing indicators of impending exacerbations, identifying what medications to take, and specifying

Table 185.11  Key Elements of Productive Clinic Visits for
Asthma
Standardize assessment of asthma control (e.g., Asthma Control
Test, exacerbations in past 12 mo)
Specify goals of asthma management
Explain basic facts about asthma
• Contrast normal vs asthmatic airways
• Link airways inflammation, “twitchiness,” and bronchoconstriction
• Long-­term-­control and quick-­relief medications
• Address concerns about potential adverse effects of asthma
pharmacotherapy
Teach, demonstrate, and have patient show proper technique
• Inhaled medication use (spacer use with metered-­dose inhaler)
Investigate and manage factors that contribute to asthma severity
• Environmental exposures
• Comorbid conditions
Create written two-­part Asthma Action Plan (see Fig. 185.5)
• Daily management
• Action plan for asthma exacerbations
Regular follow-­up visits
• Twice yearly (more often if asthma not well controlled)
• Monitor lung function at least annually

when and how to contact the regular physician and/or obtain urgent/
emergency medical care.
Regular follow-­
up visits are recommended to help to maintain
optimal asthma control. Follow-­up visits provide the opportunity to
reassess asthma medication perceptions and delivery techniques. The
Asthma Action Plan can be revised as needed.

Adherence

Asthma is a chronic condition that is usually best managed with daily
controller medication. However, symptoms wax and wane and exacerbations may be infrequent. A natural tendency is to reduce or discontinue daily controller therapies once asthma symptoms improve.
As such, adherence to a daily controller regimen is frequently suboptimal; ICSs are underused 60% of the time. In one study, children with
asthma who required an OCS course for an asthma exacerbation had
used their daily controller ICS 15% of the time. Misconceptions about
controller medication time to onset, efficacy, and safety often underlie
poor adherence and can be addressed by asking about such concerns
at each visit.

Component 3: Control of Factors Contributing to
Poor Asthma Control

Controllable factors that can worsen asthma can be generally grouped
as (1) environmental exposures and (2) comorbid conditions (Table
185.12).

Eliminating and Reducing Problematic Environmental
Exposures

Steps should be taken to investigate and minimize exposures in asthmatic patients. These exposures include allergens as well as irritants
(e.g., smoke, pollutants, and other chemicals such as perfumes), in the
patient’s home or school. However, patients often cannot identify potential triggers. Allergy testing should be considered for all patients with
persistent asthma to identify allergens that may contribute to airway
inflammation, asthma symptoms, and exacerbations. For asthmatic
patients who are allergic to allergens in their homes and/or schools or
daycare centers, reducing or eliminating these indoor allergen exposures can reduce asthma symptoms, medication requirements, AHR,
severe exacerbations, and disease persistence. Common home, school,
and daycare allergen exposures include furred or feathered animals as
pets (cats, dogs, rodents, birds) or as pests (mice, rats, cockroaches),
and occult indoor allergens such as dust mites and molds.
Allergen mitigation strategies can be used in patients with allergy of
all ages and asthma severities, but these strategies should be tailored
to the individual. Multicomponent interventions are recommended
to control indoor allergens, because single component interventions
are often not effective. Examples of single component interventions
for dust mite allergy include (1) encasing bedding and pillows in
allergen-­impermeable covers, (2) washing bedding weekly in hot water
(>130°F), (3) removing wall-­to-­wall carpeting and upholstered furniture, or (4) reducing and maintaining indoor humidity <50%. In contrast, a multicomponent strategy for dust mite allergy might include
all of these measures. Integrated pest management strategies are also
recommended for patients exposed to cockroaches, mice, or rats in the
home who have sensitization to these allergens. Integrated pest management can also be used with other interventions to reduce exposures
to pest-­related allergens. Families should be educated that it can take
≥6 months for the levels of these indoor allergens to drop significantly
and for asthma control to improve after intervention. Allergen mitigation strategies are not recommended for patients with no allergy to
indoor allergens.
Tobacco, wood and coal smoke, dusts, strong odors, and noxious air
pollutants (e.g., nitrogen dioxide from inadequately vented gas stoves
and furnaces) can also aggravate asthma. These airway irritants should
be eliminated from or reduced in the homes, schools/daycare centers,
and automobiles/school transportation used by children with asthma.
Care providers can be strong influencers of smoking cessation by parents,
caregivers, and adolescent patients (see also Chapters 157.2 and 759.1).
Secondhand marijuana smoke contains many of the same chemicals and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1397

Fig. 185.5 Asthma action plan for home use. This plan has two main components: (1) a daily management plan to keep asthma in good control and

(2) an action plan to recognize and manage worsening asthma. (From U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health,
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH Pub No 07-­5251, April 2007. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/asthma/treatment-­action-­plan.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1398 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.12  Control of Factors Contributing to Asthma
Severity
ELIMINATE OR REDUCE PROBLEMATIC ENVIRONMENTAL
EXPOSURES
Environmental tobacco smoke elimination or reduction in home and
automobiles
Allergen exposure elimination or reduction in sensitized asthmatic
patients
• Pets (cats, dogs, rodents, birds)
• Pests (mice, rats)
• Dust mites
• Cockroaches
• Molds
Other airway irritants
• Wood-­ or coal-­burning smoke
• Strong chemical odors and perfumes (e.g., household cleaners)
• Dusts
TREAT COMORBID CONDITIONS
Rhinitis
Sinusitis
Gastroesophageal reflux

particulates as tobacco smoke, and should also be avoided (see Chapter
759.2). Exposure to electronic cigarette aerosol may also aggravate asthma.
Annual influenza vaccination (both inactivated and live attenuated)
is safe in children with asthma and continues to be recommended for
all children with asthma to reduce the risk of severe complications,
although influenza is not responsible for the large majority of virus-­
induced asthma exacerbations experienced by children.

Identifying and Treating Comorbid Conditions

Rhinitis, sinusitis, GER, and obesity often accompany asthma and may
make the asthma difficult to treat. These conditions can also mimic
asthma symptoms and lead to misclassification of asthma severity and
control. Indeed, these conditions, along with asthma, are the most
common causes of chronic cough. Poor conditioning from obesity may
also be confused with asthma-­related dyspnea. Effective management
of these comorbid conditions may improve asthma symptoms, such
that less asthma medication is needed to achieve good asthma control.

Component 4: Principles of Asthma
Pharmacotherapy

The current version of NIH asthma guidelines (2020) provides treatment
recommendations that vary by level of asthma severity and age-­groups
(Table 185.13). There are six treatment steps. Patients at Treatment Step
1 have intermittent asthma. Children with mild persistent asthma are
at Treatment Step 2. Children with moderate persistent asthma can
be at Treatment Step 3 or 4. Children with severe persistent asthma
are at Treatment Steps 5 and 6. The goals of therapy are to achieve a
well-­controlled state by reducing the components of both impairment
(e.g., preventing or minimizing symptoms, infrequently needing quick-­
reliever medications, maintaining “normal” lung function and normal
activity levels) and risk (e.g., preventing recurrent exacerbations, reduced
lung growth, and medication adverse effects). The recommendations for
initial therapy are based on assessment of asthma severity, whereas level
of control determines any modifications of treatment in children who
are already using controller therapy. A major objective of this approach
is to identify and treat all “persistent” and inadequately controlled
asthma with anti-­
inflammatory controller medication. Treatment
Step 1 (intermittent asthma) management is simply the use of a SABA as
needed for symptoms and for pretreatment in those with EIB. For children <5 years with recurrent episodic wheeze in the setting of viral illness, a short course of daily high-­dose ICS may also be considered.
The preferred treatment for all patients with persistent asthma
includes an ICS-­containing therapy, as monotherapy or in combination

with adjunctive therapy. The type(s) and amount(s) of daily controller medications to be used are determined by the asthma severity and
control rating.
At Treatment Step 2 (mild persistent asthma), low-­dose daily ICS
therapy is the treatment of choice for all children. Common alternative
medications include a leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA) such as
montelukast.
At Treatment Step 3 (moderate persistent asthma), for school-­age
children, the preferred treatment has recently been modified to the
daily and as-­needed use of a low-­dose ICS/formoterol (a rapid onset,
long-­acting β2-­agonist [LABA]) combination inhaler, used twice daily
as both maintenance therapy and as-­needed reliever therapy (in place
of a separate SABA inhaler).
Single maintenance and reliever therapy (SMART) is a fundamental change from the conventional distinct daily controllers vs quick
reliever medications. Although SMART has been determined to be
effective in reducing asthma exacerbations relative to use of SABA as
a reliever (i.e., favorable benefit-­harm ratio), some current challenges
to implementation for providers and patients include ICS/formoterol
availability/affordability, FDA approval for use as a reliever therapy,
and asthma management and action plan reeducation for home and
school, including the appropriate use of SABA in asthma care (e.g.,
exercise pretreatment). A SABA/ICS combination inhaler (albuterol/
budesonide 90 mcg/80 mcg per actuation) is FDA approved for asneeded use as a quick reliever in adults ages 18 years and older (not
in children).
Common alternate choices for the treatment of school-­age children
at Treatment Step 3 include (1) medium-­dose ICS or (2) low-­dose
ICS used in combination with an inhaled LABA. In a study of children with uncontrolled asthma receiving low-­dose ICS, the addition of
LABA was more likely to provide improvement than either adding an
LTRA or increasing ICS dosage. However, some children had a good
response to medium-­dose ICS or the addition of an LTRA, justifying
them as step-­up controller therapy options. Thus if a child is not well
controlled with a given step 3 treatment, trials of the alternate treatment approaches should be considered before stepping up to step 4.
In patients 12 years and older with uncontrolled persistent asthma for
whom a LABA is not used, current guidelines recommend addition of
a LABA or a long-­acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) to the ICS as a
step-­up approach. Adding a LAMA is not more efficacious than adding
a LABA, so LAMAs should not be selected over a LABA unless necessary. LAMAs also have a less favorable benefit-­harm profile and should
not be used in patients with a risk of urinary retention or glaucoma.
LAMAs can also be added to ICS/LABA combination therapy if the
patient remains symptomatic.
For young children (≤4 years) at Treatment Step 3, NAEPP guidelines recommend daily medium dose ICS, whereas GINA recommends
three co-­equal preferred options: (1) daily low-­dose ICS/LABA, (2)
daily low-­dose ICS + LTRA, or (3) daily medium-­dose ICS.
At Treatment Step 4 (moderate persistent asthma), the preferred
therapy for school-­age children is daily and as-­needed use of a
medium-­
dose ICS/formoterol combination inhaler, used twice
daily for maintenance and as needed for reliever therapy. Alternatives include daily medium-­dose ICS with either a LABA, LTRA, or
other controller (such as a LAMA in patients 12 years and older). For
preschool-­age children at Treatment Step 4, daily medium-­dose ICS/
LABA is recommended.
For children age ≥5 years with allergic asthma requiring Treatment
Steps 2-­4 care, subcutaneous allergen immunotherapy (SCIT) can be
considered. Current guidelines recommend SCIT as an adjunct treatment to standard pharmacotherapy in patients whose asthma can be
adequately controlled and managed at the initiation, buildup, and
maintenance phases of SCIT. Some requirements for effective and
safe SCIT include (1) allergen sensitization evaluation using either
immediate hypersensitivity skin testing or in vitro antigen-­specific
IgE antibody testing, and by a trained healthcare professional skilled
in proper testing and result interpretation; (2) before each SCIT injection, evaluation to ensure that asthma is well controlled because poorly
controlled asthma is a major risk factor for life-­threatening and fatal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1399
Table 185.13  Stepwise Approach for Managing Asthma in Children*
Age

Treatment

Intermittent
Asthma
Step 1

Preferred

0–4
years

PRN SABA
And
At the start of
RTI: Add short
course daily ICS

Alternative

Persistent Asthma
Step 2
Daily low-dose
ICS and
PRN SABA

Step 3

Step 4

Daily low-dose
ICS-LABA and
PRN SABA
Or
Daily low-dose
ICS + montelukast
or daily mediumdose ICS and
PRN SABA

Daily mediumdose ICS-LABA
and PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA and
PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA + oral
systemic
corticosteroids
and PRN SABA

Daily mediumdose ICS +
montelukast
and PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS + montelukast
and PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA +
montelukast +
oral systemic
corticosteroids
and PRN SABA

Daily montelukast
or Cromolyn and
PRN SABA

Step 5

Step 6

For children age 4 years only, see Step 3
and Step 4 for ages 5–11 years
Preferred

PRN SABA

5–11
years
Alternative

Daily low-dose
ICS and
PRN SABA

Daily and PRN
combination
low-dose ICSformoterol

Daily and PRN
combination
medium-dose
ICS-formoterol

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA and
PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA + oral
systemic
corticosteroids
and PRN SABA

Daily LTRA, or
Cromolyn, or
Nedocromil, or
Theophylline, and
PRN SABA

Daily medium-dose
ICS and PRN SABA
Or
Daily low-dose
ICS-LABA, or daily
low-dose ICS +
LTRA, or daily
low-dose ICS +
theophylline,
and PRN SABA

Daily mediumdose ICS-LABA
and PRN SABA
Or
Daily mediumdose ICS + LTRA,
or daily mediumdose ICS +
theophylline,
and PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS + LTRA or
daily high-dose
ICS + Theophylline,
and PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS + LTRA +
oral systemic
corticosteroid or
daily high-dose
ICS + Theophylline
+ oral systemic
corticosteroid,
and PRN SABA

Steps 2–4: Conditionally recommend use of subcutaneous
immunotherapy as an adjunct treatment to standard
pharmacotherapy in individuals 5 years of age whose asthma is
controlled at the initiation, build up, and maintenance phases of
immunotherapy
Preferred
12+
years
Alternative

PRN SABA

Consider omalizumab

Daily low-dose ICS
and PRN SABA
Or
PRN concomitant
ICS and SABA

Daily and PRN
combination
low-dose
ICS-formoterol

Daily and PRN
combination
medium-dose
ICS-formoterol

Daily medium-high
dose ICS-LABA +
LAMA and PRN
SABA

Daily LTRA and
PRN SABA
Or
Cromolyn, or
Nedocromil, or
Theophylline, and
PRN SABA

Daily mediumdose ICS and
PRN SABA
Or
Daily low-dose
ICS-LABA, or
Daily low-dose
ICS + LAMA, or
daily low-dose
ICS + LTRA, or
daily low-dose
ICS + theophylline,
and PRN SABA

Daily mediumdose ICS or daily
medium-dose
ICS + LAMA, and
PRN SABA
Or
Daily mediumdose ICS + LTRA,
or daily mediumdose ICS +
theophylline, and
PRN SABA

Daily medium-high
dose ICS-LABA or
daily high-dose
ICS + LTRA, and
PRN SABA

Steps 2–4: Conditionally recommend use of subcutaneous allergen
immunotherapy as an adjunct treatment to standard
pharmacotherapy in individuals 5 years of age whose asthma is
controlled at the initiation, build up, and maintenance phases of
immunotherapy

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA + oral
systemic
corticosteroids
and PRN SABA

Consider adding asthma biologics
(e.g., anti-IgE, anti-IL5, anti-IL5R,
anti-IL4/IL13R, anti-TSLP)

Assess control
• First check adherence, inhaler technique, environmental factors, and comorbid conditions.
• Step up if needed, reassess in 4–6 weeks
• Step down if possible (if asthma is well controlled for at least 3 consecutive months)
Consult with asthma specialist if Step 3 or higher is required for those 0–4 years of age (and consider consultation at Step 2)
or if Step 4 is required for those 5+ years of age (and consider consultation at Step 3).
Control assessment is a key element of asthma care. This involves both impairment and risk. Use of objective measures,
self-reported control, and health care utilization are complementary and should be employed on an ongoing basis,
depending on the individual’s clinical situation.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

1400 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.13  Stepwise Approach for Managing Asthma in Children*—cont’d
*Notes:
• The stepwise approach is meant to assist, not replace, the clinical decision-­making required to meet individual patient needs.
• If alternative treatment is used and response is inadequate, discontinue it and use the preferred treatment before stepping up.
• If clear benefit is not observed within 4-­6 wk and patient/family medication technique and adherence are satisfactory, consider adjusting therapy or alternative diagnosis.
• Studies on children age 0-­4 yr are limited.
• Clinicians who administer allergen immunotherapy or biologic therapy should be prepared and equipped to identify and treat anaphylaxis that may occur.
• Theophylline is a less desirable alternative because of the need to monitor serum concentration levels. The 2016 GINA guidelines do not recommend the use of theophylline as a
controller medication and in IV forms to treat status asthmaticus due to its severe adverse effects profile.
†Alphabetical order is used when more than 1 treatment option is listed within either preferred or alternative therapy.
ICS, Inhaled corticosteroid; LABA, inhaled long-acting β2-agonist; LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonist; OCS, oral corticosteroid; prn, as needed; SABA, inhaled short-acting β2-agonist.
Adapted from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR3): Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma --summary report
2007, J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(Suppl):S94-S138, 2007 and 2020 Focused Updates to Asthma Management Guidelines: A Report from the National Asthma Education and
Prevention Program Coordinating Committee Expert Panel Working Group.

allergic reactions from SCIT; and (3) being well prepared to respond
to systemic allergic/anaphylactic reactions to SCIT injections. Patients
with allergic asthma may also benefit from improvements in comorbid
allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis, which could additionally improve
quality of life. SCIT efficacy with regard to asthma medication use and
exacerbations is not clear. SCIT is not recommended in patients with
severe asthma given the potential for systemic reactions of potentially
great severity. Sublingual immunotherapy is not currently recommended based on available data.
At Treatment Steps 5 and 6 (severe persistent asthma), all children should receive daily high-­dose ICS plus LABA as the preferred
approach; alternative secondary controllers to LABA include LTRA
or LAMA. Long-­term administration of OCSs as controller therapy
may be effective but is rarely required and should be avoided whenever possible due to potential for significant corticosteroid side effects.
In addition, biologics should be considered in children with specific
asthma phenotypes: (1) omalizumab can be used in children ≥6 years
old with severe allergic asthma; (2) mepolizumab (≥6 years), dupilumab
(≥6 years), and benralizumab (≥12 years) can be used in children with
severe eosinophilic asthma; and (3) tezepelumab (≥12 years) can be used
in children with severe asthma. A rescue course of systemic corticosteroids may be necessary at any step for very poorly controlled asthma.

Adjusting Asthma Pharmacotherapy

By determining the lowest number or dose of daily controller medications that can maintain good control, the potential for medication
adverse effects is reduced. Asthma controller therapy can be stepped
down after good asthma control has been achieved and maintained
for at least 3 months. Stopping ICS controller therapy should be given
careful consideration in children with a history of exacerbations. For
example, in children with a history of fall seasonal asthma exacerbations and whose asthma becomes well controlled in the summer, ICS
may be reduced but not completely discontinued. Regular follow-­up is
still emphasized because the variability of asthma’s course is well recognized. When asthma is not well controlled, adherence, inhaler technique, and comorbidities should be considered first before increasing
controller treatment. If increased treatment is required, the recommendation is to step up by one level and closely monitor for clinical
improvement. For a child with very poorly controlled asthma, the recommendations are to consider a short course of prednisone and/or to
increase therapy by two step levels, with reevaluation in 2 weeks.

Referral to Asthma Specialist

Referral to an asthma specialist for consultation or co-­management is
recommended if there are difficulties in achieving or maintaining good
asthma control. For children ≤4 years, referral is recommended if the
patient requires at least Treatment Step 3 care, and should be considered if the patient requires Treatment Step 2 care. For children ≥5 years,
consultation with a specialist is recommended if the patient requires
Treatment Step 4 care or higher, and should be considered if Treatment
Step 3 is required. Referral is also recommended if allergen immunotherapy (AIT) or biologic therapy is being considered.

Long-­Term Controller Medications

All levels of persistent asthma should be treated with an ICS-­containing
therapy to reduce airway inflammation, improve long-­term control, and
reduce exacerbation risk (see Table 185.13). Other long-­term controller medications include LABAs, leukotriene modifiers, LAMAs, SCIT,
cromolyn, sustained-­release theophylline, and tiotropium in adolescents.
Omalizumab and mepolizumab are approved by the FDA for use as an
add-­on therapy in children ≥6 years who have severe allergic asthma or
eosinophilic asthma, respectively, that remains difficult to control. For
adolescents 12 years and older, benralizumab is approved by the FDA for
severe asthma with an eosinophilic phenotype. Dupilumab is approved
by the FDA for moderate to severe asthma with an eosinophilic phenotype for children 6 years and older. Tezepelumab is approved by the FDA
for severe asthma in adolescents 12 years and older (see Tables 185.13
and 185.14).

Inhaled Corticosteroids

ICS therapy serves as the cornerstone of therapy in persistent asthma,
as it improves lung function; reduces asthma symptoms, AHR, and
use of “rescue” medications; improves quality of life; and most importantly reduces exacerbations, the need for systemic corticosteroids,
urgent care visits, and hospitalizations. Epidemiologic studies have also
shown that ICS therapy in adults substantially lowers the risk of death
attributable to asthma if used regularly. Because ICS therapy frequently
achieves all the goals of asthma management, it is viewed as first-­line
treatment for persistent asthma. The selection of the initial ICS dose is
based on the determination of disease severity.
Seven ICSs are approved by the FDA for use in children. The NIH
and GINA guidelines provide equivalence classifications (Table 185.15),
although direct comparisons of efficacy and safety outcomes are lacking. ICSs are available in metered-­dose inhalers (MDIs) using hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) as their propellant, in dry powder inhalers (DPIs),
or in suspension for nebulization. Fluticasone propionate, fluticasone furoate, mometasone furoate, ciclesonide, and to a lesser extent
budesonide are considered “second-­generation” ICSs, in that they have
greater antiinflammatory potency and less systemic bioavailability.
Even though ICSs are very effective in most patients, there has been
some reluctance to treat children with ICSs due to parental and occasionally physician concerns regarding their potential for adverse effects
with chronic use. The most serious adverse effects that occur with long-­
term systemic corticosteroid therapy have not been seen or have only
rarely been reported in children receiving ICSs in recommended doses.
The risk of adverse effects from ICS therapy is related to the dose and
frequency of administration (Table 185.16). High doses (≥1,000 μg/day
in children) and frequent administration (4 times per day) are more
likely to have both local and systemic adverse effects. Children who
receive maintenance therapy with higher ICS doses are also likely to
require frequent systemic corticosteroid courses for asthma exacerbations, further increasing their risk of corticosteroid adverse effects.
The most common ICS adverse effects are local: oral candidiasis
(thrush) and dysphonia (hoarse voice). Thrush results from propellant-­
induced mucosal irritation and local immunosuppression, and dysphonia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1401
Table 185.14  Usual Dosages for Long-­Term Control Medications
AGE
MEDICATION

0-­4 YR

≥12 YR

5-­11 YR

INHALED CORTICOSTEROID MONOTHERAPIES (SEE TABLE 185.13)
Inhaled Corticosteroid/Long-­Acting β-­Agonist (ICS/LABA) Combination Therapies:
Fluticasone/salmeterol (Advair):
N/A
DPI: 100, 250, or 500 μg/50 μg

HFA: 45 μg/21 μg, 115 μg/21 μg,
230 μg/21 μg
Budesonide/formoterol
(Symbicort):
HFA: 80 μg/4.5 μg, 160 μg/4.5 μg
Mometasone/formoterol (Dulera):
HFA: 100 μg/5 μg, 200 μg/5 μg

1 inhalation bid; dose depends on
level of severity or control (the
100/50 dosage is indicated in
children ≥4 yr)
N/A

2 inhalations bid; dose depends on
level of severity or control
2 inhalations bid; dose depends on
level of severity or control
2 inhalations bid; dose depends on
level of severity or control

Leukotriene Receptor Antagonists:
Montelukast (Singulair):
4 mg qhs (1-­5 yr)
4 or 5 mg chewable tablet
4 mg granule packets
10 mg tablet
Black box warning
(see text)
Zafirlukast (Accolate):
N/A
10 mg or 20 mg tablet
Biologic Therapies:
Omalizumab (anti-­IgE; Xolair):
SC injection, 150 mg

1 inhalation bid; dose depends on
level of severity or control

N/A

5 mg qhs (6-­14 yr)

10 mg qhs (indicated in children
≥15 yr)

10 mg bid (7-­11 yr)

40 mg daily (20 mg tablet bid)

75-­375 mg SC q 2-­4 wk, depending
on body weight and pretreatment
serum IgE level
100 mg SC q 4 wk

Mepolizumab (anti–IL-­5; Nucala):
SC injection, 100 mg
Benralizumab (anti–IL-­5 Rα;
Fasenra)
SC injection, 30 mg
Dupilumab (anti–IL-­4 Rα; Dupixent)
SC injection, 200 mg, 300 mg

N/A

75-­375 mg SC q 2-­4 wk (6-­11 yr),
depending on body weight and
pretreatment serum IgE level
40 mg SC q 4 wk (6-­11 yr)

N/A

N/A

30 mg SC q 4 wk × 3 doses, then 30
mg SC q 8 wk

N/A

400 mg or 600 mg SC starting dose,
then 200 or 300 mg SC q 2 wk

Tezepelumab (anti-TSLP; Tezspire)
SC injection, 210 mg

N/A

15 to <30 kg:100 mg q 2 wk or 300
mg q 4 wk
≥30 kg: 200 mg q2 wk
N/A

210 mg SC q 4 wk

bid, Two times daily; DPI, dry powder inhaler; HFA, hydrofluoroalkane; IL, interleukin; q, every; qhs, every night; SC, subcutaneous(ly).

is the result of vocal cord myopathy. These effects are dose dependent
and are most common in individuals receiving high-­dose ICS or OCS
therapy. The incidence of these local effects can be greatly minimized by
using a spacer with an MDI with the ICS, because spacers reduce oropharyngeal deposition of the drug and propellant. Mouth rinsing using a
“swish and spit” technique after ICS use is also recommended.
The potential for growth suppression and osteoporosis with long-­
term ICS use had been an unanswered concern. A long-­term, prospective NIH-­
sponsored study (CAMP) followed the growth and
bone mineral density (BMD) of >1,000 children (age 6-­12 years at
entry) with mild to moderate asthma until they reached adulthood
and found slight growth suppression and osteopenia in some children
who received long-­term ICS therapy. A small (1.1 cm), limited (1 year)
growth suppressive effect was noted in children receiving budesonide,
200 μg twice daily, after 5 years of therapy. Height was then followed
until all children had reached adulthood (mean age 25 years). Those
who received ICS therapy remained approximately 1 cm shorter than
those who received placebo. Thus children treated with long-­term
low-­dose ICS therapy may be about 1 cm shorter than expected as an
adult, which is of little clinical significance. BMD was no different in
those receiving budesonide vs placebo during the duration of the study,
whereas a follow-­up study after a mean of 7 years found a slight dose-­
dependent effect of ICS therapy on bone mineral accretion only among
males. A much greater effect on BMD was observed with increasing

numbers of OCS bursts for acute asthma, as well as an increase in risk
for osteopenia, which was again limited to males. These findings were
with use of low-­dose budesonide; higher ICS doses, especially of agents
with increased potency, are likely to have a greater potential for adverse
effects. Thus osteoporosis screening and prevention measures are
recommended for patients receiving higher ICS doses, because these
patients are also likely to require systemic courses for exacerbations
(see Table 185.16).

Systemic Corticosteroids

The development of second-­generation ICSs, especially when used in
combination with a LABA in a single device, along with the addition of
biologics, have allowed almost all children with asthma to achieve and
maintain good control without need for maintenance OCS therapy. Thus
short courses of OCSs are used primarily to treat asthma exacerbations
and, very rarely, as maintenance therapy in children with very severe disease. In these patients, every attempt should be made to exclude comorbid
conditions and to keep the OCS dose at ≤20 mg every other day. Doses
exceeding this amount are associated with numerous adverse effects (see
Chapter 615). To determine the need for continued OCS therapy, tapering of the OCS dose over several weeks should be attempted, with close
monitoring of the patient’s symptoms and lung function.
Prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, and dexamethasone are rapidly and completely absorbed, with peak plasma

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1402 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.15  Estimated Comparative Inhaled Corticosteroid Doses
GLUCOCORTICOID

LOW DAILY DOSE

MEDIUM DAILY DOSE

HIGH DAILY DOSE

Beclomethasone (Qvar)
MDI: 40 or 80 μg
(Approved for children ≥5 yr)

80-­160 μg

160-­320 μg

>320 μg

Budesonide (Pulmicort Flexhaler)
DPI: 90, 180 μg
(Approved for children ≥6 yr)

200 μg

200-­400 μg

>400 μg

Budesonide suspension for nebulization
(Generic and Pulmicort Respules)
0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg
(Approved for children 1-­8 yr)

0.5 mg

1.0 mg

2.0 mg

Ciclesonide (Alvesco)
MDI: 80, 160 μg
(Approved for children ≥12 yr)

80 μg

80-­160 μg

160 μg

Flunisolide (Aerospan)
MDI: 80 μg/puff
(Approved for children ≥6 yr)

80 μg

80-­160 μg

160 μg

Fluticasone propionate (Flovent, Flovent
Diskus)
MDI: 44, 110, 220 μg
DPI: 50, 100, 250 μg
(44 and 50 μg approved for children ≥4 yr)

88-­176 μg
100-­200 μg

176-­440 μg
200-­500 μg

>440 μg
>500 μg

Fluticasone furoate (Arnuity Ellipta)
DPI: 100, 200 μg
(Approved for children ≥12 yr)

100 μg

100-­200 μg

200 μg

Mometasone Furoate (Asmanex, Asmanex
Twisthaler)
MDI: 100, 200 μg
DPI: 110, 220 μg
(Approved for children ≥4 yr)

110 μg
100 μg

110 μg
100 μg

110 μg
100 μg

DPI, Dry powder inhaler; MDI, metered-­dose inhaler.
Adapted from National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR3). Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma—Summary Report 2007.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120(Suppl):S94–S138.

concentrations occurring within 1-­2 hours. Prednisone is an inactive prodrug that requires biotransformation via first-­pass hepatic
metabolism to prednisolone, its active form. For asthma exacerbations in children, oral dexamethasone is also commonly used given
its long half-­life of 36-­54 hours and association with less vomiting
when compared with oral prednisone. These corticosteroids are
metabolized in the liver into inactive compounds, with the rate of
metabolism influenced by drug interactions and disease states. Anticonvulsants (phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine) increase
the metabolism of prednisolone, methylprednisolone, and dexamethasone, with methylprednisolone most significantly affected.
Rifampin also enhances the clearance of corticosteroids and can
result in diminished therapeutic effect. Other medications (ketoconazole, oral contraceptives) can significantly delay corticosteroid
metabolism. Some macrolide antibiotics, such as erythromycin and
clarithromycin, delay the clearance of only methylprednisolone.
Long-­term OCS therapy can cause numerous adverse effects over
time (see Chapter 617). Some occur immediately (metabolic effects),
whereas others can develop insidiously over several months to years
(growth suppression, osteoporosis, cataracts). Most adverse effects
occur in a cumulative dose-­and duration-­dependent manner. Children
who require routine or frequent short courses of OCSs, especially with
concurrent high-­dose ICSs and often intranasal corticosteroids, should
receive corticosteroid adverse effects screening (see Table 185.16) and
osteoporosis preventive measures (see Chapter 749).

Long-­Acting Inhaled β-­Agonists

Although considered daily controller medications, LABAs (salmeterol,
formoterol) are not intended for use as monotherapy for persistent asthma
because they can increase the risk for serious asthma exacerbations (ICU
admission, endotracheal intubation) and asthma-­related deaths when

used without an ICS. The likely mechanism involves the ability of LABAs
to “mask” worsening asthma inflammation and asthma severity, leading
to a delay in seeking urgent care and increased risk of a life-­threatening
exacerbation. Although both salmeterol and formoterol have a prolonged
duration of effect (≥12 hours), salmeterol has a prolonged onset of effect
(60 minutes), whereas formoterol’s onset of effect is rapid (5-­10 minutes)
after administration. Given their long duration of action, LABAs are well
suited for patients with nocturnal asthma and for individuals who require
frequent use of SABA inhalations during the day to prevent EIB, but only
in combination with ICSs. The FDA recommends that once a patient is
well controlled on combination ICS/LABA therapy, the LABA component
should be discontinued while continuing treatment with the ICS, although
many patients experience disease worsening on LABA discontinuation.

Combination ICS/LABA Therapy

Combination ICS/LABA therapy is recommended for patients
who are suboptimally controlled with ICS therapy alone and those
with moderate or severe persistent asthma. In most patients who
are inadequately controlled with ICS alone, combination ICS/LABA
therapy is superior to add-­on therapy with either an LTRA or LAMA
or doubling the ICS dose. Benefits include improvement in baseline
lung function, less need for rescue SABA therapy, improved quality of
life, and fewer asthma exacerbations. A large study found that in children inadequately controlled with low-­dose ICS therapy, combination
low-­dose fluticasone/salmeterol (100 μg/21 μg) twice daily was almost
twice as likely to be effective as other step-­up regimens, including
fluticasone (250 μg) twice daily or low-­dose fluticasone (100 μg twice
daily) plus montelukast once daily, with the greatest improvement in
reducing exacerbations requiring prednisone and study withdrawals
due to poorly controlled asthma. In addition, combination fluticasone/
salmeterol was as likely to be effective as medium-­dose fluticasone and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1403
Table 185.16  Risk Assessment for Corticosteroid Adverse Effects
CONDITIONS

RECOMMENDATIONS

Low risk

(≤1 risk factor*)
Low-­to medium-­dose ICS (see Table 185.13)

Monitor blood pressure and weight with each physician visit
Measure height annually (stadiometry); monitor periodically for declining
growth rate and pubertal developmental delay
Encourage regular physical exercise
Ensure adequate dietary calcium and vitamin D with additional supplements
for daily calcium if needed.
Avoid smoking and alcohol
Ensure TSH status if patient has history of thyroid abnormality

Medium risk

(If >1 risk factor,* consider evaluating as high
risk)
High-­dose ICS (see Table 185.13)
At least four courses of OCS per year

As above, plus:
Yearly ophthalmologic evaluations to monitor for cataracts or glaucoma
Baseline bone densitometry (DEXA scan)
Consider patient at increased risk for adrenal insufficiency, especially with
physiologic stressors (e.g., surgery, accident, significant illness)

High risk

Chronic systemic corticosteroids (>7.5 mg daily
or equivalent for >1 mo)
≥7 OCS burst treatments per year
Very-­high-­dose ICS (e.g., fluticasone
propionate ≥800 μg/day)

As above, plus:
DEXA scan: if DEXA z score ≤1.0, recommend close monitoring (every 12
mo)
Consider referral to a bone or endocrine specialist
Bone age assessment
Complete blood count
Serum calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase determinations
Urine calcium and creatinine measurements
Measurements of testosterone in males, estradiol in amenorrheic
premenopausal women, vitamin D (25-­OH and 1,25-­OH vitamin D),
parathyroid hormone, and osteocalcin
Urine telopeptides for those receiving long-­term systemic or frequent OCS
treatment
Assume adrenal insufficiency for physiologic stressors (e.g., surgery,
accident, significant illness)

*Risk factors for osteoporosis: presence of other chronic illness(es), medications (corticosteroids, anticonvulsants, heparin, diuretics), low body weight, family history of osteoporosis,
significant fracture history disproportionate to trauma, recurrent falls, impaired vision, low dietary calcium and vitamin D intake, and lifestyle factors (decreased physical activity,
smoking, alcohol intake).
DEXA, Dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry; ICS, inhaled corticosteroid; OCS, oral corticosteroid; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone.

was superior to combination fluticasone/montelukast therapy in Black
children, arguing against the notion that Black children are more prone
to serious asthma exacerbations than White children when treated with
combination ICS/LABA therapy.
Despite their efficacy and widespread use, the long-­term safety of
LABAs, even when used in combination with ICS in a single inhaler,
has been questioned. To address this concern of rare, severe asthma-­
related events with LABA/ICS use, large randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) compared the safety of combination ICS/LABA vs ICS monotherapy. Two studies of >23,000 adults and adolescents ≥12 years old
with various levels of asthma severity were randomized to receive ICS
(low or medium dose) monotherapy vs equivalent ICS/LABA (fluticasone vs fluticasone/salmeterol; budesonide vs budesonide/formoterol)
over 26 weeks to determine whether small but significant differences
might occur in asthma hospitalization, intubation, or death attributable to ICS/LABA. No intubations or asthma deaths occurred during the study, and no differences in asthma hospitalizations between
treatment groups were observed. The similar pediatric study enrolled
>6,000 children age 4-­11 years with various levels of asthma severity
to receive either fluticasone (low or medium dose) or equivalent fluticasone/salmeterol dose over 26 weeks, with similar findings of no significant differences in severe asthma-­related events between treatment
groups. These results strongly suggest that the use of combination ICS/
LABA products in children and adults with moderate to severe persistent
asthma is both effective and safe.

Leukotriene-­Modifying Agents

Leukotrienes are potent proinflammatory mediators that can induce
bronchospasm, mucus secretion, and airways edema. LTRAs have
bronchodilator and targeted antiinflammatory properties and reduce
exercise-­, aspirin-­, and allergen-­induced bronchoconstriction. LTRAs
may be an alternative treatment for mild persistent asthma and as an
add-­on medication with ICS for moderate persistent asthma. Two
LTRAs with FDA-­
approved use in children are montelukast and

zafirlukast. Both medications improve asthma symptoms, decrease
the need for rescue β-­agonist use, and modestly improve lung function. Montelukast is approved for use in children ≥1 year of age and
is administered once daily, whereas zafirlukast is approved in children
≥5 years and is given twice daily. LTRAs are less effective than ICSs in
patients with mild persistent asthma (e.g., ICSs improve baseline lung
function 5–15%, whereas LTRAs improve lung function 2.5–7.5%). The
FDA has identified serious behavior and mood-­related changes in some
patients treated with montelukast and suggests that the benefits of montelukast may not outweigh the risks in some patients, particularly when
the symptoms of disease may be mild and adequately treated with other
medicines. When initially prescribing montelukast, a precaution is to
inform the child and family that, if mood changes are noted after starting
montelukast, they should discontinue its use and contact their physician.

Long-­Acting Inhaled Anticholinergics

Tiotropium is a LAMA (24-­hour duration of action) that is approved
by the FDA for use in children with asthma ≥6 years old. In studies in
children and adolescents with moderate persistent asthma, tiotropium
improved lung function as an add-­on therapy to ICS. Adding a LAMA
is not more efficacious than adding a LABA, so LAMAs should not be
selected over a LABA unless necessary. LAMAs can also be added to
ICS/LABA combination therapy if the patient remains symptomatic.

Allergen Immunotherapy

AIT involves administering gradually increasing doses of allergens to a
person with allergic disease to reduce or eliminate the patient’s allergic
response to those allergens, including allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and
asthma. Conventional AIT is given subcutaneously (SCIT) under the
direction of an experienced allergist. The goal of SCIT is to increase
the dose of allergen extract administered to reach a therapeutic maintenance dose of each major allergen, in a manner that minimizes the
likelihood of systemic allergic reactions. Allergen extracts are formulated for each patient based on documented allergen sensitizations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1404 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
and problematic exposures. Maintenance doses are generally given
monthly, to complete a 3–5-­year course. A meta-­analysis of 20 trials
examining the effects of SCIT on allergic asthma revealed significant
improvement with fewer symptoms, improved lung function, less need
for medication, and AHR reduction.
Although AIT is regarded as safe, the potential for anaphylaxis
always exists when patients receive extracts containing allergens to
which they are sensitized. Local transient allergic reactions at the
injection site are common. Systemic allergic reactions can also occur
with SCIT, with fatal anaphylaxis occurring in approximately 1 per
2 million injections. Because of the risks of systemic allergic reactions to SCIT, standard precautions include administering SCIT in
medical settings where a physician with access to emergency equipment and medications required for the treatment of anaphylaxis is
available (see Chapter 190). Patients should be observed in the office
for 30 minutes after each injection because most systemic reactions
to SCIT begin within this time frame. SCIT should never be given at
home or by untrained personnel. Because of the complexities and risks
of administration, SCIT should only be administered by an experienced allergist. SCIT is not recommended for patients with severe
and uncontrolled asthma.
AIT should be discontinued in patients who have not shown
improvement after 1 year of receiving maintenance doses of an appropriate allergen extract(s), or who have a serious systemic allergic or
adverse reaction.

Biologic Therapies

Biologic therapies are genetically engineered proteins derived from
human genes and designed to inhibit specific immune mediators of
disease. Several are approved by the FDA as add-­on controller therapies (i.e., in addition to conventional controller therapies) for severe
asthma in adults and children.
Omalizumab (Anti-­
IgE Antibody). Omalizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody (mAb) that binds IgE and prevents its
binding to the high-­affinity IgE receptor on mast cells and basophils, thereby blocking IgE-­
mediated allergic responses and
inflammation. It is approved by the FDA for patients >6 years old
with severe allergic asthma who continue to have inadequate disease control despite treatment with high-­dose ICS and/or OCS.
Omalizumab is given every 2-­4 weeks subcutaneously, with the
dosage based on body weight and serum IgE levels. Omalizumab
can improve asthma control while allowing ICS and/or OCS dose
reduction. Omalizumab has been studied in inner-­city children
with exacerbation-­prone asthma. When added to guideline-­based
controller management, omalizumab reduced exacerbations (50%),
particularly those that peak in the spring and fall seasons. A follow­up prospective preseasonal treatment study confirmed the effect
on fall seasonal exacerbations and demonstrated how omalizumab
restores antiviral (interferon [IFN]-­α) immune responses to rhinovirus (the most common infectious trigger of exacerbations)
that are impaired by IgE-­mediated mechanisms. Omalizumab is
generally well tolerated, although local injection site reactions can
occur. Hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylaxis) have been
reported following approximately 0.1% of injections. As a result,
omalizumab has an FDA black box warning of potentially serious
and life-­threatening anaphylactic adverse reactions, and an epinephrine autoinjector should be available to all patients receiving
omalizumab.
Mepolizumab and Reslizumab (Anti–IL-­5 Antibodies). Mepolizumab, an anti–IL-­5 mAb that blocks IL-­5-­mediated eosinophilopoiesis, reduces severe asthma exacerbations and lowers sputum
and blood eosinophils while allowing for a significant reduction in
OCS dose in adults and adolescents with severe exacerbation-­prone
eosinophilic asthma. It is administered subcutaneously every 4
weeks and is approved by the FDA for severe eosinophilic asthmatic
children ≥6 years old. Reslizumab, another anti–IL-­5 mAb therapeutic, is administered intravenously and is approved by the FDA
for severe asthmatics ≥18 years old (i.e., not currently approved for
use in children).

Benralizumab (Anti–IL-­5Ra Antibody). Benralizumab is also an
mAb that binds to the IL-­5 receptor α subunit, resulting in apoptosis
of eosinophils and basophils. Benralizumab is approved for patients
≥12 years old with severe eosinophilic asthma with a suggested absolute blood eosinophil count of at least 300 cells/μL. Benralizumab is
administered subcutaneously every 4 weeks for three doses followed
by every 8-­week dosing.
Dupilumab (Anti–IL-­4 Receptor α Antibody). Dupilumab, an
anti–IL-­4 receptor α human mAb that inhibits both IL-­4 and IL-­13
production (both cytokines share the same IL-­4 receptor α chain)
and atopic immune responses, reduces exacerbations and symptoms and improves lung function in moderate to severe asthmatic
patients with an eosinophilic phenotype. Dupilumab is administered subcutaneously every 2 weeks and is approved by the FDA for
patients ≥6 years old with moderate to severe eosinophilic asthma.
It is suggested that patients have an absolute eosinophil count of
at least 150 cells/μL or an exhaled nitric oxide level of at least 25
parts per billion (ppb). In meta-­analysis, dupilumab was associated
with significant reductions of the annualized rate of severe asthma
exacerbations and OCS use and a statistical improvement in lung
function.
Tezepelumab (Anti-Thymic Stromal Lymphopoietin [TSLP]
Antibody). Tezepelumab, an anti-TSLP human mAb, binds and

blocks TSLP’s inflammatory actions, reduces asthma exacerbations and
symptoms, and improves lung function. Tezepelumab is administered
subcutaneously every 4 weeks and is approved by the FDA for patients
≥12 years old with severe asthma.

Quick-­Reliever Medications

Quick-­reliever or “rescue” medications (SABAs, inhaled anticholinergics, and short-­course systemic corticosteroids) are used in the management of acute asthma symptoms (Table 185.17).

Short-­Acting Inhaled β-­Agonists

Given their rapid onset of action, effectiveness, and 4–6-­
hour
duration of action, SABAs (albuterol, levalbuterol, terbutaline,
pirbuterol) are the drugs of choice for acute asthma symptoms
(“rescue” medication) and for preventing EIB. β-­Adrenergic agonists cause bronchodilation by inducing airway smooth muscle
relaxation, reducing vascular permeability and airways edema, and
improving mucociliary clearance. Levalbuterol, the R-­isomer of albuterol, is associated with less tachycardia and tremor, which can be
bothersome to some asthmatic patients. Overuse of β-­agonists is
associated with an increased risk of death or near-­death episodes
from asthma. This is a major concern for some patients with asthma
who rely on the frequent use of SABAs as a “quick fix” for their
asthma, rather than using controller medications in a preventive
manner. It is helpful to monitor the frequency of SABA use, in that
use of one or more MDIs per month or three or more MDIs per
year (200 inhalations per MDI) indicates inadequate asthma control and necessitates improving other aspects of asthma therapy and
management. Of note, a SABA/ICS combination inhaler (albuterol/
budesonide 90 mcg/80 mcg per actuation) has recently been FDA
approved for as-needed use as a quick reliever in adults ages 18
years and older (not in children).

Anticholinergic Agents

As bronchodilators, the anticholinergic agents (e.g., ipratropium
bromide) are less potent than the β-­agonists. Inhaled ipratropium is
used primarily in the treatment of acute severe asthma. When used
in combination with albuterol, ipratropium can improve lung function
and reduce the rate of hospitalization in children who present to the
ED with acute asthma. Ipratropium has few central nervous system
adverse effects and is available in both MDI and nebulizer formulations. Although widely used in all children with asthma exacerbations,
it is approved by the FDA for use in children >12 years old. A combination ipratropium/albuterol product is also available in both nebulized
and mist formulations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1405
Table 185.17  Management of Asthma Exacerbation (Status Asthmaticus)
RISK ASSESSMENT ON ADMISSION
Focused history

Clinical assessment

Risk factors for asthma morbidity and death

Onset of current exacerbation
Frequency and severity of daytime and nighttime symptoms and activity limitation
Frequency of rescue bronchodilator use
Current medications and allergies
Potential triggers
History of systemic steroid courses, emergency department visits, hospitalization, intubation, or
life-­threatening episodes
Physical examination findings: vital signs, breathlessness, air movement, use of accessory
muscles, retractions, anxiety level, alteration in mental status
Pulse oximetry
Lung function (defer in patients with moderate to severe distress or history of labile disease)
See Table 185.18

TREATMENT
DRUG AND TRADE NAME
Oxygen (mask or nasal cannula)
Inhaled short-­acting β-­agonists

Albuterol nebulizer solution (5 mg/
mL concentrate; 2.5 mg/3 mL,
1.25 mg/3 mL, 0.63 mg/3 mL)
Albuterol MDI (90 μg/puff)
Levalbuterol (Xopenex) nebulizer
solution (1.25 mg/0.5 mL
concentrate; 0.31 mg/3 mL,
0.63 mg/3 mL, 1.25 mg/3 mL)
Systemic corticosteroids

Prednisone: 1, 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 50 mg
tablets
Methylprednisolone (Medrol): 2, 4, 8,
16, 24, 32 mg tablets
Prednisolone: 5 mg tablets; 5 mg/5
mL and 15 mg/5 mL solution
Depo-­Medrol (IM); Solu-­Medrol (IV)
Dexamethasone: 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2, 4,
6 mg tablets; 0.5 mg/5 mL, 1 mg/mL
Intensol solution
Anticholinergics
Ipratropium
Atrovent (nebulizer solution
0.5 mg/2.5 mL; MDI 18 μg/inhalation)
Ipratropium with albuterol
DuoNeb nebulizer solution (0.5 mg
ipra­tropium + 2.5 mg albuterol/3 mL
vial)
Injectable sympathomimetic epinephrine

MECHANISMS OF ACTION AND DOSING

CAUTIONS AND ADVERSE EFFECTS

Treats hypoxia

Monitor pulse oximetry to maintain O2
saturation >92%
Cardiorespiratory monitoring
Bronchodilator
During exacerbations, frequent or continuous
doses can cause pulmonary vasodilation, V̇/Q̇
mismatch, and hypoxemia
Adverse effects: palpitations, tachycardia,
arrhythmias, tremor, hypoxemia
Nebulizer: 0.15 mg/kg (minimum 2.5 mg) as often
Nebulizer: when giving concentrated forms,
as every 20 min for 3 doses as needed, then 0.15-­ dilute with saline to 3 mL total nebulized
0.3 mg/kg up to 10 mg every 1-­4 hr as needed, or
volume.
up to 0.5 mg/kg/hr by
continuous nebulization
2-­8 puffs up to every 20 min for 3 doses as
For MDI: use spacer/holding chamber
needed, then every 1-­4 hr as needed
0.075 mg/kg (minimum 1.25 mg) every 20 min for 3 Levalbuterol 0.63 mg is equivalent to 1.25 mg
doses, then 0.075-­0.15 mg/kg up to 5 mg every
of standard albuterol for both efficacy and
1-­4 hr as needed, or 0.25 mg/kg/hr by continuside effects
ous nebulization
Antiinflammatory
If patient has been exposed to chickenpox or
measles, consider passive immunoglobulin
prophylaxis; also, risk of complications with
herpes simplex and tuberculosis
For daily dosing, 8 am administration minimizes
adrenal suppression
Children may benefit from dosage tapering if
course exceeds 7 days
Adverse effects monitoring: frequent therapy
bursts risk numerous corticosteroid adverse
effects (see Chapter 615); see Table 185.14
for adverse effects screening recommendations
Short course oral “burst” for exacerbation:
1-­2 mg/kg/day divided qd or bid for 3-­7 days
(maximum 40 mg/day)

0.5-­1 mg/kg every 6-­12 hr for 48 hr, then 1-­2 mg/kg/
day qd or bid
Short course oral “burst” for exacerbation: 0.6 mg/
kg, maximum 16 mg; can be repeated next day
Mucolytic/bronchodilator

Should not be used as first-­line therapy; added
to β2-­agonist therapy

Nebulizer: 0.5 mg q6-­8h (tid-­qid) as needed
MDI: 2 puffs qid
1 vial by nebulizer qid

Nebulizer: may mix ipratropium with albuterol

Bronchodilator

For extreme circumstances (e.g., impending
respiratory failure despite high-­dose inhaled
SABA, respiratory failure)

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1406 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.17  Management of Asthma Exacerbation (Status Asthmaticus)—cont’d
Adrenalin 1 mg/mL (1:1000)
EpiPen autoinjection device (0.3 mg;
EpiPen Jr 0.15 mg)

IM: 0.01 mg/kg (max dose 0.5 mg); may repeat
after 15-­30 min

Terbutaline

Continuous IV infusion (terbutaline only): 2-­10 μg/kg
loading dose, followed by 0.1-­0.4 μg/kg/min
Titrate in 0.1-­0.2 μg/kg/min increments every
30 min, depending on clinical response.

Brethine 1 mg/mL

Terbutaline is β-­agonist–selective relative to
epinephrine
Monitoring with continuous infusion:
cardiorespiratory monitor, pulse oximetry,
blood pressure, serum potassium
Adverse effects: tremor, tachycardia, palpitations,
arrhythmia, hypertension, headaches,
nervousness, nausea, vomiting, hypoxemia

Other medications
Magnesium sulfate
RISK ASSESSMENT FOR DISCHARGE
Medical stability

Home supervision
Asthma education

25-75 mg/kg over 20 min
Max 2 gm

Flushing, headache, hypotension (rare)

Discharge home if there has been sustained
improvement in symptoms and bronchodilator
treatments are at least 3 hr apart, physical findings
are normal, PEF >70% of predicted or personal
best, and oxygen saturation >92% when
breathing room air
Capability to administer intervention and to
observe and respond appropriately to clinical
deterioration
See Table 185.10

IM, Intramuscular; IV, intravenous; MDI, metered-­dose inhaler; PEF, peak expiratory flow; SABA, short-­acting β-­agonist; V̇/Q̇ , ventilation/perfusion; bid, 2 times daily; tid, 3 times daily;
qid, 4 times daily; qd, every day.

Delivery Devices and Inhalation Technique

Inhaled medications are delivered in aerosolized form in an MDI,
as a DPI formulation, or in a suspension form delivered via a nebulizer. Spacer devices, recommended for the administration of
all MDI medications, are simple and inexpensive tools that (1)
decrease the coordination required to use MDIs, especially in
young children; (2) improve the delivery of inhaled drug to the
lower airways; and (3) minimize the risk of drug and propellant-­
mediated oropharyngeal adverse effects (dysphonia and thrush).
Optimal inhalation technique for each puff of MDI-­delivered medication is a slow (5-­second) inhalation, then a 5–10-­second breath
hold. No waiting time is required between puffs of medication.
Preschool-­age children cannot perform this inhalation technique.
As a result, MDI medications in this age-­group are delivered with a
spacer and mask, using a different technique: Each puff is administered with regular breathing for about 30 seconds or 5-­10 breaths;
a tight seal must be maintained; and talking, coughing, or crying
will blow the medication out of the spacer. This technique will not
deliver as much medication per puff as the optimal MDI technique
used by older children and adults.
DPI devices (e.g., Diskus, Flexhaler, Autohaler, Twisthaler, Aerolizer,
Ellipta) are popular because of their simplicity of use, although adequate
inspiratory flow is needed. DPIs are breath-­actuated devices (the drug
comes out only as it is breathed in), and spacers are not needed. Mouth
rinsing is recommended after ICS use to remove ICS deposited on the
oral mucosa and reduce the swallowed ICS and the risk of thrush.
Nebulizers are the mainstay of aerosol treatment for infants and
young children. An advantage of using nebulizers is the simple technique required of relaxed breathing. The preferential nasal breathing,
small airways, low tidal volume, and high respiratory rate of infants
greatly increase the difficulty of inhaled drug therapy targeting the
lung airways. Disadvantages of nebulizers include the need for a
power source, inconvenience in that treatments take a significantly
longer time, are more expensive, and have the potential for bacterial
contamination.

Asthma Exacerbations and Their Management

Asthma exacerbations are acute or subacute episodes of progressively
worsening symptoms and airflow obstruction. Airflow obstruction during exacerbations can become extensive, resulting in life-­threatening
respiratory insufficiency. Often, asthma exacerbations worsen during
sleep (between midnight and 8 am), when airways inflammation and
hyperresponsiveness are at their peak. Importantly, SABAs, which are
first-­line therapy for asthma symptoms and exacerbations, increase
pulmonary blood flow through obstructed, unoxygenated areas of the
lungs with increasing dosage and frequency. When airways obstruction is not resolved with SABA use, ventilation/perfusion mismatching
can cause hypoxemia, which can perpetuate bronchoconstriction and
further worsen the condition. Severe, progressive asthma exacerbations need to be managed in a medical setting, with administration
of supplemental oxygen as first-­line therapy and close monitoring
for potential worsening. Complications that can occur during severe
exacerbations include atelectasis (common) and air leaks in the chest
(pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax; rare).
A severe exacerbation of asthma that does not improve with standard therapy is termed status asthmaticus. Immediate management
of an asthma exacerbation involves a rapid evaluation of the severity of
obstruction and assessment of risk for further clinical deterioration (Fig.
185.6; see Tables 185.4 and 185.17). For most patients, exacerbations
improve with frequent bronchodilator treatments and a course of systemic (oral or intravenous) corticosteroid. However, the optimal management of a child with an asthma exacerbation should include a more
comprehensive assessment of the events leading up to the exacerbation
and the underlying disease severity. Indeed, the frequency and severity
of asthma exacerbations help define the severity of a patient’s asthma.
Whereas most children who experience life-­threatening asthma episodes
have moderate to severe asthma by other criteria, some children with
asthma appear to have mild disease except when they have severe, even
near-­fatal exacerbations. The biologic, environmental, economic, and
psychosocial risk factors associated with asthma morbidity and death
can further guide this assessment (Table 185.18).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1407
Follow this plan for After Hours patients only. Nurse may decide not to follow this home management plan if:
• Parent does not seem comfortable with or capable of following plan
• Nurse is not comfortable with this plan, based on situation and judgment
• Nurse’s time does not allow for callbacks
In all cases, tell parent to call 9-1-1 if signs of respiratory distress occur during the episode
NOTE: If action plan has already been attempted without success, go to “RED ZONE — poor response” or
“YELLOW ZONE — incomplete response” as symptoms indicate.
Assess symptoms/peak flow

YELLOW ZONE
Mild-to-moderate exacerbation
PEF 50–80% predicted or personal best
or
Signs and symptoms
• Coughing, shortness of breath or chest
tightness (correlate imperfectly with severity
of exacerbation), or
• Unable to sleep at night due to asthma, or
• Decreased ability to perform usual activities
• With or without wheezing

RED ZONE
Severe exacerbation
PEF  50% predicted or personal best or
Signs and symptoms
• Very hard time breathing; constant coughing
• Trouble walking or talking due to asthma (unable to
complete sentences; only using 2- to 3-word phrases)
• Nails blue
• Suprasternal or supraclavicular retractions
• Albuterol not relieving symptoms within 10–15 minutes
• With or without wheezing

Instructions to patient
Inhaled short-acting β2-agonist:
• 2–4 puffs of inhaler or nebulizer treatment every 20 minutes up to 3 times in 1 hour
• Assess asthma symptoms and/or peak flow 15–20 minutes after each treatment
• Nurse to call family after 1 hour
• If patient worsens during treatment, have parent call back immediately or call 9-1-1

GREEN ZONE — Good response
Mild exacerbation
PEF  80% predicted or personal
best
or
Signs and symptoms
• No wheezing, shortness of breath,
cough or chest tightness, and
• Response to β2-agonist
sustained for 4 hours

YELLOW ZONE — Incomplete
response
Moderate exacerbation PEF
50–80% predicted or personal best
or
Signs and symptoms
• Persistent wheezing, shortness of
breath, cough or chest tightness

RED ZONE — Poor response
Severe exacerbation
PEF  50% predicted or personal best
or
Signs and symptoms
• Marked wheezing, shortness of breath,
cough, or chest tightness
• Distress is severe and nonresponsive
• Response to β2-agonist last
 2 hours
Instructions to patient
• Proceed to ED, or call ambulance or
9-1-1 and repeat treatment while
waiting

Instructions to patient
• May continue 2–4 puffs (or
nebulizer) β2-agonist every
3–4 hours for 24–28 hours prn
• For patients on inhaled steroids,
double dose for 7–10 days
• Contact PCP within 48 hours
for instructions

Instructions to patient
• Take 2–4 puffs (or nebulizer) β2agonist every 2–4 hours for 24–48
hours prn
• Add oral steroid*
(see contraindications below)
• Contact PCP urgently
(within 24 hours) for instructions

Instructions to patient
IMMEDIATELY:
• Take 4-6 puffs (or nebulizer) β2agonist
• Start oral steroids* if available (see
contraindications below)
• Instruct parent to call back in 5
minutes after treatment finished
• If still in RED ZONE proceed
to ED, or call ambulance or 9-1-1
and repeat treatment while waiting
• If in YELLOW ZONE, move to
YELLOW ZONE protocol (top left box)

Documentation faxed or given to PCP within 24 hours; phone or verbal contact
sooner as indicated.
* Ask patient about preexisting conditions that may be contraindications to oral
steroids (including type 1 diabetes, active chicken pox, chicken pox exposure or
varicella vaccine within 21 days, MMR within 14 days). If so, nurse to contact PCP
before initiating steroids. Oral steroid dosages: Child: 2 mg/kg/day, maximum
60 mg/day, for 5 days.
Date:
Signature

Fig. 185.6 Algorithm for treatment of acute asthma symptoms. ED, Emergency department; PCP, primary care physician; PEF, peak expiratory
flow. (Courtesy BJC Healthcare/Washington University School of Medicine, Community Asthma Program, January 2000.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1408 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Asthma exacerbations characteristically vary among individuals but
tend to be similar in the same patient. Severe asthma exacerbations,
resulting in respiratory distress, hypoxia, hospitalization, and respiratory failure, are the best predictors of future life-­threatening exacerbations or a fatal asthma episode. In addition to distinguishing such
high-­risk children, some experience exacerbations that develop over
days, with airflow obstruction resulting from progressive inflammation, epithelial sloughing, and cast impaction of small airways. When
such a process is extreme, respiratory failure because of fatigue can
ensue, necessitating mechanical ventilation for numerous days. In contrast, some children experience abrupt-­onset exacerbations that may
result from extreme AHR and physiologic susceptibility to airways closure. Such exacerbations, when extreme, are asphyxial in nature, often
occur outside medical settings, are initially associated with very high
arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2) levels, and tend to
require only brief periods of supportive ventilation. Recognizing the
characteristic differences in asthma exacerbations is important for
optimizing their early management.

Home Management of Asthma Exacerbations

Families of all children with asthma should have a written Asthma
Action Plan (see Fig. 185.5) to guide their recognition and management of exacerbations, along with the necessary education, medications,
and tools to manage them. Early recognition of asthma exacerbations
to intensify treatment early can often prevent further worsening and
keep exacerbations from becoming severe. The NIH guidelines recommend immediate treatment with “rescue” medication (inhaled SABA,
2-­4 puffs, up to 3 times every 20 minutes in 1 hour). A good response is

Table 185.18  Risk Factors for Asthma Morbidity and
Mortality
BIOLOGIC
Previous severe asthma exacerbation (intensive care unit admission,
intubation for asthma)
Sudden asphyxia episodes (respiratory failure, arrest)
Two or more hospitalizations for asthma in past year
Three or more emergency department visits for asthma in past year
Increasing and large diurnal variation in peak flows
Use of >2 canisters of short-­acting β-­agonists per month
Poor response to systemic corticosteroid therapy
Male sex
Low birthweight
Non-White
Sensitivity to Alternaria
ENVIRONMENTAL
Allergen exposure
Environmental tobacco smoke exposure
Air pollution exposure
Urban environment
ECONOMIC AND PSYCHOSOCIAL
Poverty
Crowding
Mother <20 yr old
Mother with less than high school education
Inadequate medical care
Inaccessible
Unaffordable
No regular medical care (only emergency)
Lack of written Asthma Action Plan
No care sought for chronic asthma symptoms
Delay in care of asthma exacerbations
Inadequate hospital care for asthma exacerbation
Psychopathology in the parent or child
Poor perception of asthma symptoms or severity
Alcohol or substance abuse

characterized by resolution of symptoms within 1 hour and no further
symptoms over the next 4 hours. The child’s physician should be contacted for follow-­up, especially if bronchodilators are required repeatedly
over the next 24-­48 hours. If the child has an incomplete response to
initial treatment with rescue medication, a short course of OCS therapy
(for example, prednisone, 1-­2 mg/kg/day [not to exceed 40 mg/day] for
4 days) should be instituted, in addition to inhaled β-­agonist therapy.
The physician should also be contacted for further instructions. Immediate medical attention should be sought for severe exacerbations, persistent signs of respiratory distress, lack of expected response or sustained
improvement after initial treatment, further deterioration, or high-­risk
factors for asthma morbidity or mortality (e.g., previous history of severe
exacerbations). For patients with severe asthma and/or a history of life-­
threatening episodes, especially if abrupt in onset, an epinephrine autoinjector and perhaps portable oxygen at home can be considered. Use of
either of these extreme measures for home management of asthma exacerbations would be an indication to call 911 for emergency support services.

Emergency Department Management of Asthma
Exacerbations

In the ED, the primary goals of asthma management include correction
of hypoxemia, rapid improvement of airflow obstruction, and prevention of progression or recurrence of symptoms. Interventions are based
on clinical severity on arrival, response to initial therapy, and presence
of risk factors associated with asthma morbidity and mortality (see
Table 185.18). Indicators of a severe exacerbation include breathlessness, dyspnea, retractions, accessory muscle use, tachypnea or labored
breathing, cyanosis, mental status changes, a silent chest with poor air
exchange, and severe airflow limitation (PEF or FEV1 value <50% of
personal best or predicted values). Initial treatment includes supplemental oxygen, inhaled β-­agonist therapy every 20 minutes for 1 hour,
and, if necessary, oral, injectable or IV systemic corticosteroids (see
Tables 185.4 and 185.17, and Fig. 185.6). Inhaled ipratropium may be
added to the β-­agonist treatment, especially if no significant response
is seen with the first inhaled β-­agonist treatment. In the ED, single oral,
IV, or intramuscular (IM) dose dexamethasone (0.6 mg/kg, maximum
16 mg) is an effective alternative to prednisone and with a lower incidence of emesis. A second dose of dexamethasone can be given the
next day whether discharged or admitted to the hospital. An IM injection of epinephrine or other β-­agonist may be administered in severe
cases. Oxygen should be administered and continued for at least 20
minutes after SABA administration to compensate for possible ventilation/perfusion abnormalities caused by SABAs.
Close monitoring of clinical status, hydration, and oxygenation are
essential elements of immediate management. A poor response to intensified treatment in the first hour suggests that the exacerbation will not
remit quickly. The patient may be discharged home if there is sustained
improvement in symptoms, normal physical findings, PEF >70% of predicted or personal best, and oxygen saturation >92% while the patient is
breathing room air for 4 hours. Discharge medications include administration of an inhaled β-­agonist up to every 3-­4 hours plus a short course
of an OCS. Optimizing controller therapy before discharge is also recommended. The addition of ICS to a course of OCS in the ED setting
reduces the risk of exacerbation recurrence over the subsequent month.

Hospital Management of Asthma Exacerbations

For patients with severe exacerbations that do not adequately improve
within 1-­2 hours of intensive treatment, observation and/or admission
to the hospital, at least overnight, is likely to be needed. Other indications for hospital admission include high-­risk features for asthma morbidity or death (see Table 185.18). Admission to an ICU is indicated for
patients with severe respiratory distress, poor response to therapy, and
concern for potential respiratory failure and arrest.
Supplemental oxygen, frequent or continuous administration of an
inhaled bronchodilator, and systemic corticosteroid therapy are the
conventional interventions for children admitted to the hospital for
status asthmaticus (see Table 185.17). Supplemental oxygen is administered because many children hospitalized with acute asthma have or
will eventually have hypoxemia, especially at night and with increasing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1409
SABA administration. SABAs can be delivered frequently (every 20
minutes to 1 hour) or continuously (at 5-­15 mg/hr). When administered continuously, significant systemic absorption of β-­agonist occurs,
and thus continuous nebulization can obviate the need for IV β-­agonist
therapy. Adverse effects of frequently administered β-­agonist therapy
include tremor, irritability, tachycardia, and hypokalemia; lactic acidosis is an uncommon complication. Patients requiring frequent or
continuous nebulized β-­agonist therapy should have ongoing cardiac
monitoring. Because frequent β-­agonist therapy can cause ventilation/
perfusion mismatch and hypoxemia, oximetry is also indicated. Inhaled
ipratropium is often added to albuterol every 6 hours if patients do not
show a remarkable improvement, although there is little evidence to
support its use in hospitalized children receiving aggressive inhaled β-­
agonist therapy and systemic corticosteroids. In addition to its potential
to provide a synergistic effect with a β-­agonist agent in relieving severe
bronchospasm, ipratropium may be beneficial in patients who have
mucus hypersecretion or who are receiving β blockers.
Short-­course systemic corticosteroid therapy is recommended for
use in moderate to severe asthma exacerbations to hasten recovery and
prevent recurrence of symptoms. Studies in children hospitalized with
acute asthma have found corticosteroids administered orally to be as
effective as IV corticosteroids. Accordingly, OCS therapy can often be
used, although children with sustained respiratory distress and those
unable to tolerate oral preparations or liquids are obvious candidates
for IV corticosteroid therapy.
Patients with persistent severe dyspnea and high-­
flow oxygen
requirements require additional evaluation, such as complete blood
count, arterial blood gases, serum electrolytes, and chest radiograph,
to monitor for respiratory insufficiency, comorbidities, infection,
and dehydration. Hydration status monitoring is especially important in infants and young children, whose increased respiratory rate
(insensible losses) and decreased oral intake put them at higher risk
for dehydration. Further complicating this situation is the association
of increased antidiuretic hormone secretion with status asthmaticus.
Administration of fluids at or slightly below maintenance fluid requirements is recommended. Chest physical therapy, incentive spirometry,
and mucolytics are not recommended during asthma exacerbations
because they can trigger severe bronchoconstriction.
Despite intensive therapy, some asthmatic children remain critically ill
and at risk for respiratory failure, intubation, and mechanical ventilation.
Complications (e.g., air leaks) related to asthma exacerbations increase
with intubation and assisted ventilation, so every effort should be made
to relieve bronchospasm and prevent respiratory failure. Several therapies,
including parenteral β-­agonists, magnesium sulfate (25-­75 mg/kg, maximum dose 2.5 g, given intravenously over 20 minutes), and inhaled heliox
(helium and oxygen mixture) have demonstrated some benefit as adjunctive therapies in patients with severe status asthmaticus. Administration of
magnesium sulfate requires monitoring of serum levels and cardiovascular
status. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (e.g., continuous positive
airway pressure [CPAP] or biphasic positive airway pressure [BiPAP])
might improve severe asthma exacerbations through a variety of mechanisms. Their use in the care of children with severe persistent asthma
exacerbations has increased in efforts to avert mechanical ventilation,
even though evidence supporting the intervention has been considered
weak, and current NAEPP and GINA guidelines do not recommend the
intervention. Parenteral (SC, IM, or IV) epinephrine or terbutaline sulfate
may be effective in patients with life-­threatening obstruction that is not
responding to high doses of inhaled β-­agonists, because inhaled medication may not reach the lower airway in such patients.
Rarely, a severe asthma exacerbation in a child results in respiratory
failure, and intubation and mechanical ventilation become necessary.
Mechanical ventilation in severe asthma exacerbations requires the
careful balance of enough pressure to overcome airways obstruction
while reducing hyperinflation, air trapping, and the likelihood of barotrauma (pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum; see Chapter 461). To
minimize the likelihood of such complications, mechanical ventilation
should be anticipated, and asthmatic children at risk for the development
of respiratory failure should be managed in a pediatric ICU. Elective tracheal intubation with rapid-­induction sedatives and paralytic agents is

safer than emergency intubation. Mechanical ventilation aims to achieve
adequate oxygenation while tolerating mild to moderate hypercapnia
(Pco2 50-­70 mm Hg) to minimize barotrauma. As measures to relieve
mucus plugs, chest percussion and airways lavage are not recommended
because they can induce further bronchospasm. One must consider the
nature of asthma exacerbations leading to respiratory failure; those of
rapid or abrupt onset tend to resolve quickly (hours to 2 days), whereas
those that progress gradually to respiratory failure can require days to
weeks of mechanical ventilation. Such prolonged cases are further complicated by corticosteroid-­induced myopathy, which can lead to severe
muscle weakness requiring prolonged rehabilitation.
In children, management of severe exacerbations in medical centers
is usually successful, even when extreme measures are required. Consequently, asthma deaths in children rarely occur in medical centers;
most occur at home or in community settings before lifesaving medical care can be administered. This point highlights the importance of
home and community management of asthma exacerbations, early
intervention measures to keep exacerbations from becoming severe,
and steps to reduce asthma severity. A follow-­up appointment within
1-­2 weeks of a child’s discharge from the hospital after resolution of an
asthma exacerbation should be used to monitor clinical improvement
and to reinforce key educational elements, including action plans and
controller medications.

Special Management Circumstances
Management of Infants and Young Children

Recurrent wheezing episodes in preschool-­age children are common,
occurring in as much as one-­third of this population. Of these, most
improve and even become asymptomatic during the prepubescent
school-­age years, whereas others have lifelong persistent asthma. All
require management of their recurrent wheezing problems. The NIH
guidelines recommend risk assessment to identify preschool-­age children who are likely to have persistent asthma. One implication of this
recommendation is that these at-­risk children may be candidates for
conventional asthma management, including daily controller therapy
and early intervention with exacerbations (see Tables 185.9, 185.10,
185.13, and 185.14). For young children with recurrent episodic
wheeze in the setting of viral illness, a short course of daily high-­
dose ICS may also be considered. For young children with a history
of moderate to severe exacerbations, nebulized budesonide is approved
by the FDA, and its use as a controller medication could prevent subsequent exacerbations.
Using aerosol therapy in infants and young children with asthma
presents unique challenges. There are two delivery systems for inhaled
medications for this age-­group: the nebulizer and the MDI with spacer/
holding chamber and face mask. Multiple studies demonstrate the
effectiveness of both nebulized albuterol in acute episodes and nebulized budesonide in the treatment of recurrent wheezing in infants and
young children. In such young children, inhaled medications administered via MDI with spacer and face mask may be acceptable, although
perhaps not preferred because of limited published information and
lack of FDA approval for children <4 years of age.

Asthma Management During Surgery

Patients with asthma are at risk from disease-­related complications
from surgery, such as bronchoconstriction and asthma exacerbation,
atelectasis, impaired coughing, respiratory infection, and latex exposure, which may induce asthma complications in patients with latex
allergy. All patients with asthma should be evaluated before surgery,
and those who are inadequately controlled should allow time for intensified treatment to improve asthma stability before surgery, if possible.
A systemic corticosteroid course may be indicated for the patient who
is having symptoms and/or FEV1 or PEF values <80% of the patient’s
personal best. In addition, patients who have received >2 weeks of systemic corticosteroid and/or moderate-­to high-­dose ICS therapy may
be at risk for intraoperative adrenal insufficiency. For these patients,
anesthesia services should be alerted to provide “stress” replacement
doses of systemic corticosteroid for the surgical procedure and possibly
the postoperative period.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1410 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
ETIOLOGY

PROGNOSIS

Recurrent coughing and wheezing occur in 35% of preschool-­age
children. Of these, approximately one third continue to have persistent asthma into later childhood, and approximately two thirds
improve on their own through their teen years. Concomitant atopic
disorders (such as allergen sensitization or atopic dermatitis) are associated with greater likelihood of disease persistence. Asthma severity
by ages 7-­10 years is predictive of asthma persistence in adulthood.
Children with moderate to severe asthma and with lower lung function measures are likely to have persistent asthma as adults. Children
with milder asthma and normal lung function are likely to improve
over time, with some becoming periodically asthmatic (disease-­free
for months to years).

PREVENTION

Although chronic airways inflammation may result in pathologic
remodeling of lung airways, conventional antiinflammatory interventions—the cornerstone of asthma control—do not help children outgrow their asthma. Although controller medications reduce asthma
morbidities, most children with moderate to severe asthma continue
to have symptoms into young adulthood. Investigations into the environmental and lifestyle factors responsible for the lower prevalence of
childhood asthma in rural areas and farming communities suggest that
early immunomodulatory intervention might prevent asthma development. A hygiene hypothesis purports that naturally occurring microbial exposures in early life might drive early immune development
away from allergic sensitization, persistent airways inflammation, and
remodeling through early microbiome and innate immune development. If these natural microbial exposures truly have an asthma-­
protective effect, without significant adverse health consequences,
these findings may foster new strategies for asthma prevention.
Several nonpharmacologic measures with numerous positive health
attributes—avoidance of environmental tobacco smoke (beginning
prenatally), prolonged breastfeeding (>4 months), an active lifestyle,
and a healthy diet—might reduce the likelihood of asthma development. Care providers can be strong influencers of smoking cessation
by parents, caregivers, and adolescent patients (see Chapters 157.2 and
759.1). Immunizations are not considered to increase the likelihood of
development of asthma; therefore all standard childhood immunizations are recommended for children with asthma, including varicella,
SARS-­CoV-­2, and annual influenza vaccines.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 186

Atopic Dermatitis
(Atopic Eczema)
Donald Y.M. Leung and Scott H. Sicherer
Atopic dermatitis (AD), or eczema, is the most common chronic
relapsing skin disease seen in infancy and childhood. It affects 10–30%
of children worldwide and frequently occurs in families with other
atopic diseases. Infants with AD are predisposed to the development of
food allergy, allergic rhinitis, and asthma later in childhood, a process
called the atopic march.

AD is a complex genetic disorder that results in a defective skin barrier,
reduced skin innate immune responses, and primarily type 2 adaptive
immune responses to environmental allergens and microbes that lead
to chronic skin inflammation.

PATHOLOGY

Acute AD skin lesions are characterized by spongiosis, or marked
intercellular edema, of the epidermis. In AD, dendritic antigen-­
presenting cells (APCs) in the epidermis, such as Langerhans cells,
exhibit surface-­bound IgE molecules with cell processes that reach
into the upper epidermis to sense allergens and pathogens. These
APCs play an important role in cutaneous responses to type 2 immune
responses (see Chapter 182). There is marked perivascular T-­cell and
inflammatory monocyte-­macrophage infiltration in acute AD lesions.
Chronic, lichenified AD is characterized by a hyperplastic epidermis
with hyperkeratosis and minimal spongiosis. There are predominantly
IgE-­bearing Langerhans cells in the epidermis, and macrophages in the
dermal mononuclear cell infiltrate. Mast cell and eosinophil numbers
are increased, contributing to skin inflammation.

PATHOGENESIS

AD is associated with multiple phenotypes and endotypes that have
overlapping clinical presentations. Atopic eczema is associated with
IgE-­mediated sensitization (at onset or during the course of eczema)
and occurs in 70–80% of patients with AD. Nonatopic eczema is not
associated with IgE-­mediated sensitization and is seen in 20–30% of
patients with AD. Both forms of AD are associated with eosinophilia.
In atopic eczema, circulating T cells expressing the skin homing receptor cutaneous lymphocyte-­associated antigen produce increased levels of T-­helper type 2 (Th2) cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-­4 and
IL-­13, which induce isotype switching to IgE synthesis. Another type 2
cytokine, IL-­5, plays an important role in eosinophil development and
IL-­31 is a key itch cytokine (Fig. 186.1). Nonatopic eczema is associated
with lower IL-­4 and IL-­13 but increased IL-­17 and IL-­23 production
than in atopic eczema. Age has also been found to affect the immune
profile in AD.
Compared with the skin of healthy individuals, both unaffected
skin and acute skin lesions of patients with AD have an increased
number of cells expressing IL-­4, IL-­13, and IL-­31. Chronic AD skin
lesions, by contrast, have fewer cells that express IL-­4 and IL-­13,
but they have more cells that express IL-­5, granulocyte-­macrophage
colony-­stimulating factor, IL-­12, and interferon (IFN)-­γ than acute
AD lesions. Despite increased type 1 and type 17 immune responses
in chronic AD, IL-­4 and IL-­13 as well as other type 2 cytokines (e.g.,
thymic stromal lymphopoietin [TSLP], IL-­31, IL-­33) predominate and
reflect increased numbers of type 2 innate lymphoid cells and Th2 cells.
The infiltration of IL-­22–expressing T cells correlates with severity of
AD, blocks keratinocyte differentiation, and induces epidermal hyperplasia. The importance of IL-­4 and IL-­13 in driving severe persistent
AD has been validated by multiple clinical trials now demonstrating
that biologics blocking IL-­4 and IL-­13 action lead to clinical improvement in moderate to severe AD.
In healthy people, the skin acts as a protective barrier against external irritants, moisture loss, and infection. Proper function of the skin
depends on adequate moisture and lipid content, functional immune
responses, and structural integrity. Severely dry skin is a hallmark of AD.
This results from compromise of the epidermal barrier, which leads to
excess transepidermal water loss, allergen penetration, and microbial
colonization. Filaggrin, a structural protein in the epidermis, and its
breakdown products are critical to skin barrier function, including
moisturization of the skin. Genetic pathogenic variants in the filaggrin
gene (FLG) family have been identified in patients with ichthyosis vulgaris (dry skin, palmar hyperlinearity) and in up to 50% of patients
with severe AD. FLG pathogenic variant is strongly associated with the
development of food allergy and eczema herpeticum. Nonetheless, up
to 60% of carriers of an FLG pathogenic variant do not develop atopic
diseases. Cytokines found in allergic inflammation, such as IL-­4, IL-­13,
IL-­22, and IL-­25, and tumor necrosis factor, can also reduce filaggrin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1410 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
ETIOLOGY

PROGNOSIS

Recurrent coughing and wheezing occur in 35% of preschool-­age
children. Of these, approximately one third continue to have persistent asthma into later childhood, and approximately two thirds
improve on their own through their teen years. Concomitant atopic
disorders (such as allergen sensitization or atopic dermatitis) are associated with greater likelihood of disease persistence. Asthma severity
by ages 7-­10 years is predictive of asthma persistence in adulthood.
Children with moderate to severe asthma and with lower lung function measures are likely to have persistent asthma as adults. Children
with milder asthma and normal lung function are likely to improve
over time, with some becoming periodically asthmatic (disease-­free
for months to years).

PREVENTION

Although chronic airways inflammation may result in pathologic
remodeling of lung airways, conventional antiinflammatory interventions—the cornerstone of asthma control—do not help children outgrow their asthma. Although controller medications reduce asthma
morbidities, most children with moderate to severe asthma continue
to have symptoms into young adulthood. Investigations into the environmental and lifestyle factors responsible for the lower prevalence of
childhood asthma in rural areas and farming communities suggest that
early immunomodulatory intervention might prevent asthma development. A hygiene hypothesis purports that naturally occurring microbial exposures in early life might drive early immune development
away from allergic sensitization, persistent airways inflammation, and
remodeling through early microbiome and innate immune development. If these natural microbial exposures truly have an asthma-­
protective effect, without significant adverse health consequences,
these findings may foster new strategies for asthma prevention.
Several nonpharmacologic measures with numerous positive health
attributes—avoidance of environmental tobacco smoke (beginning
prenatally), prolonged breastfeeding (>4 months), an active lifestyle,
and a healthy diet—might reduce the likelihood of asthma development. Care providers can be strong influencers of smoking cessation
by parents, caregivers, and adolescent patients (see Chapters 157.2 and
759.1). Immunizations are not considered to increase the likelihood of
development of asthma; therefore all standard childhood immunizations are recommended for children with asthma, including varicella,
SARS-­CoV-­2, and annual influenza vaccines.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 186

Atopic Dermatitis
(Atopic Eczema)
Donald Y.M. Leung and Scott H. Sicherer
Atopic dermatitis (AD), or eczema, is the most common chronic
relapsing skin disease seen in infancy and childhood. It affects 10–30%
of children worldwide and frequently occurs in families with other
atopic diseases. Infants with AD are predisposed to the development of
food allergy, allergic rhinitis, and asthma later in childhood, a process
called the atopic march.

AD is a complex genetic disorder that results in a defective skin barrier,
reduced skin innate immune responses, and primarily type 2 adaptive
immune responses to environmental allergens and microbes that lead
to chronic skin inflammation.

PATHOLOGY

Acute AD skin lesions are characterized by spongiosis, or marked
intercellular edema, of the epidermis. In AD, dendritic antigen-­
presenting cells (APCs) in the epidermis, such as Langerhans cells,
exhibit surface-­bound IgE molecules with cell processes that reach
into the upper epidermis to sense allergens and pathogens. These
APCs play an important role in cutaneous responses to type 2 immune
responses (see Chapter 182). There is marked perivascular T-­cell and
inflammatory monocyte-­macrophage infiltration in acute AD lesions.
Chronic, lichenified AD is characterized by a hyperplastic epidermis
with hyperkeratosis and minimal spongiosis. There are predominantly
IgE-­bearing Langerhans cells in the epidermis, and macrophages in the
dermal mononuclear cell infiltrate. Mast cell and eosinophil numbers
are increased, contributing to skin inflammation.

PATHOGENESIS

AD is associated with multiple phenotypes and endotypes that have
overlapping clinical presentations. Atopic eczema is associated with
IgE-­mediated sensitization (at onset or during the course of eczema)
and occurs in 70–80% of patients with AD. Nonatopic eczema is not
associated with IgE-­mediated sensitization and is seen in 20–30% of
patients with AD. Both forms of AD are associated with eosinophilia.
In atopic eczema, circulating T cells expressing the skin homing receptor cutaneous lymphocyte-­associated antigen produce increased levels of T-­helper type 2 (Th2) cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-­4 and
IL-­13, which induce isotype switching to IgE synthesis. Another type 2
cytokine, IL-­5, plays an important role in eosinophil development and
IL-­31 is a key itch cytokine (Fig. 186.1). Nonatopic eczema is associated
with lower IL-­4 and IL-­13 but increased IL-­17 and IL-­23 production
than in atopic eczema. Age has also been found to affect the immune
profile in AD.
Compared with the skin of healthy individuals, both unaffected
skin and acute skin lesions of patients with AD have an increased
number of cells expressing IL-­4, IL-­13, and IL-­31. Chronic AD skin
lesions, by contrast, have fewer cells that express IL-­4 and IL-­13,
but they have more cells that express IL-­5, granulocyte-­macrophage
colony-­stimulating factor, IL-­12, and interferon (IFN)-­γ than acute
AD lesions. Despite increased type 1 and type 17 immune responses
in chronic AD, IL-­4 and IL-­13 as well as other type 2 cytokines (e.g.,
thymic stromal lymphopoietin [TSLP], IL-­31, IL-­33) predominate and
reflect increased numbers of type 2 innate lymphoid cells and Th2 cells.
The infiltration of IL-­22–expressing T cells correlates with severity of
AD, blocks keratinocyte differentiation, and induces epidermal hyperplasia. The importance of IL-­4 and IL-­13 in driving severe persistent
AD has been validated by multiple clinical trials now demonstrating
that biologics blocking IL-­4 and IL-­13 action lead to clinical improvement in moderate to severe AD.
In healthy people, the skin acts as a protective barrier against external irritants, moisture loss, and infection. Proper function of the skin
depends on adequate moisture and lipid content, functional immune
responses, and structural integrity. Severely dry skin is a hallmark of AD.
This results from compromise of the epidermal barrier, which leads to
excess transepidermal water loss, allergen penetration, and microbial
colonization. Filaggrin, a structural protein in the epidermis, and its
breakdown products are critical to skin barrier function, including
moisturization of the skin. Genetic pathogenic variants in the filaggrin
gene (FLG) family have been identified in patients with ichthyosis vulgaris (dry skin, palmar hyperlinearity) and in up to 50% of patients
with severe AD. FLG pathogenic variant is strongly associated with the
development of food allergy and eczema herpeticum. Nonetheless, up
to 60% of carriers of an FLG pathogenic variant do not develop atopic
diseases. Cytokines found in allergic inflammation, such as IL-­4, IL-­13,
IL-­22, and IL-­25, and tumor necrosis factor, can also reduce filaggrin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 186 u Atopic Dermatitis (Atopic Eczema) 1411
Non-lesional

Acute

Allergens

Itch

Epidermis

Keratinocyte

Scratch

Sensory neuron

*

Disrupted
barrier

Chronic

*

LC
Dermis

Barrier disruption
↓Differentiation
↓Filaggrin
↓Loricrin
↓Involucrin

Microbiome
(S aureus)

Lichenification

↑Cytokines
↑Chemokines

Barrier inhibition

DC
↑Epidermal
hyperplasia

IL-4 IL-13

↑Th1 products

AD-DC
IL-4
Th0

Th2

ThO

IL-4

*
*

Th2
↑PDE4 activity in T cells
leads to ↑ in cytokine mediators

B cell

Th22

IL-4

Lymph node
AD-DC

Th0

Th1

Basophil

Blood vessel

IgE

Mast cell

Eosinophil

Fig. 186.1 Pathogenic pathways and immunologic targets in atopic dermatitis (AD). Skin barrier defects in nonlesional atopic dermatitis leads

to penetration by allergens, which encounter antigen-­presenting Langerhans cells (LCs) in the epidermis and dendritic cells (DCs) in the dermis,
resulting in immune activation and inflammatory cell recruitment. Elevated T-­helper type 2 (Th2) cell counts in the acute state leads to increased
secretion of cytokines, especially interleukin (IL)-­4 and IL-­13, which disrupt the skin barrier by decreasing expression of barrier proteins (i.e., filaggrin,
loricrin, and involucrin). In addition, Th2 cytokines recruit eosinophils and basophils to lesional sites, and increase B-­cell IgE production. Eosinophils,
basophils, and activated IgE-­bound mast cells release proinflammatory mediators, further potentiating pathogenesis. Th2 cytokines also impair antimicrobial peptide responses to pathogens which, in combination with barrier disruption, increases the risk of colonization and barrier penetration by
allergens and pathogens (i.e., Staphylococcus aureus). Chronic atopic dermatitis results in a skewed Th1 response, leading to further inflammation
and immune activation. Processes mediated by Janus kinase (JAK) receptors are marked with a green asterisk. PDE4, phosphodiesterase-­4. (From
Vahharia PP, Silverberg JI. New and emerging therapies for paediatric atopic dermatitis. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2019;3:343–352.)

and other epidermal proteins and lipids. AD patients are at increased
risk of bacterial, viral, and fungal infection related to impairment of
innate immunity, disturbances in the microbiome, skin epithelial dysfunction, and overexpression of polarized immune pathways, which
dampen host antimicrobial responses. Patients with the combination
of AD and food allergy have significantly lower levels of filaggrin and
increased type 2 immune activation than patients with AD only.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

AD typically begins in infancy. Approximately 50% of patients experience symptoms in the first year of life, and an additional 30% are diagnosed between 1 and 5 years of age. Intense pruritus, especially at night,
and cutaneous reactivity are the cardinal features of AD. Scratching
and excoriation cause increased skin inflammation that contributes to
the development of more pronounced eczematous skin lesions. Foods
(cow’s milk, egg, peanut, tree nuts, soy, wheat, fish, shellfish), aeroallergens (pollen, grass, animal dander, dust mites), infection (Staphylococcus aureus, herpes simplex, coxsackievirus, molluscum), reduced
humidity, excessive sweating, and irritants (wool, acrylic, soaps, toiletries, fragrances, detergents) can trigger pruritus and scratching.
Acute AD skin lesions are intensely pruritic with erythematous
papules (Figs. 186.2 and 186.3). Subacute dermatitis manifests as erythematous, excoriated, scaling papules. In contrast, chronic AD is characterized by lichenification (Fig. 186.4), or thickening of the skin with
accentuated surface markings, and fibrotic papules. In chronic AD, all

three types of skin reactions may coexist in the same individual. Most
patients with AD have dry, lackluster skin regardless of their stage of
illness. Skin reaction pattern and distribution vary with the patient’s
age and disease activity. AD is generally more acute in infancy and
involves the face, scalp, and extensor surfaces of the extremities. The
diaper area is usually spared. Older children and children with chronic
AD have lichenification and localization of the rash to the flexural folds
of the extremities. AD can go into remission as the patient grows older;
however, many children with AD have persistent eczema as an adult
(see Fig. 186.2C).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

There are no specific laboratory tests to diagnose AD. Many patients
have peripheral blood eosinophilia, increased serum IgE levels, and
T cells expressing type 2 cytokines. Serum IgE measurement or skin-­
prick testing can identify the allergens (foods, inhalant/microbial allergens) to which patients are sensitized. The diagnosis of clinical allergy
to these allergens requires confirmation by history and environmental
challenges.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

AD is diagnosed on the basis of three major features: pruritus, an
eczematous dermatitis that fits into a typical pattern of skin inflammation, and a chronic or chronically relapsing course (Table 186.1).
Associated features, such as a family history of asthma, hay fever, food

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1412 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

A

B

C
Fig. 186.2 Typical clinical appearance and locations of atopic dermatitis at different ages. A, In infants, atopic dermatitis is generally acute, with
lesions mainly on the face and the extensor surfaces of the limbs. The trunk might be affected, but the napkin area is typically spared. B, From age
1-­2 years onward, polymorphous manifestations with different types of skin lesions are seen, particularly in flexural folds. C, Adolescents and adults
often present lichenified and excoriated plaques at flexures, wrists, ankles, and eyelids; in the head and neck type, the upper trunk, shoulders, and
scalp are involved. Adults might have only chronic hand eczema or present with prurigo-­like lesions. (From Weidinger S, Novak N. Atopic dermatitis.
Lancet. 2016;387:1111.)

allergy, elevated IgE, and immediate skin test reactivity, reinforce the
diagnosis of AD.
Many inflammatory skin diseases, immunodeficiencies, skin
malignancies, genetic disorders, infectious diseases, and infestations share symptoms with AD and should be considered and
excluded before a diagnosis of AD is established (Tables 186.2 and
186.3). Severe combined immunodeficiency (see Chapter 165.1)
should be considered for infants presenting in the first year of life
with diarrhea, failure to thrive, generalized scaling rash, and recurrent cutaneous and/or systemic infection. Histiocytosis should be
excluded in any infant with AD and failure to thrive (see Chapter
556). Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, an X-­linked recessive disorder
associated with thrombocytopenia, immune defects, and recurrent
severe bacterial infections, is characterized by a rash almost indistinguishable from that in AD (see Chapter 165.4). One of the hyper-­
IgE syndromes is characterized by markedly elevated serum IgE
values, recurrent deep-­seated bacterial infections, chronic dermatitis, and refractory dermatophytosis. Many of these patients have
disease as a result of autosomal dominant STAT3 pathogenic variants. In contrast, some patients with hyper-­IgE syndrome present
with increased susceptibility to viral infections and an autosomal
recessive pattern of disease inheritance. These patients may have
a dedicator of cytokinesis 8 gene (DOCK8) pathogenic variants.
This diagnosis should be considered in young children with severe
eczema, food allergy, and disseminated skin viral infections.

Adolescents who present with an eczematous dermatitis but no history of childhood eczema, respiratory allergy, or atopic family history
may have allergic contact dermatitis. A contact allergen may be the
problem in any patient whose AD does not respond to appropriate
therapy. Sensitizing chemicals, such as parabens and lanolin, can be
irritants for patients with AD and are commonly found as vehicles in
therapeutic topical agents. Topical glucocorticoid contact allergy has
been reported in patients with chronic dermatitis receiving topical corticosteroid therapy. Eczematous dermatitis has also been reported with
HIV infection as well as with a variety of infestations such as scabies.
Other conditions that can be confused with AD include psoriasis, ichthyosis, and seborrheic dermatitis.

TREATMENT

The treatment of AD requires a systematic, multifaceted approach that
incorporates skin moisturization, topical antiinflammatory therapy,
identification and elimination of flare factors (Table 186.4), and, if necessary, systemic therapy (Fig. 186.5). Assessment of the severity also
helps direct therapy (Table 186.5; see Fig. 186.5).

Cutaneous Hydration

Because patients with AD have impaired skin barrier function from
reduced filaggrin and skin lipid levels, they present with diffuse, abnormally dry skin, or xerosis. Moisturizers are first-­line therapy. Lukewarm soaking baths or showers for 15-­20 minutes followed by the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 186 u Atopic Dermatitis (Atopic Eczema) 1413
Table 186.1  Clinical Features of Atopic Dermatitis
MAJOR FEATURES
Pruritus
Facial and extensor eczema in infants and children
Flexural eczema in adolescents
Chronic or relapsing dermatitis
Personal or family history of atopic disease
ASSOCIATED FEATURES
Xerosis
Cutaneous infections (Staphylococcus aureus, group A streptococcus,
herpes simplex, coxsackievirus, vaccinia, molluscum, warts)
Nonspecific dermatitis of the hands or feet
Ichthyosis, palmar hyperlinearity, keratosis pilaris
Nipple eczema
White dermatographism and delayed blanch response
Anterior subcapsular cataracts, keratoconus
Elevated serum IgE levels
Positive results of immediate-­type allergy skin tests
Early age at onset
Dennie lines (Dennie-­Morgan infraorbital folds)
Facial erythema or pallor
Course influenced by environmental and/or emotional factors
Lichenification
Perioral, periauricular sites
Prurigo

Fig. 186.3 Crusted lesions of atopic dermatitis on the face. (From
Eichenfield LF, Friedan IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001. p 242.)

therapy. Wet dressing therapy can be complicated by maceration and
secondary infection and should be closely monitored by a physician.

Topical Corticosteroids

Fig. 186.4 Lichenification of the popliteal fossa from chronic rubbing

of the skin in atopic dermatitis. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli JG.
Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology. 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby;
1996. p 33.)

application of an occlusive emollient to retain moisture provide symptomatic relief. Hydrophilic ointments of varying degrees of viscosity
can be used according to the patient’s preference. Occlusive ointments
are sometimes not well tolerated because of interference with the function of the eccrine sweat ducts and may induce the development of
folliculitis. In these patients, less occlusive agents should be used. Several prescription (classified as a medical device) “therapeutic moisturizers” or “barrier creams” are available, containing components such
as ceramides and filaggrin acid metabolites intended to improve skin
barrier function. There are minimal data demonstrating their efficacy
over standard emollients.
Hydration by baths or wet dressings promotes transepidermal penetration of topical glucocorticoids. Dressings may also serve as effective barriers against persistent scratching, in turn promoting healing of
excoriated lesions. Wet dressings are recommended for use on severely
affected or chronically involved areas of dermatitis refractory to skin
care. It is critical that wet dressing therapy be followed by topical
emollient application to avoid potential drying and fissuring from the

Topical corticosteroids are the cornerstone of antiinflammatory treatment for acute exacerbations of AD. Patients should be carefully
instructed on their use of topical glucocorticoids to avoid potential
adverse effects. There are seven classes of topical glucocorticoids,
ranked according to their potency, as determined by vasoconstrictor assays (Table 186.6). Because of their potential adverse effects, the
ultra-­high-­potency glucocorticoids should not be used on the face or
intertriginous areas and should be used only for very short periods on
the trunk and extremities. Mid-­potency glucocorticoids can be used
for longer periods to treat chronic AD involving the trunk and extremities. Long-­term control can be maintained with twice-­weekly applications of topical fluticasone or mometasone to areas that have healed
but are prone to relapse, once control of AD is achieved after a daily
regimen of topical corticosteroids. Compared with creams, ointments
have a greater potential to occlude the epidermis, resulting in enhanced
systemic absorption.
Adverse effects of topical glucocorticoids can be divided into local
adverse effects and systemic adverse effects, the latter resulting from
suppression of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­adrenal axis. Local adverse
effects include the development of striae and skin atrophy. Systemic
adverse effects are related to the potency of the topical corticosteroid,
site of application, occlusiveness of the preparation, percentage of the
body surface area covered, and length of use. The potential for adrenal
suppression from potent topical corticosteroids is greatest in infants
and young children with severe AD requiring intensive therapy.

Topical Calcineurin Inhibitors

The nonsteroidal topical calcineurin inhibitors are effective in reducing
AD skin inflammation. Pimecrolimus cream 1% (Elidel) is indicated
for mild to moderate AD. Tacrolimus ointment 0.1% and 0.03% (Protopic) is indicated for moderate to severe AD. Both are approved for
short-­term or intermittent long-­term treatment of AD in patients ≥2
years whose disease is unresponsive to or who are intolerant of other
conventional therapies or for whom these therapies are inadvisable

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1414 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 186.2  Differential Diagnosis of Atopic Dermatitis
MAIN AGE GROUP AFFECTED

FREQUENCY*

OTHER TYPES OF DERMATITIS
Seborrheic dermatitis

Infants

Common

Seborrheic dermatitis

Adults

Common

Nummular dermatitis

Children and adults

Common

Irritant contact dermatitis

Children and adults

Common

Allergic contact dermatitis

Children and adults

Common

Lichen simplex chronicus

Adults

Uncommon

Asteatotic eczema

Adults

Common

INFECTIOUS SKIN DISEASES
Dermatophyte infection

Children and adults

Common

Impetigo

Children

Common

Scabies

Children

Common†

HIV

Children and adults

Uncommon

CONGENITAL IMMUNODEFICIENCIES (SEE TABLE 186.3)
KERATINIZATION DISORDERS
Ichthyosis vulgaris
Infants and adults

NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCY–METABOLIC DISORDERS
Zinc deficiency (acrodermatitis
Children
enteropathica)

CHARACTERISTICS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Salmon-­red greasy scaly lesions, often on the scalp
(cradle cap) and napkin area; generally presents in
the first 6 wk of life; typically clears within weeks
Erythematous patches with yellow, white, or grayish
scales in seborrheic areas, particularly the scalp,
central face, and anterior chest
Coin-­shaped scaly patches, mostly on legs and
buttocks; usually no itch
Acute to chronic eczematous lesions, mostly confined
to the site of exposure; history of locally applied
irritants is a risk factor; might coexist with AD
Eczematous rash with maximum expression at sites of
direct exposure but might spread; history of locally
applied irritants is a risk factor; might coexist with AD
One or more localized, circumscribed, lichenified
plaques that result from repetitive scratching or
rubbing because of intense itch
Scaly, fissured patches of dermatitis overlying dry
skin, most often on lower legs
One or more demarcated scaly plaques with central
clearing and slightly raised reddened edge;
variable itch
Demarcated erythematous patches with blisters or
honey-­yellow crusting
Itchy superficial burrows and pustules on palms and
soles, between fingers, and on genitalia; might
produce secondary eczematous changes
Seborrhea-­like rash

Uncommon

Dry skin with fine scaling, particularly on the lower
abdomen and extensor areas; perifollicular skin
roughening; palmar hyperlinearity; full form
(i.e., 2 FLG pathogenic variants) is uncommon;
often coexists with AD

Uncommon

Erythematous scaly patches and plaques, most often
around the mouth and anus; rare congenital form
accompanied by diarrhea and alopecia
Scaly periorofacial dermatitis, alopecia, conjunctivitis,
lethargy, hypotonia
Scaly crusted epidermis, desquamation, sun-­exposed
areas, diarrhea

Biotin deficiency (nutritional or
biotinidase deficiency)
Pellagra (niacin deficiency)

Infants

Uncommon

All ages

Uncommon

Kwashiorkor

Infants and children

Phenylketonuria

Infants

Geographic
dependent
Uncommon

Flaky scaly dermatitis, swollen limbs with cracked
peeling patches
Eczematous rash, hypopigmentation, blonde hair,
developmental delay

NEOPLASTIC DISEASE
Cutaneous T-­cell lymphoma

Adults

Uncommon

Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Infants

Uncommon

Erythematous pink-­brown macules and plaques
with a fine scale; poorly responsive to topical
corticosteroids; variable itch (in early stages)
Scaly and purpuric dermatosis, hepatosplenomegaly,
cytopenias

*Common = approximately 1 in 10 to 1 in 100; uncommon = 1 in 100 to 1 in 1,000; rare = 1 in 1,000 to 1 in 10,000; very rare = <1 in 10,000.
†Especially in developing countries.
AD, Atopic dermatitis; FLG, filaggrin gene.

because of potential risks. Topical calcineurin inhibitors may be better
than topical corticosteroids in the treatment of patients whose AD is
poorly responsive to topical steroids, patients with steroid phobia, and
those with face and neck dermatitis, in whom ineffective, low-­potency
topical corticosteroids are typically used because of fears of steroid-­
induced skin atrophy.

Phosphodiesterase Inhibitor

Crisaborole (Eucrisa) is an approved nonsteroidal topical antiinflammatory phosphodiesterase-­
4 (PDE-­
4) inhibitor indicated for the
treatment of mild to moderate AD of children 3 months or older. It
may be used as an alternative to topical corticosteroids or calcineurin
inhibitors.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 186 u Atopic Dermatitis (Atopic Eczema) 1415
Table 186.3  Features of Primary Immunodeficiencies Associated with Eczematous Dermatitis
DISEASE

GENE

INHERITANCE

CLINICAL FEATURES

LAB ABNORMALITIES

AD-­HIES

STAT3

AD, less commonly
sporadic

Cold abscesses
Recurrent sinopulmonary infections
Mucocutaneous candidiasis
Coarse facies
Minimal trauma fractures
Scoliosis
Joint hyperextensibility
Retained primary teeth
Coronary artery tortuosity or dilation
Lymphoma

High IgE (>2,000 IU/μL)
Eosinophilia

DOCK8
deficiency

DOCK8

AR

Severe mucocutaneous viral infections
Mucocutaneous candidiasis
Atopic features (asthma, allergies)
Squamous cell carcinoma
Lymphoma

High IgE
Eosinophilia
With or without decreased IgM

PGM3
deficiency

PGM3

AR

Neurologic abnormalities
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis
Atopic features (asthma, allergies)
Sinopulmonary infections
Mucocutaneous viral infections

High IgE
Eosinophilia

WAS

WASP

XLR

Hepatosplenomegaly
Lymphadenopathy
Atopic diathesis
Autoimmune conditions (especially hemolytic
anemia)
Lymphoreticular malignancies

Thrombocytopenia (<80,000/μL)
Low mean platelet volume
Eosinophilia is common
Lymphopenia
Low IgM, variable IgG

SCID

Variable,
depends on
type

XLR and AR most
common

Recurrent, severe infections
Failure to thrive
Persistent diarrhea
Recalcitrant oral candidiasis
Omenn syndrome: lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly, erythroderma

Lymphopenia common
Variable patterns of reduced
lymphocyte subsets (T, B, natural
killer cells)
Omenn syndrome: high
lymphocytes, eosinophilia, high IgE

IPEX

FOXP3

XLR

Severe diarrhea (autoimmune enteropathy)
Various autoimmune endocrinopathies
(especially diabetes mellitus, thyroiditis)
Food allergies

High IgE
Eosinophilia
Various autoantibodies

Netherton
syndrome

SPINK5

AR

Hair shaft abnormalities
Erythroderma
Ichthyosis linearis circumflexa
Food allergies
Recurrent gastroenteritis
Neonatal hypernatremic dehydration
Upper and lower respiratory infections

High IgE
Eosinophilia

AD, Autosomal dominant; AD-­HIES, autosomal-­dominant hyper-­IgE syndrome; AR, autosomal recessive; DOCK8, dedicator of cytokinesis 8 gene; IPEX, immune dysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked syndrome; PGM3, phosphoglucomutase 3; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; WAS, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome; XLR, X-­linked recessive.
From Kliegman RM, Bordini BJ, eds. Undiagnosed and rare diseases in children. Pediatr Clin N Amer. 2017;64(1):41–42.

Tar Preparations

Coal tar preparations have antipruritic and antiinflammatory effects
on the skin; however, their antiinflammatory effects are usually not as
pronounced as those of topical glucocorticoids or calcineurin inhibitors. Therefore topical tar preparations are not a preferred approach
for management of AD. Tar shampoos can be particularly beneficial
for scalp dermatitis. Adverse effects associated with tar preparations
include skin irritation, folliculitis, and photosensitivity.

Antihistamines

Systemic antihistamines act primarily by blocking the histamine H1
receptors in the dermis, thereby reducing histamine-­induced pruritus.
Histamine is only one of many mediators that induce pruritus of the
skin, so patients may derive minimal benefit from antihistaminic therapy. Because pruritus is usually worse at night, sedating antihistamines
(hydroxyzine, diphenhydramine) may offer an advantage with their
soporific side effects when used at bedtime. Doxepin hydrochloride has
both tricyclic antidepressant and H1-­and H2-­receptor blocking effects.

Short-­term use of a sedative to allow adequate rest may be appropriate
in cases of severe nocturnal pruritus. Studies of nonsedating antihistamines have shown variable effectiveness in controlling pruritus in AD,
although they may be useful in the small subset of patients with AD
and concomitant urticaria. For children, melatonin may be effective in
promoting sleep because production is deficient in AD.

Systemic Corticosteroids

Systemic corticosteroids are rarely indicated in the treatment of chronic
AD. The dramatic clinical improvement that may occur with systemic
corticosteroids is frequently associated with a severe rebound flare of AD
after therapy discontinuation. Short courses of oral corticosteroids may be
appropriate for an acute exacerbation of AD while other treatment measures are being instituted in parallel. If a short course of oral corticosteroids is given, as during an asthma exacerbation, it is important to taper
the dosage and begin intensified skin care, particularly with topical corticosteroids, and frequent bathing, followed by application of emollients or
proactive topical corticosteroids, to prevent rebound flaring of AD.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1416 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 186.4  Counseling and Aggravating Factors for
Patients with Atopic Dermatitis
Maintain cool temperature in bedroom, and avoid too many bed
covers.
Increase emollient use with cold weather.
Avoid exposure to herpes sores; urgent visit if flare of unusual
aspect.
Clothing: Avoid skin contact with irritating fibers (wool, large-­fiber
textiles).
Do not use tight and too-­warm clothing to avoid excessive
sweating.
New, nonirritating clothing designed for AD children is being
evaluated.
Tobacco: Avoid exposure.
Vaccines: Normal schedule in noninvolved skin, including
egg-­allergic patients (see text).
Sun exposure: No specific restriction.
Usually helpful because of improvement of epidermal barrier.
Encourage summer holidays in altitude or at beach resorts.
Physical exercise, sports: No restriction.
If sweating induces flares of AD, progressive adaptation to
exercise.
Shower and emollients after swimming pool.
Food allergens:
Maintain breastfeeding exclusively to 4-­6 mo if possible.
Consider evaluation for early introduction of allergens (see
Chapter 192).
Otherwise normal diet, unless an allergy workup has proved the
need to exclude a specific food.
Indoor aeroallergens: House dust mites.
Use adequate ventilation of housing; keep the rooms well aerated
even in winter.
Avoid wall-­to-­wall carpeting.
Remove dust with a wet sponge.
Vacuum floors and upholstery with an adequately filtered cleaner
once a week.
Avoid soft toys in bed (cradle), except washable ones.
Wash bedsheets at a temperature higher than 55°C (131°F) every
10 days.
Use bed and pillow encasings made of Gore-­Tex or similar material.
Furred pets: Advise to avoid. If allergy is demonstrated, be firm on
avoidance measures, such as pet removal.
Pollen: Close windows during peak pollen season on warm and dry
weather days and restrict, if possible, time outdoors.
Windows may be open at night and early in the morning or during
rainy weather.
Avoid exposure to risk situations (lawn mowing).
Use pollen filters in motor vehicles.
Clothes and pets can vectorize aeroallergens, including pollen.
Adapted from Darsow U, Wollenberg A, Simon D, et al. ETFAD/EADV Eczema Task
Force 2009 position paper on diagnosis and treatment of atopic dermatitis. J Eur Acad
Dermatol Venereol. 2010;24:321.

Dupilumab

A monoclonal antibody that binds to the IL-­4 receptor α subunit, dupilumab (Dupixent) inhibits the signaling of IL-­4 and IL-­13, cytokines
associated with AD. In children with moderate to severe AD not controlled by standard topical therapy, dupilumab reduces pruritus and
improves skin clearing. Dupilumab is approved for children 6 years or
older. Lebrikizumab, an IgG4 monoclonal antibody that targets IL-13,
has shown efficacy in adolescents and adults with moderate to severe
atopic dermatitis.

Phototherapy

Natural sunlight is often beneficial to patients with AD as long as
sunburn and excessive sweating are avoided. Many phototherapy
modalities are effective for AD, including ultraviolet A-­
1, ultraviolet B, narrow-­band ultraviolet B, and psoralen plus ultraviolet A.

Patient presents with
an eczematous
pruritic dermatitis

Patient meets diagnostic
criteria for AD?
No

Yes

Is AD
severe?

Consider other
conditions as per
differential
diagnosis?

No
Yes
• Identification and elimination of exacerbating factors
(irritants, proven allergens)
• Addressing psychosocial aspects/quality-of-life issues
• Education
• Hydration
• Moisturizers
• Topical corticosteroids (low to mid potency)
• Topical calcineurin inhibitors*
• Topical PDE4 inhibitor
• Anti-infective therapy
• Anti-pruritic therapy
• Written care plan

Management
successful?

Yes

Periodic follow-up
• Review treatment plan
• Consider maintenance
therapy with topical
immunomodulators

No

No

Reassess: Is
diagnosis of
AD correct?

Yes

Consultation with AD specialist
• Intensification of treatment
measures discussed above
• Consider
Culture and sensitivity of skin
lesion
(R/o MRSA)
Wet wrap therapy
Dupilumab**
Hospitalization
UV light therapy
Systemic immunosuppressives
Possibly oral or topical JAK
inhibitors

Fig. 186.5 Approach to the patient with atopic dermatitis (AD). *Per

boxed warning: second-­line, intermittent therapy for patients ≥2 years
of age. **Approved for patients ≥12 years of age with moderate to
severe AD. JAK, Janus kinase; MRSA; methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus; PDE, phosphodiesterase; UV, ultraviolet. (Modified from
Boguniewicz M, Fonacier L, Leung DYM. Atopic dermatitis and allergic
contact dermatitis. In Hershey GKK, Sheikh A, O’Hehir RE, Holgate ST,
eds. Allergy Essentials. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022. Fig 11.5.)

Phototherapy is generally reserved for patients in whom standard
treatments fail. Maintenance treatments are usually required for phototherapy to be effective. Short-­term adverse effects with phototherapy
include erythema, skin pain, pruritus, and pigmentation. Long-­term
adverse effects include predisposition to cutaneous malignancies.

Cyclosporine

Cyclosporine is a potent immunosuppressive drug that acts primarily on
T cells by suppressing cytokine gene transcription and has been shown
to be effective in the control of severe AD. Cyclosporine forms a complex
with an intracellular protein, cyclophilin, and this complex in turn inhibits calcineurin, a phosphatase required for activation of nuclear factor of
activated T cells (NFAT), a transcription factor necessary for cytokine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 186 u Atopic Dermatitis (Atopic Eczema) 1417
Table 186.5  Categorization of Physical Severity of Atopic
Eczema
Clear: Normal skin, with no evidence of atopic eczema
Mild: Areas of dry skin, infrequent itching (with or without small areas
of redness)
Moderate: Areas of dry skin, frequent itching, redness (with or without
excoriation and localized skin thickening)
Severe: Widespread areas of dry skin, incessant itching, redness (with
or without excoriation, extensive skin thickening, bleeding, oozing,
cracking, and alteration of pigmentation)
From Lewis-­Jones S, Mugglestone MA, Guideline Development Group. Management
of atopic eczema in children aged up to 12 years: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ.
2007;335:1263–1264.

gene transcription. Cyclosporine (5 mg/kg/day) for short-­term and long-­
term (1 year) use has been beneficial for children with severe, refractory
AD. Possible adverse effects include renal impairment and hypertension.

Janus Kinase Inhibitors

Oral and topical Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors have demonstrated
rapid improvement in adults and older children with severe AD.
These inhibitors also have potential side effects including infections (tuberculosis), malignancy (cutaneous lymphoma), and
headaches. Topical therapy is effective and has fewer side effects.
Clinical trials are in progress to address the efficacy and safely of
JAK inhibitors.

Antimetabolites

Mycophenolate mofetil is a purine biosynthesis inhibitor used as an
immunosuppressant in organ transplantation that has been used for
treatment of refractory AD. Aside from immunosuppression, herpes
simplex retinitis and dose-­related bone marrow suppression have been
reported with its use. Of note, not all patients benefit from treatment.
Therefore mycophenolate mofetil should be discontinued if the disease
does not respond within 4-­8 weeks.
Methotrexate is an antimetabolite with potent inhibitory
effects on inflammatory cytokine synthesis and cell chemotaxis.
Methotrexate has been used for patients with recalcitrant AD.
In AD, dosing is more frequent than the weekly dosing used for
psoriasis.
Azathioprine is a purine analog with antiinflammatory and antiproliferative effects that has been used for severe AD. Myelosuppression
is a significant adverse effect, and thiopurine methyltransferase levels
may identify individuals at risk.
Before any of these drugs are used, patients should be referred to
an AD specialist who is familiar with treatment of severe AD to weigh
relative benefits of alternative therapies.

Unproven Therapies

Other therapies may be considered in patients with refractory AD.

Interferon-­γ

IFN-­γ is known to suppress Th2-­cell function. Several studies, including a multicenter, double-­
blind, placebo-­
controlled trial and several open trials, have demonstrated that treatment with recombinant
human IFN-­γ results in clinical improvement of AD. Reduction in
clinical severity of AD correlated with the ability of IFN-­γ to decrease
total circulating eosinophil counts. Influenza-­like symptoms are common side effects during the treatment course.

Omalizumab

Treatment of patients who have severe AD and elevated serum IgE
values with monoclonal anti-­IgE may be considered in those with
allergen-­induced flares of AD. However, there have been no published
double-­blind, placebo-­controlled trials supporting omalizumab as a
preferred therapy for moderate to severe AD. Most reports show inconsistent responses to anti-­IgE.

Table 186.6  Selected Topical Corticosteroid Preparations*
GROUP 1
Clobetasol propionate (Temovate) 0.05% ointment/cream
Betamethasone dipropionate (Diprolene) 0.05% ointment/lotion/gel
Fluocinonide (Vanos) 0.1% cream
GROUP 2
Mometasone furoate (Elocon) 0.1% ointment
Halcinonide (Halog) 0.1% cream
Fluocinonide (Lidex) 0.05% ointment/cream
Desoximetasone (Topicort) 0.25% ointment/cream
Betamethasone dipropionate (Diprolene) 0.05% cream
GROUP 3
Fluticasone propionate (Cutivate) 0.005% ointment
Halcinonide (Halog) 0.1% ointment
Betamethasone valerate (Valisone) 0.1% ointment
GROUP 4
Mometasone furoate (Elocon) 0.1% cream
Triamcinolone acetonide (Kenalog) 0.1% ointment/cream
Fluocinolone acetonide (Synalar) 0.025% ointment
GROUP 5
Fluocinolone acetonide (Synalar) 0.025% cream
Hydrocortisone valerate (Westcort) 0.2% ointment
GROUP 6
Desonide (DesOwen) 05% ointment/cream/lotion
Alclometasone dipropionate (Aclovate) 0.05% ointment/cream
GROUP 7
Hydrocortisone (Hytone) 2.5%, 1%, 0.5% ointment/cream/lotion
*Representative corticosteroids are listed by group from 1 (superpotent) through 7
(least potent).
Adapted from Stoughton RB. Vasoconstrictor assay-­specific applications. In: Malbach
HI, Surber C, eds. Topical Corticosteroids. Basel, Switzerland: Karger; 1992. p 42–53.

Allergen Immunotherapy

In contrast to its acceptance for treatment of allergic rhinitis and
extrinsic asthma, immunotherapy with aeroallergens in the treatment
of AD is controversial. There are reports of both disease exacerbation
and improvement. Studies suggest that specific immunotherapy in
patients with AD sensitized to dust mite allergen showed improvement in severity of skin disease, as well as reduction in topical corticosteroid use.

Probiotics

Perinatal administration of the probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus
strain GG has been shown to reduce the incidence of AD in at-­risk
children during the first 2 years of life. The treatment response has been
found to be more pronounced in patients with positive skin-­prick test
results and elevated IgE values. Other studies have not demonstrated
a benefit.

Chinese Herbal Medications

Several placebo-­
controlled clinical trials have suggested that
patients with severe AD may benefit from treatment with traditional
Chinese herbal therapy. The patients had significantly reduced skin
disease and decreased pruritus. The beneficial response of Chinese
herbal therapy is often temporary, and effectiveness may wear off
despite continued treatment. The possibility of hepatic toxicity, cardiac side effects, or idiosyncratic reactions remains a concern. The
specific ingredients of the herbs also remain to be elucidated, and
some preparations have been found to be contaminated with corticosteroids. At present, Chinese herbal therapy for AD is considered
investigational.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1418 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Vitamin D

Vitamin D deficiency often accompanies severe AD. Vitamin D
enhances skin barrier function, reduces corticosteroid requirements to
control inflammation, and augments skin antimicrobial function. Several small clinical studies suggest vitamin D can enhance antimicrobial peptide expression in the skin and reduce severity of skin disease,
especially in patients with low baseline vitamin D, as during winter,
when exacerbation of AD often occurs. Patients with AD might benefit
from supplementation with vitamin D, particularly if they have a documented low level or low vitamin D intake.

AVOIDING TRIGGERS

It is essential to identify and eliminate triggering factors for AD, both
during the period of acute symptoms and on a long-­term basis to prevent recurrences (see Table 186.4).

Irritants

Patients with AD have a low threshold response to irritants that trigger
their itch-­scratch cycle. Soaps or detergents, chemicals, smoke, abrasive clothing, and exposure to extremes of temperature and humidity
are common triggers. Patients with AD should use soaps with minimal
defatting properties and a neutral pH. New clothing should be laundered before wearing to decrease levels of formaldehyde and other
chemicals. Residual laundry detergent in clothing may trigger the itch-­
scratch cycle; using a liquid rather than powder detergent and adding a
second rinse cycle facilitates removal of the detergent.
Every attempt should be made to allow children with AD to be
as normally active as possible. A sport such as swimming may be
better tolerated than others that involve intense perspiration, physical contact, or heavy clothing and equipment. Rinsing off chlorine
immediately and lubricating the skin after swimming are important. Although ultraviolet light may be beneficial to some patients
with AD, high sun protection factor (SPF) sunscreens should be
used to avoid sunburn.

Foods

Food allergy is comorbid in approximately 40% of infants and young
children with moderate to severe AD (see Chapter 192). Undiagnosed
food allergies in patients with AD may induce eczematous dermatitis
in some patients and urticarial reactions, wheezing, or nasal congestion in others. Increased severity of AD symptoms and younger age
correlate directly with the presence of food allergy. Removal of food
allergens from the diet may lead to clinical improvement but also carries a risk of the patient developing immediate type allergic reactions
to the food allergen removed.
Potential allergens can be identified by a careful history and performing selective skin-­
prick tests or in vitro blood testing for

A

allergen-­specific IgE. Negative skin and blood test results for allergen-­
specific IgE have a high predictive value for excluding suspected allergens. Positive results of skin or blood tests using foods often do not
correlate with clinical symptoms and should be confirmed with controlled food challenges and elimination diets. Extensive elimination
diets, which can be nutritionally deficient, are rarely required. Even
with multiple positive skin test results, the majority of patients react to
fewer than three foods under controlled challenge conditions.

Aeroallergens

In older children, AD flares can occur after intranasal or epicutaneous
exposure to aeroallergens such as fungi, animal dander, grass, and ragweed pollen. Avoiding aeroallergens, particularly dust mites, can result
in clinical improvement of AD. Avoidance measures for dust mite–
allergic patients include using dust mite–proof encasings on pillows,
mattresses, and box springs; washing bedding in hot water weekly;
removing bedroom carpeting; and decreasing indoor humidity levels
with air conditioning.

Infections

Patients with AD have increased susceptibility to bacterial, viral, and
fungal skin infections. Antistaphylococcal antibiotics are very helpful for treating patients who are heavily colonized or infected with
S. aureus. Erythromycin and azithromycin are usually beneficial
for patients who are not colonized with a resistant S. aureus strain;
a first-­
generation cephalosporin (cephalexin) is recommended for
macrolide-­resistant S. aureus. Topical mupirocin is useful in the treatment of localized impetiginous lesions, with systemic clindamycin or
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole needed for methicillin-­
resistant S.
aureus (MRSA). Cytokine-­mediated skin inflammation contributes to
skin colonization with S. aureus. This finding supports the importance
of combining effective antiinflammatory therapy with antibiotics for
treating moderate to severe AD to avoid the need for repeated courses
of antibiotics, which can lead to the emergence of antibiotic-­resistant
strains of S. aureus. Dilute bleach baths (½ cup of bleach in 40 gallons
of water) twice weekly may be also considered to reduce S. aureus colonization. In one randomized trial, the group who received the bleach
baths plus intranasal mupirocin (5 days/month) had significantly
decreased severity of AD at 1 and 3 months compared with placebo.
Patients rinse off after the soaking. Bleach baths may not only reduce S.
aureus abundance on the skin but also have antiinflammatory effects.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) can provoke recurrent dermatitis and
may be misdiagnosed as S. aureus infection (Fig. 186.6). The presence
of punched-­out erosions, vesicles, and infected skin lesions that fail
to respond to oral antibiotics suggests HSV infection, which can be
diagnosed by a Giemsa-­stained Tzanck smear of cells scraped from the
vesicle base or by viral polymerase chain reaction or culture. Topical

B

Fig. 186.6 Eczema herpeticum infection in a patient with atopic dermatitis. Numerous punched-­out vesicles and erosions involving the face (A)
and extremities (B). (From Papulosquamous eruptions. In Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013. pp 68–103.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 187 u Insect Allergy
corticosteroids should be temporarily discontinued if HSV infection is
suspected. Reports of life-­threatening dissemination of HSV infections
in patients with AD who have widespread disease mandate antiviral
treatment. Persons with AD are also susceptible to eczema vaccinatum, which is similar in appearance to eczema herpeticum and historically follows smallpox (vaccinia virus) vaccination.
Cutaneous warts, coxsackievirus, and molluscum contagiosum are
additional viral infections affecting children with AD.
Dermatophyte infections can also contribute to exacerbation of AD.
Patients with AD have been found to have a greater susceptibility to
Trichophyton rubrum fungal infections than nonatopic controls. There
has been particular interest in the role of Malassezia furfur (formerly
known as Pityrosporum ovale) in AD because it is a lipophilic yeast
commonly present in the seborrheic areas of the skin. IgE antibodies
against M. furfur have been found in patients with head and neck dermatitis. A reduction of AD severity has been observed in these patients
after treatment with antifungal agents.

COMPLICATIONS

Exfoliative dermatitis may develop in patients with extensive skin involvement. It is associated with generalized redness, scaling, weeping, crusting,
systemic toxicity, lymphadenopathy, and fever and is usually caused by
superinfection (e.g., with toxin-­producing S. aureus or HSV infection) or
inappropriate therapy. In some cases the withdrawal of systemic glucocorticoids used to control severe AD precipitates exfoliative erythroderma.
Eyelid dermatitis and chronic blepharitis may result in visual impairment from corneal scarring. Atopic keratoconjunctivitis is usually
bilateral and can have disabling symptoms that include itching, burning,
tearing, and copious mucoid discharge. Vernal conjunctivitis is associated
with papillary hypertrophy or cobblestoning of the upper eyelid conjunctiva. It typically occurs in younger patients and has a marked seasonal incidence with spring exacerbations. Keratoconus is a conical deformity of the
cornea believed to result from chronic rubbing of the eyes in patients with
AD. Cataracts may be a primary manifestation of AD or from extensive
use of systemic and topical glucocorticoids, particularly around the eyes.

PROGNOSIS

AD generally tends to be more severe and persistent in young children,
particularly if they have homozygous null pathogenic variants in their filaggrin genes. Periods of remission occur more frequently as patients grow
older. Spontaneous resolution of AD has been reported to occur after age
5 years in 40–60% of patients affected during infancy, particularly for mild
disease. Earlier studies suggested that approximately 84% of children outgrow their AD by adolescence; however, later studies reported that AD
resolves in approximately 20% of children monitored from infancy until
adolescence and becomes less severe in 65%. Of those adolescents treated
for mild dermatitis, >50% may experience a relapse of disease as adults,
which frequently manifests as hand dermatitis, especially if daily activities
require repeated hand wetting. Predictive factors of a poor prognosis for
AD include widespread AD in childhood, FLG null pathogenic variants,
concomitant allergic rhinitis and asthma, family history of AD in parents
or siblings, early age at onset of AD, being an only child, and very high
serum IgE levels.

1419

Chapter 187

Insect Allergy
Julie Wang and Scott H. Sicherer
Allergic responses to stinging or, more rarely, biting insects vary from
localized cutaneous reactions to systemic anaphylaxis. Allergic reactions caused by inhalation of airborne particles of insect origin result
in acute and chronic respiratory symptoms of seasonal or perennial
rhinitis, conjunctivitis, and asthma.

ETIOLOGY

Most reactions to stinging and biting insects, such as those induced
by wasps, mosquitoes, flies, and fleas, are limited to a primary lesion
isolated to the area of the sting or bite and do not represent an allergic response. Occasionally, insect stings or bites induce pronounced
localized reactions or systemic reactions that may be based on immediate or delayed hypersensitivity reactions. Systemic allergic responses
to insects are usually attributed to IgE antibody–mediated responses,
which are caused primarily by stings from venomous insects of the
order Hymenoptera and more rarely from ticks, spiders, scorpions,
and Triatoma (kissing bug). Members of the order Hymenoptera
include apids (honeybee, bumblebee), vespids (yellow jacket, wasp,
hornet), and formicids (fire and harvester ants) (Fig. 187.1). Among
winged stinging insects, yellow jackets are the most notorious for stinging because they are aggressive and ground dwelling, and they linger
near activities involving food. Hornets nest in trees, whereas wasps
build honeycomb nests in dark areas such as under porches; both
are aggressive if disturbed. Honeybees are less aggressive and nest in
tree hollows; unlike the stings of other flying Hymenoptera, honeybee
stings almost always leave a barbed stinger with venom sac.
In the United States, fire ants are found in the Southeast, living in
large mounds of soil. When disturbed, the ants attack in large numbers,
anchor themselves to the skin by their mandibles, and sting multiple
times in a circular pattern. Sterile pseudopustules form at the sting
sites. Systemic reactions to stinging insects occur in 0.4–0.8% of children and 3% of adults and account for approximately 40 deaths each
year in the United States.
Although reactions to insect bites are common, IgE-­mediated reactions are infrequently reported and anaphylaxis is rare. The Triatoma
(kissing bug) bite causes an erythematous plaque that is painless. Mosquito bites generally result in local reactions that are pruritic. Large,

PREVENTION

Breastfeeding may be beneficial. Probiotics and prebiotics may also reduce
the incidence or severity of AD, but this approach is unproven. If an infant
with AD is diagnosed with food allergy, the breastfeeding mother may
need to eliminate the implicated food allergen from her diet. For infants
with severe eczema, introduction of infant-­safe forms of peanut as early as
4-­6 months, after other solids are tolerated, is recommended after consultation with the child’s pediatrician and/or allergist for allergy testing. This
approach may prevent peanut allergy (see Chapter 192). Identification and
elimination of triggering factors are the mainstay for prevention of flares as
well as for the long-­term treatment of AD.
Emollient therapy applied to the whole body for the first few months
of life may enhance the cutaneous barrier and reduce the risk of eczema.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 187.1 Representative venomous Hymenoptera. A, Hornet

(Vespula maculata). B, Wasp (Chlorion ichneumerea). C, Yellowjacket
(Vespula maculiforma). D, Honeybee (Apis mellifera). E, Fire ant (Solenopsis invicta). F, Bumblebee (Bombus species). (From Erickson TB,
Marquez A. Arthropod envenomation and parasitism. In: Auerbach PS,
Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds. Auerbach’s Wilderness Medicine. 7th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig 41-­1, p 937.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1420 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
local reactions to mosquito bites can occur in some young children;
this is known as skeeter syndrome and is often misdiagnosed as cellulitis. The tabanid species (horsefly, deerfly), typically found in rural
and suburban areas, are large flies that induce painful bites.
IgE antibody–mediated allergic responses to airborne particulate
matter carrying insect emanations contribute to seasonal and perennial symptoms affecting the upper and lower airways. Seasonal allergy
is attributed to exposures to a variety of insects, particularly aquatic
insects such as the caddis fly and midge, or lake fly, at a time when larvae pupate and adult flies are airborne. Perennial allergy is attributed
to sensitization to insects such as cockroaches and ladybugs, as well
as house dust mite, which is phylogenetically related to spiders rather
than insects and has eight rather than six legs.

PATHOGENESIS

Hymenoptera venoms contain numerous components with toxic and
pharmacologic activity and with allergenic potential. These constituents include vasoactive substances such as histamine, acetylcholine,
and kinins; enzymes such as phospholipase and hyaluronidase; apamin;
melittin; and formic acid. The majority of patients who experience systemic reactions after Hymenoptera stings have IgE-­mediated sensitivity
to antigenic substances in the venom. Some venom allergens are homologous among members of the Hymenoptera order; others are family
specific. There is substantial cross reactivity among vespid venoms, but
these venom allergies are distinct from honeybee venom allergies.
Localized skin responses to biting insects are caused primarily by
vasoactive or irritant materials derived from insect saliva; they rarely
occur from IgE-­associated responses. Systemic IgE-­mediated allergic
reactions to salivary proteins of biting insects such as mosquitoes are
reported but uncommon.
A variety of proteins derived from insects can become airborne and
induce IgE-­mediated respiratory responses, causing inhalant allergies.
The primary allergen from the caddis fly is a hemocyanin-­like protein,
and that from the midge fly is derived from hemoglobin. Allergens
from the cockroach are the best studied and are derived from cockroach saliva, secretions, fecal material, and debris from skin casts.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Clinical reactions to stinging venomous insects are categorized as
local, large local, generalized cutaneous, systemic, toxic, and delayed/
late. Simple local reactions involve limited swelling and pain and generally last <24 hours. Large local reactions develop over hours and
days, involve swelling of extensive areas (>10 cm) that are contiguous with the sting site, and may last for days. Generalized cutaneous
reactions typically progress within minutes and include cutaneous
symptoms of urticaria, angioedema, and pruritus beyond the site of
the sting. Systemic reactions are identical to anaphylaxis from other
triggers and may include symptoms of generalized urticaria, laryngeal
edema, bronchospasm, and hypotension. A subset of patients with
hypotension and persistently elevated (once recovered) tryptase levels may have mast cell activation syndrome (see Chapter 190). Stings
from numerous insects at once may result in toxic reactions of fever,
malaise, emesis, and nausea because of the chemical properties of the
venom in large doses. Serum sickness, nephrotic syndrome, vasculitis, neuritis, or encephalopathy may occur as delayed/late reactions to
stinging insects.
Insect bites are usually urticarial but may be papular or vesicular.
Papular urticaria affecting the lower extremities in children is usually caused by multiple bites. Occasionally, individuals have large, local
reactions. IgE antibody–associated immediate-­and late-­phase allergic
responses to mosquito bites sometimes mimic cellulitis.
Inhalant allergy caused by insects results in clinical disease similar to
that induced by other inhalant allergens such as pollens. Depending on
individual sensitivity and exposure, reactions may result in seasonal or
perennial rhinitis, conjunctivitis, or asthma.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of allergy from stinging and biting insects is generally
evident from the history of exposure, typical symptoms, and physical
findings. The diagnosis of Hymenoptera allergy rests in part on the
identification of venom-­specific IgE by skin-­prick testing or in vitro
testing. The primary reasons to pursue testing are to confirm reactivity
when venom immunotherapy (VIT) is being considered or when it is
clinically necessary to confirm venom hypersensitivity as a cause of a
reaction. Venoms of five Hymenoptera (honeybee, yellow jacket, yellow hornet, white-­faced hornet, and wasp), as well as the jack jumper
ant in Australia and whole body extract of fire ant, are available for
skin testing. Although skin tests are considered to be the most sensitive
modality for detection of venom-­specific IgE, additional evaluation
with an in vitro serum assay for venom-­specific IgE is recommended
if skin test results are negative in the presence of a convincing history
of a severe systemic reaction. In vitro tests have a 20% incidence of
both false-­positive and false-­negative results, so it is not appropriate
to exclude venom hypersensitivity based on this test alone. If initial
skin-­prick and in vitro test results are negative in the context of a convincing history of a severe reaction, repeat testing is recommended
before concluding that allergy is unlikely. Skin tests are usually accurate
within 1 week of a sting reaction, but occasionally a refractory period
is observed that warrants retesting after 4-­6 weeks if the initial results
are negative.
An elevated basal tryptase level is associated with more severe reactions to venom stings. Therefore basal tryptase should be measured if
there is a history of severe reaction to a sting, hypotensive reaction,
lack of urticaria in a systemic sting reaction, or negative venom IgE
in a patient who has a history of systemic reaction to a sting. As many
as 40% of skin test–positive patients may not experience anaphylaxis
on sting challenge, so testing without an appropriate clinical history is
potentially misleading.
The diagnosis of inhalant insect allergy may be evident from a history of typical symptoms. A chronic respiratory symptom during long-­
term exposure, as may occur with cockroach allergy, is less amenable
to identification by history alone. Skin-­prick or in vitro immunoassay
tests for specific IgE to the insect are used to confirm inhalant insect
allergy. Allergy tests may be particularly warranted for potential cockroach allergy in patients with persistent asthma and known cockroach
exposure.

TREATMENT

For local cutaneous reactions caused by insect stings and bites, treatment with cold compresses, topical medications to relieve itching, and
occasionally a systemic antihistamine and oral analgesic are appropriate. Stingers should be removed promptly by scraping, with caution not
to squeeze the venom sac because doing so could inject more venom.
Sting sites rarely become infected, possibly because of the antibacterial actions of venom constituents. Vesicles left by fire ant stings that
are scratched open should be cleansed to prevent secondary infection.
Anaphylactic reactions after a Hymenoptera sting are treated the
same as anaphylaxis from any cause; epinephrine is the drug of choice.
Adjunctive treatment includes antihistamines, corticosteroids, intravenous fluids, oxygen, and transport to the emergency department (see
Chapter 190). Referral to an allergist-­immunologist should be considered for patients who have experienced a generalized cutaneous or systemic reaction to an insect sting, who need education about avoidance
and emergency treatment, who may be candidates for VIT, or who have
a condition that may complicate management of anaphylaxis (e.g., use
of β blockers).

Venom Immunotherapy

Hymenoptera VIT is highly effective (95–97%) in decreasing the risk
for severe anaphylaxis. The selection of patients for VIT depends
on several factors (Table 187.1). Individuals with local reactions,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 187 u Insect Allergy

1421

Table 187.1  Risk of Systemic Reaction in Untreated Patients with History of Sting Anaphylaxis and/or Positive Venom Skin
Test Results
ORIGINAL STING REACTION

RISK OF SYSTEMIC REACTION

SEVERITY

AGE

ANY SYSTEMIC (%)

ANAPHYLAXIS (%)

No reaction

Adult

5-15

<3

Large local

All

4-10

<

Cutaneous systemic

All

10

<3

Anaphylaxis

Child

40

30

Adult

60

40

From Golden DBK: Insect allergy. In Burks AW, Holgate ST, O’Hehir RE, et al., eds. Middleton’s Allergy Principles and Practice, ed 9, vol 2, Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2020, Table 76.2, p. 1253.

regardless of age, are not at increased risk for severe systemic reactions
on a subsequent sting and are not candidates for VIT. The risk of a
systemic reaction for those who experienced a large, local reaction is
approximately 7%; testing or VIT is usually not recommended, and
prescription of self-­injectable epinephrine is considered optional but
usually not necessary. There is growing evidence that VIT can reduce
the size and duration of large, local reactions, and therefore VIT may
be considered for those with frequent or unavoidable large, local
reactions. Those who experience severe systemic reactions, such as
airway involvement or hypotension, and who have specific IgE to
venom allergens, should receive immunotherapy. Immunotherapy
against winged Hymenoptera is generally not required when stings
have caused only generalized urticaria or angioedema, because the risk
for a systemic reaction after a subsequent sting is approximately 10%
and the chance of a more severe reaction is <3%. VIT may be considered if there are potential high-­risk cofactors such as comorbid cardiovascular disease or use of specific cardiovascular medications (e.g.,
angiotensin-­converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors, β blockers), elevated
basal tryptase level, or high likelihood of future stings. VIT is usually
not indicated if there is no evidence of IgE to venom.
The incidence of adverse effects in the course of treatment is not
trivial in adults; 50% experience large, local reactions, and about 10%
experience systemic reactions. The incidence of both local and systemic reactions is much lower in children. Patients treated with honeybee venom are at higher risk for systemic reactions to VIT than those
receiving treatment with vespid venom. Individuals with mast cell disorders are at increased risk for severe anaphylaxis and more frequent
systemic reactions with VIT; thus some experts recommend basal
tryptase level for risk assessment purposes.
It is uncertain how long immunotherapy with Hymenoptera venom
should continue. In general, treatment duration of 3-­5 years is recommended because >80% of adults who have received 5 years of therapy
tolerate challenge stings without systemic reactions for 5-­10 years after
completion of treatment. Long-­term responses to treatment are even
better for children. Follow-­up over a mean of 18 years of children with
moderate to severe insect sting reactions who received VIT for a mean
of 3-­5 years and were stung again showed a reaction rate of only 5%;
untreated children experienced a reaction rate of 32%. Whereas duration of therapy with VIT may be individualized, it is clear that a significant number of untreated children retain their allergy. Extended
or lifelong treatment may be considered for those who have had life-­
threatening anaphylaxis with insect stings or severe reaction during
VIT, those with honeybee allergy, and those with occupational exposures to Hymenoptera. Lifelong VIT should also be considered for

patients with mast cell disorders because they have a higher rate of
failure of VIT and relapse when VIT is discontinued.
Less is known about the natural history of fire ant hypersensitivity
and efficacy of immunotherapy for this allergy. The criteria for starting immunotherapy are similar to those for hypersensitivities to other
Hymenoptera, but there is stronger consideration to treat patients who
have only cutaneous systemic reactions with VIT. Only whole body fire
ant extract is commercially available for diagnostic skin testing and
immunotherapy.

Inhalant Allergy

The symptoms of inhalant allergy caused by insects are managed as for
other causes of seasonal or perennial rhinitis (see Chapter 184), conjunctivitis (see Chapter 188), and asthma (see Chapter 185).

PREVENTION

Avoidance of stings and bites is essential. To reduce the risk of stings,
sensitized individuals should have known or suspected nests near the
home removed by trained professionals, should wear gloves when gardening, should wear long pants and shoes with socks when walking in
the grass or through fields, and should avoid or be cautious about eating or drinking outdoors. Typical insect repellents do not guard against
Hymenoptera.
Individuals who are at high risk for future severe reactions to Hymenoptera stings should have immediate access to self-­injectable epinephrine. High-­risk individuals include those who have a history of
severe reactions or have elevated basal tryptase level. Adults responsible for allergic children and older patients who can self-­treat must
be carefully taught the indications and technique of administration for
this medication. Particular attention is necessary for children in out-­
of-­home daycare centers, at school, or attending camps, to ensure that
an emergency action plan is in place. The individual at risk for anaphylaxis from an insect sting should also wear medical identification
jewelry indicating the allergy.
Avoidance of the insect is the preferred management of inhalant
allergy. This can prove difficult, particularly for those living in apartments, where eradication of cockroaches may be problematic. Immunotherapy for dust mites is effective and should be considered in
conjunction with avoidance measures. In contrast, there is limited data
regarding the efficacy of cockroach immunotherapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1422 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

Chapter 188

Ocular Allergies
Leonard Bielory, Brett P. Bielory, and
Scott H. Sicherer
The ocular surface of the eye, the conjunctiva, is the most immunologically active tissue of the external eye. The conjunctiva is a
common target of allergic disorders because of its marked vascularity and direct contact with allergens in the environment. Ocular
allergies can occur as isolated target organ disease or more often in
conjunction with nasal allergies. Ocular symptoms can significantly
affect quality of life.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Allergic eye diseases represent a spectrum of conditions that require
allergic sensitization and range from acute (seasonal) progressing
to the perennial and then to the more chronic forms and potentially
sight-­
threatening forms, vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis
(Table 188.1).

Allergic Conjunctivitis

Allergic conjunctivitis is the most common hypersensitivity response
of the eye, affecting approximately 25% of the general population and
30% of children with atopy. It is caused by direct exposure of the mucosal surfaces of the eye to environmental allergens. Patients complain of

variable ocular itching, rather than pain, with increased tearing. Clinical signs include bilateral injected conjunctivae with vascular congestion that may progress to chemosis, or conjunctival swelling, and a
watery discharge (Fig. 188.1).
Allergic conjunctivitis occurs in a seasonal or, less frequently,
perennial form. Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis is typically associated with allergic rhinitis (see Chapter 184) and is most commonly triggered by pollens. Major pollen groups in the temperate
zones include trees (late winter to early spring), grasses (late spring
to early summer), and weeds (late summer to early fall), but seasons vary significantly in different parts of the United States. Mold
spores can also cause seasonal allergy symptoms, principally in the
summer and fall. Seasonal allergy symptoms may be aggravated by
coincident exposure to perennial allergens. Perennial allergic conjunctivitis is triggered by allergens such as animal danders or dust
mites that are present throughout the year. Symptoms are usually
less severe than with seasonal allergic conjunctivitis. Because pollens and soil molds may be present intermittently by season, and
exposure to allergens such as furred animals may be perennial, classification as intermittent (symptoms present <4 days/week or for <4
weeks) and persistent (symptoms present >4 days/week and for >4
weeks) has been proposed.

Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis

Vernal keratoconjunctivitis is a severe bilateral chronic inflammatory process of the upper tarsal conjunctival surface that occurs in two
forms, limbal or palpebral. It may threaten eyesight if there is corneal
involvement. Vernal keratoconjunctivitis is only associated with positive
cutaneous allergic reactivities in 50% of cases, although it occurs most
frequently in children with seasonal allergies, asthma, or atopic dermatitis. Vernal keratoconjunctivitis affects males twice as often as females

Table 188.1  Allergic Diseases of the Eye
DISEASE

CLINICAL PARAMETERS

SIGNS/SYMPTOMS

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis
(SAC)

• Sensitized individuals
• Both females and males
• Bilateral involvement
• Seasonal allergens
• Self-­limiting

• Ocular itching
• Tearing (watery discharge)
• Chemosis, redness
• Often associated with rhinitis
• Not sight threatening

• Infective conjunctivitis
• Preservative toxicity
• Medicamentosa
• Dry eye
• PAC/AKC/VKC

Perennial allergic conjunctivitis
(PAC)

• Sensitized individuals
• Both females and males
• Bilateral involvement
• Year-­round allergens
• Self-­limiting

• Ocular itching
• Tearing (watery discharge)
• Chemosis, redness
• Often associated with rhinitis
• Not sight threatening

• Infective conjunctivitis
• Preservative toxicity
• Medicamentosa
• Dry eye
• SAC/AKC/VKC

Atopic keratoconjunctivitis
(AKC)

• Sensitized individuals
• Peak incidence 20-­50 years of age
• Both females and males
• Bilateral involvement
• Seasonal/perennial allergens
• Atopic dermatitis
• Chronic symptoms

• Severe ocular itching
• Red flaking periocular skin
• Mucoid discharge, photophobia
• Corneal erosions
• Scarring of conjunctiva
• Cataract (anterior subcapsular)
• Sight threatening

• Contact dermatitis
• Infective conjunctivitis
• Blepharitis
• Pemphigoid
• VKC/SAC/PAC/GPC

Vernal keratoconjunctivitis
(VKC)

• Some sensitized individuals
• Peak incidence 3-­20 years of age
• Males predominate 3:1
• Bilateral involvement
• Warm, dry climate
• Seasonal/perennial allergens
• Chronic symptoms

• Severe ocular itching
• Severe photophobia
• Thick, ropy discharge
• Cobblestone papillae
• Corneal ulceration and scarring
• Sight threatening

• Infective conjunctivitis
• Blepharitis
• AKC/SAC/PAC/GPC

Giant papillary conjunctivitis
(GPC)

• Sensitization not necessary
• Both females and males
• Bilateral involvement
• Prosthetic exposure
• Occurs anytime
• Chronic symptoms

• Mild ocular itching
• Mild mucoid discharge
• Giant papillae
• Contact lens intolerance
• Foreign body sensation
• Protein buildup on contact lens
• Not sight threatening

• Infective conjunctivitis
• Preservative toxicity
• SAC/PAC/AKC/VKC

From Barney NP. Allergic and immunologic diseases of the eye. In: Burks AW, Holgate ST, O’Hehir RE, et al., eds. Middleton’s Allergy: Principles and Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2020: Table 38.1, p. 607)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 188 u Ocular Allergies

1423

Fig. 188.3 Horner-­Trantas dots. Classic appearance of small white-­
Fig. 188.1 Allergic conjunctivitis. Arrow indicates area of chemosis in
the conjunctivitis. (From Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al.,
eds. Middleton’s Allergy: Principles & Practice. 8th ed. St Louis: Elsevier,
2014: p. 619.)

yellow chalky concretions with collections of degenerated epithelial
cells and eosinophils around the corneal limbus (arrows). (From Cheng
J, Jiang L, Morrow NC, et al. Recognition of atopic keratoconjunctivitis
during treatment with dupilumab for atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;85(1):265–267. Fig 1.)

Fig. 188.2 Vernal keratoconjunctivitis. Cobblestone papillae and
ropey discharge are seen on the underside (tarsal conjunctiva) of the
upper eyelid. (From Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al., eds.
Middleton’s Allergy: Principles & Practice. 8th ed. St Louis: Elsevier,
2014: p. 627.)

Fig. 188.4 Corneal shield ulcer classic depiction of sterile plaques

containing fibrin and mucous that accumulate into macro-­
erosions
forming a shield ulcer. (From LaMattina K, Thompson L. Pediatric conjunctivitis. Dis Mon. 2014;60(6):231–238. Fig 6.)

and is more common in the Mediterranean basin and in persons of Asian
and African descent. It affects primarily children in temperate areas, with
exacerbations in the spring and summer, but can occur throughout the
year. Symptoms include intense ocular itching exacerbated by exposure
to irritants, light, or perspiration. In addition, patients may complain of
severe photophobia due to corneal involvement, foreign body sensation,
and lacrimation. Giant papillae occur predominantly on the upper tarsal
plate and are typically described as cobblestoning (Fig. 188.2). Other signs
include a stringy or thick, ropey discharge, cobblestone papillae, transient yellow-­white points at the corneal limbus (Trantas dots) (Fig. 188.3)
and conjunctiva (Horner points), corneal “shield” ulcers (Fig. 188.4), and
Dennie lines (Dennie-­Morgan folds), which are prominent symmetric
skin folds that extend in an arc from the inner canthus beneath and parallel to the lower lid margin. Children with vernal keratoconjunctivitis
have measurably longer eyelashes, which may represent a reaction to
ocular inflammation.

threaten eyesight if there is corneal involvement. Almost all patients
have atopic dermatitis, and a significant number have asthma.
Atopic keratoconjunctivitis rarely presents before late adolescence.
Symptoms include severe bilateral ocular itching, burning, photophobia, and tearing with a mucoid discharge that are much more
severe than in allergic conjunctivitis and persist throughout the
year. The bulbar conjunctiva is injected and chemotic; cataracts may
occur. Trantas dots at the corneal limbus or giant papillae typically
found in inferior palpebral conjunctiva may also be present. Eyelid
eczema can extend to the periorbital skin and cheeks with erythema
and thick, dry scaling. Secondary staphylococcal blepharitis is common because of eyelid induration and maceration. Chronic eye rubbing associated with vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis can lead
to keratoconus, a noninflammatory cone-­shaped corneal ectasia.
This may lead to corneal thinning and perforation.

Atopic Keratoconjunctivitis

Giant Papillary Conjunctivitis

Atopic keratoconjunctivitis is a chronic inflammatory ocular disorder most often involving the lower tarsal conjunctiva. It may

Giant papillary conjunctivitis is not associated with IgE sensitization, but has been linked to chronic exposure to foreign bodies, such

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1424 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
as contact lenses (both hard and soft), ocular prostheses, and sutures.
Symptoms and signs include mild bilateral ocular itching, tearing, a
foreign body sensation, and excessive ocular discomfort with mild
mucoid discharge with white or clear exudate on awakening, which
may become thick and stringy. Trantas dots, limbal infiltration, bulbar
conjunctival hyperemia, and edema may develop.

Contact Allergy

Contact allergy typically involves the eyelids but can also involve the
conjunctivae. It is frequently associated with increased exposure to
topical medications, contact lens solutions, and preservatives.

DIAGNOSIS

Nonallergic conjunctivitis can be viral, bacterial, or chlamydial in origin. It is typically unilateral, but can be bilateral with symptoms initially
developing in one eye (see Chapter 666). Symptoms include stinging or
burning rather than itching and often a foreign body sensation. Ocular
discharge can be watery, mucoid, or purulent. Masqueraders of ocular allergy also include nasolacrimal duct obstruction, foreign body,
blepharoconjunctivitis, dry eye, uveitis, and trauma.

Dry Eye

Dry eye conditions are being increasingly recognized as a concomitant
and comorbid condition in children directly correlated with increased
use of computers and gaming and mobile devices that are associated

with decreased blinking time and increased evaporative tear film
dysfunction.

TREATMENT

Primary treatment of ocular allergies includes avoidance of allergens,
cold compresses, and lubrication. Secondary treatment regimens
include the use of oral or topical antihistamines and, if necessary, topical decongestants, mast cell stabilizers, and antiinflammatory agents
(Table 188.2). Drugs with dual antihistamine and mast cell–blocking
activities provide the most advantageous approach in treating allergic
conjunctivitis, with both fast-­acting symptomatic relief and disease-­
modifying action. Children often complain of stinging or burning with
use of topical ophthalmic preparations and usually prefer oral antihistamines for allergic conjunctivitis. It is important not to contaminate
topical ocular medications by allowing the applicator tip to contact
the eye or eyelid. Using refrigerated medications may decrease some
of the discomfort associated with their use. Topical decongestants act
as vasoconstrictors, reducing erythema, vascular congestion, and eyelid edema, but do not diminish the allergic response. Adverse effects
of topical vasoconstrictors include burning or stinging and rebound
hyperemia or conjunctivitis medicamentosa with chronic use. Combined use of an antihistamine and a vasoconstrictor is more effective
than use of either agent alone. Use of topical nasal corticosteroids for
allergic rhinoconjunctivitis decreases ocular symptoms, presumably
through a nasoocular reflex.

Table 188.2  Topical Ophthalmic Medications for Allergic Conjunctivitis
DRUG AND TRADE NAMES

MECHANISM OF ACTION AND DOSING

Azelastine hydrochloride, 0.05%
Optivar

Antihistamine
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt bid

Not for treatment of contact lens–related irritation; the
preservative may be absorbed by soft contact lenses
Wait at least 10 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses

Emedastine difumarate, 0.05%
Emadine

Antihistamine
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt qid

Soft contact lenses should not be worn if the eye is red
Wait at least 10 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses

Levocabastine hydrochloride, 0.05%
Livostin

Antihistamine
Children ≥12 yr: 1 gtt bid-­qid up to 2 wk

Not for use in patients wearing soft contact lenses during
treatment

Pheniramine maleate

Antihistamine/vasoconstrictor

Avoid prolonged use (>3-­4 days) to avoid rebound symptoms
Not for use with contact lenses

Naphazoline hydrochloride, 0.3%

Children >6 yr: 1-­2 gtt qid

Avoid prolonged use (>3-­4 days) to avoid rebound symptoms
Not for use with contact lenses

Cromolyn sodium, 4%
Crolom, Opticrom

Mast cell stabilizer
Children >4 yr: 1-­2 gtt q4-­6h

Can be used to treat giant papillary conjunctivitis and vernal
keratitis
Not for use with contact lenses

Lodoxamide tromethamine, 0.1%
Alomide

Mast cell stabilizer
Children ≥2 yr: 1-­2 gtt qid up to 3 mo

Can be used to treat vernal keratoconjunctivitis
Not for use in patients wearing soft contact lenses during
treatment

Nedocromil sodium, 2% Alocril

Mast cell stabilizer
Children ≥3 yr: 1-­2 gtt bid

Avoid wearing contact lenses while exhibiting the signs and
symptoms of allergic conjunctivitis

Pemirolast potassium, 0.1%
Alamast

Mast cell stabilizer
Children >3 yr: 1-­2 gtt qid

Not for treatment of contact lens–related irritation; the
preservative may be absorbed by soft contact lenses
Wait at least 10 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses

Epinastine hydrochloride, 0.05%
Elestat

Antihistamine/mast cell stabilizer
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt bid

Contact lenses should be removed before use
Wait at least 15 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses
Not for the treatment of contact lens irritation

0.025%
Naphcon-­A, Opcon-­A

COMMENTS, CAUTIONS AND ADVERSE EVENTS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 188 u Ocular Allergies

1425

Table 188.2  Topical Ophthalmic Medications for Allergic Conjunctivitis—cont’d
DRUG AND TRADE NAMES

MECHANISM OF ACTION AND DOSING

COMMENTS, CAUTIONS AND ADVERSE EVENTS

Ketotifen fumarate, 0.025%
Zaditor

Antihistamine/mast cell stabilizer
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt bid q8-­12h

Not for treatment of contact lens–related irritation; the
preservative may be absorbed by soft contact lenses
Wait at least 10 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses

Olopatadine hydrochloride, 0.1%,
0.2%, 0.7%
Patanol, Pataday, Pazeo

Antihistamine/mast cell stabilizer
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt bid (8 hr apart)
Children ≥2 yr: 1 gtt qd

Not for treatment of contact lens–related irritation; the
preservative may be absorbed by soft contact lenses
Wait at least 10 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses

Alcaftadine, 0.25%
Lastacaft

Antihistamine/mast cell stabilizer
Children >2 yr: 1 gtt bid q8-­12h

Contact lenses should be removed before application; may
be inserted after 10 min
Not for the treatment of contact lens irritation

Bepotastine besilate, 1.5%
Bepreve

Antihistamine/mast cell stabilizer
Children >2 yr: 1 gtt bid q8-­12h

Contact lenses should be removed before application; may
be inserted after 10 min
Not for the treatment of contact lens irritation

Cetirizine, 0.24%
Zerviate

Antihistamine
Children >2 yr: 1 gtt bid

Contains lubricant hydrocellulose, preservative free unit
doses

Ketorolac tromethamine, 0.5%
Acular

NSAID
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt qid

Avoid with aspirin or NSAID sensitivity
Use ocular product with caution in patients with complicated
ocular surgeries, corneal denervation or epithelial defects,
ocular surface diseases (e.g., dry eye syndrome), repeated
ocular surgeries within a short period, diabetes mellitus,
or rheumatoid arthritis; these patients may be at risk for
corneal adverse events that may be sight threatening
Do not use while wearing contact lenses

Fluorometholone, 0.1%, 0.25%
suspension and 0.1% ointment
FML, FML Forte, Flarex

Fluorinated corticosteroid
Children ≥2 yr: 1 gtt into conjunctival sac of
affected eye(s) bid-­qid
During initial 24-­48 hr, dosage may be
increased to 1 gtt q4h
Ointment (∼1.3 cm in length) into
conjunctival sac of affected eye(s) 1-­3
times daily
May be applied q4h during initial 24-­48 hr
of therapy.

If improvement does not occur after 2 days, patient should
be reevaluated
Patient should remove soft contact lenses before
administering (contains benzalkonium chloride) and delay
reinsertion of lenses for ≥15 min after administration
Close monitoring for development of glaucoma and
cataracts

Cyclosporine ophthalmic solution,
01.%
Verkazia

Immunomodulation
Children >3 yr:1 gtt qid

Unpreserved single dose units
Approved for treatment of vernal keratoconjunctivitis

loteprednol, 0.5%
Lotemax, Alrex

Steroid, antiinflammatory
Children >2 yr:1-2 gtt qid

Lowest steroid associated with cataract formation or
increase in intraocular pressure
Comes in suspension and gel formulations

NSAID, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; bid, 2 times daily; gtt, drops; qid, 4 times daily; q4-­6h, every 4-­6 hr; qd, every day.

Tertiary treatment of ocular allergy includes topical (or rarely oral)
corticosteroids and should be conducted in conjunction with an ophthalmologist. Local administration of topical corticosteroids may be associated
with increased intraocular pressure, viral infections, and cataract formation. Other immunomodulatory medications, such as topical tacrolimus
or topical cyclosporine, are used as steroid-­sparing agents. Allergen immunotherapy is very effective in seasonal and perennial allergic conjunctivitis,
especially when associated with rhinitis, and can decrease the need for oral
or topical medications to control allergy symptoms.

Because vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis can be associated with
visual morbidity, if these diagnoses are suspected, the patient should be
referred to an ophthalmologist. Symptoms that should prompt referral
to an ophthalmologist include unilateral red eye with pain, photophobia,
change in vision, refractory dry eyes, or corneal abnormality.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1426 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

Chapter 189

Urticaria (Hives) and
Angioedema
David A. Khan, Aleena Banerji, and
Scott H. Sicherer
Urticaria affects 20% of individuals at some point in their life. Episodes
of hives that last for <6 weeks are considered acute, whereas those that
occur on most days of the week for >6 weeks are designated chronic.
The distinction is important, because the causes and mechanisms of
urticaria formation and the therapeutic approaches are different in
each instance.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Urticaria is defined as the presence of wheals (hives), angioedema,
or both. Acute urticaria is often caused by an allergic IgE–mediated
reaction (Table 189.1). This form of urticaria is a self-­limited process
that occurs when an allergen activates mast cells in the skin. Common
causes of acute generalized urticaria include foods, drugs (particularly
antibiotics), and stinging-­insect venoms. If an allergen (latex, animal
dander) penetrates the skin locally, hives often can develop at the site
of exposure. Acute urticaria can also result from non–IgE-­mediated
stimulation of mast cells, caused by viral infections, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and opiates. The diagnosis of chronic
urticaria is established when lesions occur on most days of the week
for >6 weeks (Tables 189.2 and 189.3). In about half the cases, chronic
urticaria is accompanied by angioedema. In 20% of chronic urticaria
patients, angioedema occurs without wheals. Acute angioedema without wheals is often a result of allergy, but recurrent isolated angioedema
raises the possibility of other diagnoses.
A typical hive is an erythematous, pruritic, raised wheal that blanches
with pressure, is transient, and resolves without residual lesions, unless
the area was intensely scratched. In contrast, urticaria associated with

systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), or other vasculitides in which a
skin biopsy reveals a small-­vessel vasculitis, often have distinguishing
clinical features. Lesions that burn more than itch, last >24 hours, do
not blanch, blister, heal with scarring, or that are associated with bleeding into the skin (purpura) suggest urticarial vasculitis, which is a rare
condition in children. Atypical aspects of the gross appearance of the
hives or associated systemic symptoms should heighten concern that
the urticaria or angioedema may be the manifestation of a systemic
disease process (Table 189.4).

INDUCIBLE URTICARIA

Inducible urticaria and angioedema (previously referred to as physical
urticaria) share the common property of being induced by an environmental stimulus, such as a change in temperature or direct stimulation of
the skin with pressure, stroking, vibration, or light (Table 189.5; see also
Table 189.2). In contrast to chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU), the
wheals of inducible urticaria are more short-­lived, often lasting <1 hour.

Cold-­Dependent Disorders

Cold urticaria is characterized by the development of localized pruritus, erythema, and urticaria/angioedema after exposure to a cold
stimulus. Total body exposure, as seen with swimming in cold water,
can cause anaphylaxis, resulting in hypotension, loss of consciousness,
and even death if not promptly treated. The diagnosis is most easily
confirmed by challenge testing by holding an ice cube in place on the
patient’s skin for 5 minutes. In patients with cold urticaria, a urticarial
lesion develops about 10 minutes after removal of the ice cube and on
rewarming of the chilled skin. Most cases of acquired cold urticaria
are idiopathic. Cold urticaria is rarely associated with the presence
of cryoproteins such as cold agglutinins, cryoglobulins, cryofibrinogen, and the Donath-­Landsteiner antibody seen in secondary syphilis
(paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria). Multiple subtypes of atypical cold
urticaria with a negative ice cube test have also been reported. Cold
Table 189.2  Etiology of Chronic Urticaria
Spontaneous/autoimmune

Approximately 30% of chronic urticaria
cases are inducible urticaria, and
60–70% are spontaneous; of the
spontaneous cases approximately
20–60% have autoantibodies (see text)

Inducible

Dermographism
Cholinergic urticaria
Cold urticaria (see Table 189.6)
Delayed pressure urticaria
Solar urticaria
Vibratory urticaria
Aquagenic urticaria

Autoimmune diseases

Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Thyroid disease (Graves, Hashimoto)
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Urticarial vasculitis

Autoinflammatory/periodic
fever syndromes

See Tables 189.3 and 189.6.

Neoplastic

Lymphoma
Mastocytosis
Leukemia

Angioedema

Hereditary angioedema
Acquired angioedema
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme
inhibitors

Table 189.1  Etiology of Acute Urticaria
Foods

Egg, milk, wheat, peanuts, tree nuts,
soy, shellfish, fish, direct mast cell
degranulation

Medications

Suspect all medications, even
nonprescription or homeopathic

Insect stings

Hymenoptera (honeybee, yellow jacket,
hornets, wasp, fire ants), biting insects
(papular urticaria)

Infections

Bacterial (streptococcal pharyngitis,
Mycoplasma, sinusitis); Viral (hepatitis,
mononucleosis [Epstein-­Barr virus],
coxsackieviruses A and B); Parasitic
(Ascaris, Ancylostoma, Echinococcus,
Fasciola, Filaria, Schistosoma,
Strongyloides, Toxocara, Trichinella);
Fungal (dermatophytes, Candida)

Contact allergy

Latex, pollen, animal saliva, nettle plants,
caterpillars

Transfusion reactions

Blood, blood products, or intravenous
immune globulin administration

From Lasley MV, Kennedy MS, Altman LC. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Altman LC,
Becker JW, Williams PV, eds. Allergy in Primary Care. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000:
p. 232.

Modified from Lasley MV, Kennedy MS, Altman LC. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Altman LC,
Becker JW, Williams PV, eds. Allergy in Primary Care. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000:
p. 234.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 189 u Urticaria (Hives) and Angioedema

1427

Table 189.3  Febrile Autoinflammatory Diseases Causing Urticaria in Children
GENE
(PROTEIN)

DISEASE

INHERITANCE

ATTACK
LENGTH

TIMING OF
ONSET

CUTANEOUS
FEATURES

EXTRACUTANEOUS
CLINICAL FEATURES

FCAS

NLRP3
(cryopyrin)

AD

Brief; minutes
to 3 days

Neonatal or
infantile

Cold-­induced
pseudourticaria

Arthralgia
Conjunctivitis
Headache

Muckle-­Wells
syndrome

NLRP3
(cryopyrin)

AD

1-­3 days

Neonatal, infantile,
childhood (can
be later)

Widespread
pseudourticaria

Arthralgia/arthritis
Sensorineural hearing loss
Conjunctivitis/episcleritis
Headache
Amyloidosis

Neonatal-­onset
multisystem
inflammatory
disease (aka
chronic infantile
neurologic
cutaneous
articular
syndrome)

NLRP3
(cryopyrin)

AD

Continuous
flares

Neonatal or
infantile

Widespread
pseudo-urticaria

Deforming osteoarthropathy,
epiphyseal overgrowth
Sensorineural hearing loss
Dysmorphic facies
Chronic aseptic meningitis,
headaches, papilledema,
seizures
Conjunctivitis/uveitis, optic
atrophy
Growth retardation
Developmental delay
Amyloidosis

HIDS

MVK
AR
(mevalonate
kinase)

3-­7 days

Infancy (<2 yr)

Intermittent
morbilliform or
urticarial rash
Aphthous mucosal
ulcers
Erythema nodosum

Arthralgia/arthritis
Cervical lymphadenopathy
Severe abdominal pain
Diarrhea/vomiting
Headache
Elevated IgD and IgA antibody
levels
Elevated urine mevalonic acid
during attacks

Tumor necrosis
factor receptor–
associated
periodic
syndrome

TNFRSF1A
(TNFR1)

AD

>7 days

Childhood

Intermittent migratory
erythematous macules
and edematous
plaques overlying
areas of myalgia,
often on limbs
Periorbital edema

Migratory myalgia
Conjunctivitis
Serositis
Amyloidosis

Systemic-­onset
juvenile idiopathic
arthritis (SoJIA)

Polygenic

Varies

Daily
(quotidian)

Peak onset at
1-­6 yr

Nonfixed
erythematous rash;
may be urticarial
With or without
dermographism
With or without
periorbital edema

Polyarthritis
Myalgia
Hepatosplenomegaly
Lymphadenopathy
Serositis

PLAID

PLCG2

AD

N/A

Infancy

Urticaria induced by
evaporative cooling
Ulcers in cold-­
exposed areas

Allergies
Autoimmune disease
Recurrent sinopulmonary
infections
Elevated IgE antibody levels
Decreased IgA and IgM
antibody levels
Often elevated antinuclear
antibody titers

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; HIDS, hyperimmunoglobulinemia D syndrome; FCAS, familial cold-­induced autoinflammatory syndrome; N/A, not available;
PLAID, PLCG2-­associated antibody deficiency and immune dysregulation.
From Youseff MJ, Chiu YE. Eczema and urticaria as manifestations of undiagnosed and rare diseases. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2017;64:39–56. Table 2, pp. 49–50.

urticaria must be distinguished from the familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (see later, Diagnosis) (Table 189.6; see also Table 189.3
and Chapter 204). Because 20% of pediatric patients with cold urticaria
may experience anaphylaxis, counseling on risks of anaphylaxis and
prescribing epinephrine autoinjectors should be considered.

Cholinergic Urticaria

Cholinergic urticaria is characterized by the onset of small, punctate
pruritic wheals surrounded by a prominent erythematous flare and

associated with exercise, hot showers, emotional stress, and sweating. Once the patient cools down, the rash usually subsides in 30-­60
minutes. Occasionally, symptoms of more generalized cholinergic
stimulation, such as lacrimation, wheezing, salivation, and syncope,
are observed. These symptoms are mediated by cholinergic nerve
fibers that innervate the musculature via parasympathetic neurons
and innervate the sweat glands by cholinergic fibers that travel with
the sympathetic nerves. Elevated plasma histamine values parallel the
onset of urticaria triggered by changes in body temperature.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1428 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 189.4  Distinguishing Features Between Urticaria
and Systemic Urticarial Syndromes
COMMON URTICARIA

URTICARIAL SYNDROMES
(≥1 OF FOLLOWING)

Only typical wheals:

Atypical “wheals”:

Erythematous edematous lesions

Infiltrated plaques

Transient (<24-­36 hr)

Persistent (>24-­36 hr)

Asymmetric distribution

Symmetric distribution

Resolution without signs

Resolution with signs (hypo/
hyperpigmentation, bruising,
or scarring)

No associated different
elementary lesions (papules,
vesicles, purpura, crustae)

Associated different elementary
lesions (papules, vesicles,
purpura, scaling, crustae)

Pruritic (rarely stinging/burning)

Not pruritic; rather painful or
burning

Possibly associated with
angioedema

Usually no associated
angioedema

No associated systemic
symptoms

Often associated with systemic
symptoms (fever, malaise,
arthralgia, abdominal pain,
weight loss, acral circulatory
abnormalities, neurologic signs

From Peroni A, Colato C, Zanoni G, Girolomoni G. Urticarial lesions: if not urticaria,
what else? The differential diagnosis of urticaria. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;62(4):559.

Symptomatic Dermographism

Symptomatic dermographism (also called dermatographism or urticaria factitia) may occur as an isolated disorder or may accompany
chronic urticaria or other inducible urticarias. It can be diagnosed by
observing the skin after stroking it with a tongue depressor. In patients
with dermographism, a linear response occurs secondary to reflex
vasoconstriction, followed by pruritus, erythema, and a linear wheal
caused by secondary dilation of the vessel and extravasation of plasma.
Symptomatic dermographism is distinct from the more common “simple dermographism,” affecting 4% of the population, whereas whealing
but no itch occurs with stroking the skin.

Delayed Pressure Urticaria

Delayed pressure urticaria differs from other inducible urticaria in that
symptoms typically occur 4-­6 hours after pressure has been applied.
Some patients may complain of swelling, with or without pruritus,
secondary to pressure, without hives. Other lesions are predominantly
wheals and may or may not be associated with significant swelling.
When wheals are present, an infiltrative skin lesion is seen, characterized by a perivascular mononuclear cell infiltrate and dermal edema
similar to that seen in CSU. Symptoms occur at sites of tight clothing; foot swelling is common after walking; and buttock swelling may
be prominent after sitting for a few hours. This condition can coexist
with CSU or can occur separately. The diagnosis is confirmed by challenge testing, most commonly via the “sand bag test.” This test can be
performed by using 15 lb of weights attached to a strap applied to the
shoulder, thigh, or forearm for 15 minutes and observing the site over
the next 24 hours for evidence of hives or edema.

Solar Urticaria

Solar urticaria is a rare disorder in which urticaria develops within
minutes of direct sun exposure. Typically, pruritus occurs first, in
approximately 30 seconds, followed by edema confined to the light-­
exposed area and surrounded by a prominent erythematous zone. The
lesions usually disappear within 1-­3 hours after cessation of sun exposure. When large areas of the body are exposed, systemic symptoms
may occur, including hypotension and wheezing. Solar urticaria has

been classified into six types, depending on the wavelength of light that
induces skin lesions and the ability or inability to transfer the disorder
passively with serum IgE.

Aquagenic Urticaria

Patients with aquagenic urticaria demonstrate small wheals after contact with water, regardless of its temperature, and are thereby distinguishable from patients with cold urticaria or cholinergic urticaria.
Direct application of a compress of water to the skin is used to test
for the presence of aquagenic urticaria. Rarely, chlorine or other trace
contaminants may be responsible for the reaction.

CHRONIC SPONTANEOUS URTICARIA

CSU is the most common form of chronic urticaria and is associated
with normal routine laboratory values and no evidence of systemic disease. CSU differs from allergen-­induced skin reactions and from physically induced urticaria in that histologic studies reveal cellular infiltrate
predominantly around small venules. Skin examination reveals infiltrative hives with palpably elevated borders, sometimes varying greatly
in size and shape but generally rounded.
Biopsy of a typical lesion reveals nonnecrotizing, perivascular,
mononuclear cellular infiltration. Varying histopathologic processes
can occur in the skin and manifest as urticaria. Patients with urticarial vasculitis can have urticaria and/or angioedema. Biopsy of these
lesions in patients who may present with urticaria, arthralgias, myalgias, an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and in some
cases hypocomplementemia as manifestations of urticarial vasculitis
can reveal fibrinoid necrosis with a predominantly neutrophilic infiltrate. Although urticarial vasculitis lesions are typically less blanchable,
the lesions may be clinically indistinguishable from those seen in the
more typical, nonvasculitic cases.
The immunopathogenesis of CSU is not entirely clear; however, mast
cell activation is thought to have a key role. A key activating receptor in
mast cells is the high-­affinity IgE receptor (FcεRI). Two theories suggest that autoimmune factors may lead to FcεRI activation. In type 1
autoimmunity (aka autoallergy), patients have IgE autoantibodies to
self-­antigens such as thyroperoxidase or interleukin (IL)-­24, which can
cross link the IgE autoantibodies leading to mast cell activation and
urticaria. In type II autoimmunity, patients have autoantibodies (IgG,
IgM, IGA) directed against FcεRI or IgE itself, which can similarly lead
to mast cell activation. Direct measurement of these autoantibodies is
limited to research studies with no clear clinical utility at present. However, the autoallergy theory is an attractive explanation for the effectiveness of anti-­IgE therapies like omalizumab.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of both acute and chronic urticaria is primarily clinical
and requires that the clinician be aware of the various forms of urticaria
(wheals and angioedema).
Hives are transient, pruritic, erythematous, raised wheals that may
become tense and painful. The lesions may coalesce and form polymorphous, serpiginous, or annular lesions (Figs. 189.1 and 189.2).
Individual lesions usually last minutes to several hours and rarely more
than 24 hours. The lesions often disappear, only to reappear at another
site. Angioedema involves the deeper subcutaneous tissues in locations such as the eyelids, lips, tongue, genitals, dorsum of the hands or
feet, and in the case of hereditary angioedema (HAE), the wall of the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract (see Chapter 189.1).
Viral infections, drugs, and foods are the most common identifiable
causes of acute urticaria in children. Allergy skin testing for foods can
be helpful in identifying a cause of acute urticaria, but only when supported by historical evidence. The role of an offending food can then
be proved by elimination and food challenge, when needed. In the
absence of information implicating an ingestant cause, skin testing for
foods and implementation of elimination diets are generally not useful for either acute or chronic urticaria. Patients with delayed urticaria
3-­6 hours after a meal consisting of mammalian meat should be evaluated for IgE to galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose (“alpha-­gal”), a carbohydrate
allergen. Alpha-­gal has been identified as a trigger in this circumstance,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 189.5  Comparison of the Physical Urticarias
RELATIVE
FREQUENCY

PRECIPITANT

Symptomatic
dermographism

Most frequent

Stroking skin

Minutes

2-­3 hr

Irregular
pruritic
attacks

None

Stroke skin

Passive transfer, IgE,
histamine, possible
role of adenosine
triphosphate, substance
P, possible direct
pharmacologic
mechanism

Continual
antihistamines

Delayed
dermographism

Rare

Stroking skin

30 min to 8 hr

<48 hr

Burning, deep
swelling

None

Stroke skin,
observe early
and late

Unknown

Avoidance of
precipitants

Pressure urticaria Frequent

Pressure

3-­12 hr

8-­24 hr

Diffuse, tender
swelling

Flulike
symptoms

Apply weight

Unknown

Avoidance of
precipitants; if
severe, omalizumab

Solar urticaria

Frequent

Various
wavelengths of
light

2-­5 min

15 min to
3 hr

Pruritic wheals

Wheezing,
dizziness,
syncope

Phototest

Passive transfer, reverse
passive transfer, IgE,
possible histamine

Avoidance of
precipitants;
antihistamines,
sunscreens,
antimalarials

Familial cold
urticaria

Rare

Change in skin
temperature

30 min to 3 hr

<48 hr

Burning wheals

Tremor;
headache;
arthralgia;
fever

Expose skin to
cold air

Unknown

Avoidance of
precipitants

Essential
acquired cold
urticaria

Frequent

Cold contact

2-­5 min

1-­2 hr

Pruritic wheals

Wheezing,
syncope,
drowning

Apply ice-­filled
Passive transfer, reverse
copper beaker
passive transfer, IgE
to arm, immerse
(IgM), histamine;
vasculitis can be
induced

Cyproheptadine
hydrochloride, other
antihistamines;
desensitization;
avoidance of
precipitants

Heat urticaria

Rare

Heat contact

2-­5 min (rarely
delayed)

1 hr

Pruritic wheals

None

Apply hot
water–filled
cylinder to
arm

Possibly histamine;
possibly complement

Antihistamines,
desensitization;
avoidance of
precipitants

Cholinergic
urticaria

Very frequent

General
overheating of
body

2-­20 min

30 min to
1 hr

Papular, pruritic
wheals

Syncope;
diarrhea;
vomiting,
salivation;
headaches

Bathe in hot
water; exercise
until
perspiring,
inject
methacholine
chloride

Passive transfer;
possible
immunoglobulin;
product of sweat gland
stimulation; histamine,
reduced protease

Application of cold
water or ice to skin;
antihistamines;
omalizumab

Aquagenic
urticaria

Rare

Water contact

Several
minutes

30-­45 min

Papular, pruritic
wheals

None reported

Apply water
compresses to
skin

Unknown

Avoidance of
precipitants;
antihistamine;
application of inert
oil

Vibratory
angioedema

Very rare

Vibrating against
skin

2-­5 min

1 hr

Angioedema

None reported

Apply vibration
to forearm

Unknown

Avoidance of
precipitants

URTICARIA

TIME OF
ONSET

DURATION

LOCAL
SYMPTOMS

SYSTEMIC
SYMPTOMS

TESTS

TREATMENT

Chapter 189 u Urticaria (Hives) and Angioedema

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1429

Ig, Immunoglobulin.
From Lee AD, Jorizzo JL. Urticaria. In: Callen JP, Jorizzo JL, Bolognia JL, et al., eds. Dermatological Signs of Internal Disease. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2009: p. 59, Table 6.4.

MECHANISM

1430 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 189.6  Hereditary Diseases with Cold-­Induced Urticaria
EPISODIC SYMPTOMS
CAPS

FCAS

SUSTAINED/PROGRESSIVE SYMPTOMS

Urticarial rash, arthralgia, myalgia, chills, fever, swelling of
extremities
Urticarial rash, arthralgia, chills, fever
Fever

Renal amyloidosis

NAPS12 (FCAS2)

Fever, arthralgia, myalgia, urticaria, abdominal pain,
aphthous ulcers, lymphadenopathy

Sensorineural deafness

PLAID (FCAS3)

Urticaria induced by evaporative cooling, sinopulmonary
infections

Serum low IgM and IgA levels; high IgE levels; decreased
B and NK cells; granulomata; antinuclear antibodies

MWS
CINCA

Sensorineural deafness, renal amyloidosis
Rash, arthritis, chronic meningitis, visual defect, deafness,
growth retardation, renal amyloidosis

CAPS, Cryopyrin-­associated periodic syndromes; FCAS, familial cold-­induced autoinflammatory syndrome; MWS, Muckle-­Wells syndrome; CINCA, chronic infantile neurologic
cutaneous articular syndrome; NAPS, NLRP-­12–associated periodic syndrome; PLAID, PLCG2-­associated antibody deficiency and immune dysregulation; NK, natural killer; Ig,
immunoglobulin.
From Kanazawa N. Hereditary disorders presenting with urticaria. Immunol Allergy Clin N Amer. 2014;34:169–179. Table 4, p. 176.

Fig. 189.1 Polycyclic lesions of urticaria associated with prostaglandin E2 infusion. (From Eichenfield LF, Friedan IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of
Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001: p. 300.)

Fig. 189.2 Annular urticaria of unknown etiology. (From Eichenfield

LF, Friedan IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001: p. 301.)

with sensitization linked to tick bites in specific geographic regions,
such as the mid-­Atlantic area of the United States. Skin testing for aeroallergens is not indicated unless there is a concern about contact urticaria (animal dander or grass pollen).
Autoimmune diseases are very rare causes of chronic urticaria or
angioedema. Clinically available tests marketed for chronic urticaria
such as basophil activation tests (used as surrogates for detecting type
2 autoantibodies) are generally not recommended. The differential
diagnosis of chronic urticaria includes atopic or contact dermatitis, cutaneous or systemic mastocytosis, complement-­mediated mast
cell degranulation as may occur with circulating immune complexes,

malignancies, mixed connective tissue diseases, and cutaneous blistering disorders (e.g., bullous pemphigoid; see Table 189.2). Routine laboratory testing in chronic urticaria in the absence of other
history has not been found to be cost-­effective as it rarely changes
management. Urticaria guidelines recommend either no testing or
limited laboratory testing such as a complete blood cell count with
differential and ESR or CRP. Further studies are warranted if the
patient has fever, arthralgias, or elevated ESR (Table 189.7; see also
Table 189.4). HAE is potentially life-­threatening, usually associated
with deficient C1 inhibitor (C1-­INH) activity, and the most important familial form of angioedema (see Chapter 189.1), but it is not
associated with typical urticaria. In patients with eosinophilia, stools
should be obtained for ova and parasite testing, because infection
with helminthic parasites has been associated with urticaria. A rare
syndrome of episodic (approximately 3-­to 4-­week intervals) angioedema less often with urticaria, weight gain, and occasionally fever
with associated hypereosinophilia has been described in both adults
and children.
Skin biopsy for diagnosis of possible urticarial vasculitis is recommended for urticarial lesions that persist at the same location for
>24 hours, those with pigmented or purpuric components, and those
that burn more than itch. Collagen vascular diseases such as SLE may
manifest urticarial vasculitis as a presenting feature. The skin biopsy in
urticarial vasculitis typically shows endothelial cell swelling of postcapillary venules with necrosis of the vessel wall, perivenular neutrophil
infiltrate, diapedesis of red blood cells, and fibrin deposition associated
with deposition of immune complexes.
Mastocytosis is characterized by mast cell hyperplasia in the
bone marrow, liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and skin. Clinical effects
of mast cell activation are common, including pruritus, flushing,
urtication, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. The diagnosis is
confirmed by a bone marrow biopsy showing increased numbers
of spindle-­shaped mast cells that express CD2 and CD25. Maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis (aka urticaria pigmentosa) is the
most common skin manifestation of mastocytosis and may occur as
an isolated skin finding. It appears as small, yellow-­tan to reddish
brown macules or raised papules that urticate on scratching (Darier
sign). This sign can be masked by antihistamines. The diagnosis is
confirmed by a skin biopsy that shows increased numbers of dermal
mast cells.
Inducible urticaria should be considered in any patient with chronic
urticaria and a suggestive history (see Tables 189.2 and 189.5). Papular
“urticaria” often occurs in small children, generally on the extremities,
but the lesions are more persistent than true urticaria. It manifests as
grouped or linear, highly pruritic wheals or papules mainly on exposed
skin at the sites of insect bites.
Exercise-­induced anaphylaxis manifests as varying combinations of pruritus, urticaria, angioedema, wheezing, or hypotension
after exercise (see Chapter 190). Cholinergic urticaria is differentiated by positive results of heat challenge tests and the rare occurrence

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 189 u Urticaria (Hives) and Angioedema
Table 189.7  Diagnostic Testing for Urticaria and
Angioedema
DIAGNOSIS

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING

Chronic spontaneous
urticaria

No testing required for diagnosis

Food and drug
reactions

Elimination of offending agent, skin
testing, and challenge with suspected
foods

Autoimmune urticaria

Autologous serum skin test; antithyroid
antibodies

Thyroiditis

Thyroid-­stimulating hormone; antithyroid
antibodies

Infections

Appropriate cultures or serology

Collagen vascular
Skin biopsy, CH50, C1q, C4, immunofluodiseases and cutaneous
rescence of tissues, antinuclear antibodvasculitis
ies, cryoglobulins
Cold urticaria

Ice cube test usually positive but may be
negative in familial autoinflammatory
disorders

Solar urticaria

Exposure to defined wavelengths of light,
red blood cell protoporphyrin, fecal
protoporphyrin, and coproporphyrin

Dermographism

Stroking with narrow object (e.g., tongue
blade)

Pressure urticaria

Application of pressure for defined time
and intensity

Vibratory urticaria

Vibration for 4 min

Aquagenic urticaria

Challenge with tap water at various
temperatures

Urticaria pigmentosa

Skin biopsy, test for dermographism

Hereditary angioedema

C4, C1-­INH testing by protein and function

Familial cold
autoinflammatory
syndrome

Genetic testing for NALP3 pathogenic
variants

of anaphylactic shock. The combination of ingestion of various food
allergens and postprandial exercise has been associated with urticaria/
angioedema and anaphylaxis. In patients with this combination disorder, the offending food or exercise alone does not produce the reaction.
Muckle-­Wells syndrome and familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome are rare, autosomal dominantly inherited conditions associated with recurrent urticaria-­like lesions. Muckle-­Wells syndrome is
characterized by arthritis and joint pain that usually appears in adolescence. It is associated with progressive nerve deafness, recurrent fever,
elevated ESR (see Tables 189.3 and 189.6), hypergammaglobulinemia,
renal amyloidosis, and a poor prognosis. Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome is characterized by a cold-­induced rash that has urticarial features but is rarely pruritic. Cold exposure leads to additional
symptoms such as conjunctivitis, sweating, headache, and nausea.

Treatment

Acute urticaria is a self-­limited illness requiring little treatment other than
antihistamines and avoidance of any identified trigger. Hydroxyzine and
diphenhydramine are sedating but are effective and frequently used for
treatment of urticaria. Loratadine, fexofenadine, and cetirizine are also
effective and are preferable because of reduced sedation (Table 189.8).
Epinephrine 1:1,000, 0.01 mg/kg (maximum 0.5 mg) intramuscularly,
usually provides rapid relief of acute, severe urticaria/angioedema but is
seldom required. A short course of oral corticosteroids may be given for
more severe episodes of urticaria and angioedema that are unresponsive
to antihistamines.

1431

Table 189.8  Treatment of Urticaria and Angioedema
CLASS/DRUG

DOSE

FREQUENCY

ANTIHISTAMINES, TYPE H1 (SECOND GENERATION)
Fexofenadine
6-­11 yr: 30 mg
Twice daily
>12 yr: 60 mg
Adult: 180 mg
Once daily
Loratadine
2-­5 yr: 5 mg
Once daily
>6 yr: 10 mg
Desloratadine
6-­11 mo: 1 mg
Once daily
12 mo-­5 yr: 1.25 mg
6-­11 yr: 2.5 mg
>12 yr: 5 mg
Cetirizine
6-­23 mo: 2.5 mg
Once daily
2-­6 yr: 2.5-­5 mg
>6 yr: 5-­10 mg
>12 yr: 10 mg
Once daily
Levocetirizine
6 mo-­5 yr: 1.25 mg
Once daily
6-­11 yr: 2.5 mg
Once daily
>12 yr: 5 mg
Once daily
ANTIHISTAMINES, TYPE H2
Cimetidine
Infants: 10-­20 mg/kg/day
Children: 20-­40 mg/kg/day
Ranitidine
1 mo-­16 yr: 5-­10 mg/kg/day
Famotidine
3-­12 mo: 1 mg/kg/day
1-­16 yr: 1-­2 mg/kg/day
LEUKOTRIENE PATHWAY MODIFIERS
Montelukast
12 mo-­5 yr: 4 mg
6-­14 yr: 5 mg
>14 yr: 10 mg
Zafirlukast
5-­11 yr: 10 mg
IMMUNOMODULATORY DRUGS
Omalizumab (anti
>11 yr: 300 mg
IgE)
Cyclosporine
1-­4 mg/kg/day

Divided q6-­12h
Divided q12h
Divided q12h

Once daily

Twice daily
Every 28 days
Divided q12h*

*Monitor blood pressure and serum creatinine, potassium, and magnesium levels
monthly.

The best treatment of inducible urticaria is avoidance of the stimulus;
however, for some conditions like cholinergic urticaria, this can be very
difficult. Antihistamines with appropriate updosing, should be tried in
all inducible urticarias but may not be effective in many patients.
Management of chronic urticaria through dietary manipulation
is not recommended by U.S. guidelines. The mainstay of therapy for
chronic urticaria is the use of nonsedating or low-­sedating H1 antihistamines. In those patients not showing response to standard doses,
increasing the dose up to fourfold the recommended dose is recommended; however, studies on the safety and efficacy of this approach
in children are lacking. The addition of H2 antihistamines and/or
leukotriene receptor antagonists (e.g., montelukast) is controversial.
These medications are generally benign but evidence supporting their
efficacy is weak. For chronic urticaria patients that are not well controlled, brief courses of oral corticosteroids may be considered, but
long-­term corticosteroid use is not recommended. The monoclonal
antibody omalizumab (anti-­IgE) is approved by the US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of chronic urticaria
in children 12 years and older. Other agents that have been used for
chronic urticaria but are not approved by the FDA include cyclosporine, tacrolimus, mycophenolate, dapsone, hydroxychloroquine,
sulfasalazine, and azathioprine. Ultraviolet light therapy may also be
beneficial in refractory cases. Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitors
have demonstrated efficacy in treating chronic spontaneous urticaria
and have a rapid onset of action with few side effects.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1432 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
THE DIAGNOSIS OF C1-INH DEFICIENCY

189.1 Hereditary Angioedema

Asymptomatic pediatric patient
with positive family history of C1-INH-HAE

Aleena Banerji, David A. Khan, and Scott H. Sicherer

ETIOLOGY, PATHOGENESIS, CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS, AND DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH

HAE (types 1 and 2) is an inherited autosomal dominant genetic disease caused by low functional levels of the plasma protein C1-­INH.
Patients typically report unpredictable episodic attacks of angioedema
or deep localized swelling, most often on a hand or foot, that begin during childhood or adolescence. Cutaneous nonpitting and nonpruritic
edema not associated with urticaria is the most common symptom.
The swelling usually becomes more severe over about several hours and
then resolves over 2-­5 days when left untreated. However, the duration of attacks can be quite variable. In some patients, attacks are preceded by the development of a rash, erythema marginatum, that is
erythematous, not raised, and not pruritic. A second major symptom
complex noted by patients is attacks of severe abdominal pain caused
by edema of the mucosa of any portion of the GI tract. The intensity of
the pain can approximate that of an acute abdomen, often resulting in
unnecessary surgery, including appendectomy. Either constipation or
diarrhea during these attacks can be noted. The GI edema generally
follows the same time course to resolution as the cutaneous attacks.
Patients may have a prodrome, a tightness or tingling in the area that
will swell, usually lasting several hours, followed by the development
of angioedema.
Laryngeal edema, the most worrisome complication of HAE, can
cause complete respiratory obstruction with a high risk of mortality when untreated. Although life-­threatening attacks are infrequent,
more than half of patients with HAE experience laryngeal involvement
at some time during their lives. Laryngeal edema can be triggered by
local trauma but can also occur spontaneously without any identifiable trigger. The clinical condition may deteriorate rapidly, progressing
through mild discomfort to complete airway obstruction over hours.
Soft tissue edema can be readily seen when the disease involves the
throat and uvula. If this edema progresses to difficulty swallowing
secretions or a change in the tone of the voice, the patient may require
emergency intubation or even tracheostomy to ensure an adequate
airway. As symptoms are bradykinin mediated, patients with HAE
typically do not respond well to treatment with epinephrine, antihistamines, or glucocorticoids.
In most cases the cause of the attack is unknown, but in some
patients, trauma, infections or emotional stress clearly precipitates
attacks. Drugs such as estrogen or angiotensin-­converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors that inhibit the degradation of bradykinin make the
disease strikingly worse. In some females, menstruation can be associated with an increase in attacks. The frequency of attacks varies greatly
among affected individuals and at different times in the same individual. Some individuals experience weekly episodes, whereas others may
go years between attacks. Episodes can start at any age.
C1-­INH is a member of the serpin family of proteases, similar to
α-­antitrypsin, antithrombin III, and angiotensinogen. These proteins
stoichiometrically inactivate their target proteases by forming stable,
1:1 complexes with the protein to be inhibited. Synthesized primarily
by hepatocytes, C1-­INH is also synthesized by monocytes. The regulation of the protein production is not completely understood, but it
is believed that androgens may stimulate C1-­INH synthesis, because
patients with the disorder respond clinically to androgen therapy with
elevated serum C1-­INH levels. C1-­INH deficiency is an autosomal
dominant disease, with as many as 25% of patients giving no family
history. Because all C1-­INH–deficient patients are heterozygous for
this gene variation, it is believed that half the normal level of C1-­INH
is not sufficient to prevent attacks. Figure 189.3 shows the diagnostic
approach.
Although named for its action on the first component of complement (C1 esterase), C1-­INH also inhibits components of the fibrinolytic, clotting, and kinin pathways. Specifically, C1-­INH inactivates
plasmin-­activated Hageman factor (factor XII), activated factor XI,

If a pathogenic variant
has been detected in
the family, and the test
is available then
Consider genetic
testing before
12 mo of age

Neonate

Infant

Umbilical cord blood
C1-INH functional
& antigenic levels,
C4

Peripheral blood
C1-INH functional
& antigenic levels,
C4

Repeat after
1 year of age

Complete after
12 mo of age

Until C1-INH-HAE diagnosis is
ruled out with testing performed
after one year of age, the pediatric
patient should be considered to
have inherited C1-INH deficiency.

A
THE DIAGNOSIS OF PEDIATRIC C1-INH-HAE
Pediatric patient with angioedema of unknown etiology
Positive/negative family history

C1-INH functional and antigenic
level, C4

Positive screen*

Negative screen

Perform initial testing on
peripheral blood after
12 mo of age

C1-INH-HAE excluded

Consider DNA analysis

B

*Normal C1-INH antigen but
low C1-INH activity confirms
HAE2
Angioedema with acquired
C1-INH deficiency is also
excluded, but HAE with normal
C1-INH function, which is very
rare in pediatric patients, is not
ruled out

Fig. 189.3 A, Diagnosis of C1-­INH deficiency in families with known

C1-­INH hereditary angioedema (HAE). B, Diagnosis of C1-­INH HAE in
pediatric patients with angioedema of unknown etiology. (From Farkas H, Martinez-­
Saguer I, Bork K, et al. International consensus on
the diagnosis and management of pediatric patients with hereditary
angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency. Eur J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2017;72:300–313. Fig. 1, p. 304.)

plasma thromboplastin antecedent, and kallikrein. Within the complement system, C1-­INH blocks the activation of C1 and the rest of the
classical complement pathway by binding to C1r and C1s. Without
adequate C1-­INH, unchecked activation of C1 causes cleavage of C4
and C2, the proteins following in the complement cascade. Levels of
C3 are normal. C1-­INH also inhibits serine proteases associated with
activation of the lectin activation pathway. The major factor responsible for the edema formation is bradykinin, an important nonapeptide
mediator that can induce leakage of postcapillary venules. Bradykinin is derived from cleavage of the circulating protein high molecular
weight kininogen by the plasma enzyme kallikrein.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 189 u Urticaria (Hives) and Angioedema
Two major genetic types of C1-­INH deficiency are described that
result in essentially the same phenotypic expression. The C1-­INH gene
is located on chromosome 11 in the p11-­q13 region. The inheritance
is autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance. Persons inheriting the variant gene can have a clinical spectrum ranging from asymptomatic to severely affected. Type 1 HAE is the most common form,
accounting for approximately 80–85% of cases. Synthesis of C1-­INH
is blocked at the site of the faulty allele, or the protein is not secreted
normally because of faulty protein processing, but secretion occurs at
the normal allele. The result is secretion of the normal protein, yielding
quantitative serum concentrations of C1-­INH approximately 20–40%
of normal. Type 2 HAE accounts for approximately 15–20% of cases.
Pathogenic variants of one of the amino acids near the active site of the
inhibitor lead to synthesis of nonfunctional C1-­INH protein and again
less than half of the normal functioning protein. Patients with type 2
HAE have either normal or increased concentrations of the protein but
low values in assays of C1-­INH function.
A clinical syndrome resembling HAE termed HAE with normal
C1-­INH has been described that more commonly affects females, with
a tendency to cause fewer abdominal attacks and more upper airway
attacks. In this condition, no abnormalities of complement or of C1-­
INH have been described. A small number of affected patients have
been found to have a gain-­of-­function abnormality of clotting factor
XII, but the fundamental cause of this syndrome is still unknown.
Additional pathogenic variants including ANGPT1 (angiopoietin­1), PLG (plasminogen), KNG1 (kininogen), MYOF (myoferlin), and
HS3ST6 (heparan sulfate-­glucosamine 3-­O-­sulfotransferase 6) have
been identified. Acquired C1-­INH is associated with low levels of C4,
C1-­INH, and C1q (Table 189.9).

1433

TREATMENT

Treatment of HAE is aimed at use of on-­demand treatment when an
attack starts along with long-­term prophylaxis to prevent attacks. Short-­
term prophylaxis is used prior to a known trigger such as a surgical
or dental procedure. The medical management of HAE has improved
significantly in recent years with the availability of several new safe
and effective therapies approved by the FDA in the United States. To
provide optimal care and restore a normal quality of life, treatment of
patients with HAE needs to be individualized based on patient-­specific
factors including patient preference and access to emergency care.
Options for long-­term prophylaxis in patients with HAE include
an intravenous formulation of plasma-­derived C1-­INH concentrate
(Cinryze) given twice a week. Cinryze was FDA approved in 2008 for
adolescents and adults. The half-­life of this plasma protein is relatively
short, about 40 hours, and the approved regimen is 1,000 units twice a
week. In 2017, a subcutaneous C1-­INH concentrate formulation given
twice a week was approved for long-­term prophylaxis in adolescents
and adults. Lanadelumab, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits plasma
kallikrein, given subcutaneously once every 2-­4 weeks, along with
berotralstat, an oral once a day pill, which inhibits plasma kallikrein,
are the newest treatment options available for long-­term prophylaxis
in patients with HAE (see Table 189.10). Garadacimab, a fully human
recombinant monoclonal antibody targeting activated factor XII, has
shown efficacy as a prophylactic agent.
Androgens, like the gonadotropin inhibitor danazol, were previously used more frequently for long-­term prophylaxis to prevent
attacks. Weak androgens have many side effects that preclude their use
in some patients. Their use in children is problematic because of the
possibility of premature closure of the epiphyses, and these agents are

Table 189.9  Complement Evaluation of Patients with Recurrent Angioedema
C4

C1-­INH LEVEL

C1-­INH FUNCTION

C1q

Idiopathic angioedema

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Type 1 HAE

Low

Low

Low

Normal

Type 2 HAE

Low

Normal

Low

Normal

HAE-­nlC1-­INH

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Acquired C1-­INH deficiency

Low

Low

Low

Low

Urticarial vasculitis

Low or normal

Normal

Normal

Low or normal

C1-­INH, C1 inhibitor; HAE-­nlC1-­INH, hereditary angioedema with normal C1-­INH; nl, normal.
From Joshi SR, Khan DA. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:
Table 39.3, p. 338.

Table 189.10  Long-­Term Prophylactic Treatment Options for Patients with Hereditary Angioedema in the United States
DATE OF FDA
APPROVAL IN US

MECHANISM OF ACTION

ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

Intravenous plasma-­derived
C1-­INH

2008

Replacing missing protein

Intravenous

Dependent on plasma supply
Extensive clinical experience

Subcutaneous plasma-­
derived C1-­INH

2017

Replacing missing protein

Subcutaneous

Dependent on plasma supply
Improved steady-­state C1-­INH levels

Lanadelumab

2018

Plasma kallikrein inhibitor

Subcutaneous

Unknown safety in pregnancy
Infrequent dosing every 2-­4 wk

Berotralstat

2020

Plasma kallikrein inhibitor

Oral

Unknown safety in pregnancy
Once a day pill

Attenuated androgens

1976

Increases circulating levels
of C1-­INH protein

Oral

Significant adverse effects
Contraindicated in pregnancy,
lactation and children

Antifibrinolytics

1986

Reduces complement
activation and C1-­INH
protein consumption

Oral

Significant adverse effects
Inferior efficacy compared with other
agents

DRUG

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1434 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 189.11  On-­Demand Treatment Options for Patients with Hereditary Angioedema in the United States
DATE OF FDA
APPROVAL IN US

DRUG

MECHANISM OF ACTION

ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

Intravenous plasma-­derived
C1-­INH

2009

Replacing missing protein

Intravenous

Dependent on plasma supply
Extensive clinical experience

Recombinant
C1-­INH

2014

Replacing missing protein

Intravenous

No human virus risk
Scalable supply

Ecallantide

2009

Plasma kallikrein inhibitor

Subcutaneous

No infectious risk
3–4% risk of anaphylaxis
Requires administration by a
healthcare provider

Icatibant

2011

B2 bradykinin receptor antagonist

Subcutaneous

No infectious risk
Stable at room temperature
Local injection reactions

not used in pregnant women. The fibrinolysis inhibitor ε-­aminocaproic
acid (EACA) is also effective in preventing attacks and has been used
in children, but its use is attenuated by the development of severe
fatigue and muscle weakness over time. A cyclized analog of EACA,
tranexamic acid, has been used extensively in Europe; because of side
effects and increased availability of other novel treatment options, it
has been used less extensively in the United States. Tranexamic acid
is believed to be more effective than EACA and has lower toxicity,
but there have been few direct studies. Its mechanism of action is not
clearly defined, and not all patients respond to this agent.
There are four on-­demand treatment options FDA approved in the
United States for patients with HAE. The first, approved in 2009, is a
purified C1-­inhibitor product (Berinert) that is administered as 20 U/
kg intravenously. It was approved for the treatment of attacks. In 2009
the FDA approved a kallikrein inhibitor, ecallantide, given subcutaneously, for acute treatment in patients age 16 years and older. This
60–amino acid peptide causes anaphylaxis rarely and is approved only
for administration by medical personnel. In 2010 a bradykinin type
2 receptor antagonist, icatibant, was approved for acute treatment in
patients age 18 years and older. An intravenous recombinant C1-­INH
product has been FDA approved in 2014 for treatment of acute attacks
(and in Europe) in adolescents and adults (see Table 189.11). All treatments are most effective when given early in an attack and begin to
have a noticeable effect about 1-­4 hours after treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 190

Anaphylaxis
Hugh A. Sampson, Julie Wang, and
Scott H. Sicherer
Anaphylaxis is a serious allergic reaction that is rapid in onset and
may cause death. Anaphylaxis in children, particularly infants, may be
underdiagnosed. Anaphylaxis occurs when there is a sudden release
of potent, biologically active mediators from mast cells and basophils,
leading to cutaneous (urticaria, angioedema, flushing), respiratory
(bronchospasm, laryngeal edema), cardiovascular (hypotension, dysrhythmias, myocardial ischemia), and gastrointestinal (GI; nausea, colicky abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea) symptoms (Table 190.1 and
Fig. 190.1).

Table 190.1  Clinical Criteria for Diagnosing Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is highly likely when any one of the following three
criteria is fulfilled:
1.	Acute onset of an illness (minutes to several hours) with
involvement of the skin, mucosal tissue, or both (e.g., generalized
urticaria, itching or flushing, swollen lips-­tongue-­uvula)
And at least one of the following:
A.	Respiratory compromise (e.g., dyspnea, wheeze-­
bronchospasm, stridor, hypoxemia)
B.	Reduced blood pressure or associated symptoms of end-­
organ dysfunction (e.g., hypotonia [collapse], syncope,
incontinence)
OR
2.	Two or more of the following that occur rapidly after exposure
to a likely allergen (or other trigger) for that patient (minutes to
several hours)
A.	Involvement of the skin/mucosal tissue (e.g., generalized
urticaria, itch-­flush, swollen lips-­tongue-­uvula)
B.	Respiratory compromise (e.g., dyspnea, wheeze or
bronchospasm, stridor, reduced peak expiratory flow, hypoxemia)
C.	Reduced blood pressure or associated symptoms (e.g.,
hypotonia [collapse], syncope, incontinence)
D.	Persistent gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., crampy abdominal
pain, vomiting)
OR
3.	Reduced blood pressure after exposure to a known allergen or
other trigger for that patient (minutes to hours).
A.	Infants and children: low systolic blood pressure (age-­specific)
or greater than 30% decrease in systolic blood pressure
B.	Adults: systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mm Hg or
greater than 30% decrease from that person’s baseline
From Sampson HA, Muñoz-Furlong A, Campbell RL, et al. Second symposium on the
definition and management of anaphylaxis: summary report–Second National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Disease/Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network symposium.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006;117(2):391-7.

ETIOLOGY

The most common causes of anaphylaxis in children are different for
hospital and community settings. Anaphylaxis occurring in the hospital
results primarily from allergic reactions to medications and latex. Food
allergy is the most common cause of anaphylaxis occurring outside the
hospital, accounting for about half the anaphylactic reactions reported
in pediatric surveys from the United States, Italy, and South Australia
(Table 190.2). Peanut allergy is an important cause of food-­induced anaphylaxis, accounting for the majority of fatal and near-­fatal reactions. In
the hospital, latex is a particular problem for children undergoing multiple operations, such as patients with spina bifida and urologic disorders, and has prompted many hospitals to switch to latex-­free products.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 190 u Anaphylaxis

1435

ANAPHYLAXIS PATHOGENESIS

Immunologic
IgE/Fc RI

Immunologic
other

• Food
• Insect stings/bites
• Medications (e.g. β-lactam
antibiotics)
• Other (e.g. latex)

• Complement cascade activation
• Coagulation pathway activation

Mast cells

Histamine

Skin
• Itching
• Flushing
• Hives
• Angioedema

Tryptase

Direct mast
cell activation

Carboxypeptidase A

• Cough
• Dyspnea
• Hoarseness
• Stridor
• Wheeze

Basophils

Chymase

PAF

GI

Respiratory

• Exercise
• Cold
• Medications (e.g. opioids)
• Other

Prostaglandins

Leukotrienes

CVS

• Vomiting
• Diarrhea
• Abdominal pain

• Dizziness
• Hypotension
• Shock
• Incontinence
• Angina
• Arrhythmia

Other

CNS
• Headache

Fig. 190.1 Summary of the pathogenesis of anaphylaxis. See text for details about mechanisms, triggers, key cells, and mediators. Two or more

target organ systems are typically involved in anaphylaxis. CNS, Central nervous system; CVS, cardiovascular system; GI, gastrointestinal; PAF,
platelet-­activating factor. (From Leung DYM, Szefler SJ, Bonilla FA Akdis CA, Sampson HA, eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: p. 525.)

Table 190.2  Anaphylaxis Triggers in the Community*
ALLERGEN TRIGGERS (IgE-­DEPENDENT IMMUNOLOGIC
MECHANISM)*
Foods (e.g., peanut, tree nuts, shellfish, fish, milk, egg, wheat, soy,
sesame, meat [galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose])
Food additives (e.g., spices, colorants, vegetable gums,
contaminants)
Stinging insects: Hymenoptera species (e.g., bees, yellow jackets,
wasps, hornets, fire ants)
Medications (e.g., β-­lactam antibiotics, ibuprofen)
Biologic agents (e.g., monoclonal antibodies [infliximab, omalizumab]
and allergens [challenge tests, specific immunotherapy])
Natural rubber latex
Vaccines
Inhalants (rare) (e.g., horse or hamster dander, grass pollen)

OTHER IMMUNE MECHANISMS (IgE INDEPENDENT)
IgG mediated (infliximab, high molecular weight dextrans)
Immune aggregates (IVIG)
Drugs (aspirin, NSAID, opiates, contrast material, ethylene oxide/
dialysis tubing)
Complement activation
Physical factors (e.g., exercise,† cold, heat, sunlight/ultraviolet
radiation)
Ethanol
Idiopathic*

*In the pediatric population, some anaphylaxis triggers, such as hormones (progesterone), seminal fluid, and occupational allergens, are uncommon, as is idiopathic anaphylaxis.
†Exercise with or without a co-­trigger, such as a food or medication, cold air, or cold water.

IVIG, Intravenous immunoglobulin; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug.
Adapted from Leung DYM, Sampson HA, Geha RS, et al. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010. p. 652.

Patients with latex allergy may also experience food-­allergic reactions
from homologous proteins in foods such as bananas, kiwi, avocado,
chestnut, and passion fruit. Anaphylaxis to galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose
has been reported 3-­6 hours after eating red meat (see Chapter 189).
Anaphylaxis may be idiopathic and in some of these patients related to
mast cell activation syndrome (Fig. 190.2; see Chapter 700.1) or familial
hypertryptasemia. Exercise-­induced anaphylaxis has been associated
with the combination of certain foods and exercise. Ingestion of the food
without exercise does not produce allergic symptoms or anaphylaxis.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The overall annual incidence of anaphylaxis in the United States is
estimated at 42 cases per 100,000 person-­years, totaling >150,000
cases per year. Food allergens are the most common trigger in children, with an incidence rate of approximately 20 per 100,000 person-­
years. An Australian parental survey found that 0.59% of children
3-­17 years of age had experienced at least one anaphylactic event.
Having asthma and the severity of asthma are important anaphylaxis risk factors (Table 190.3). In addition, patients with systemic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1436 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Idiopathic anaphylaxis

MCAS clinical criterion

Acute onset of symptoms with
involvement of organs as below

Acute onset of symptoms with concurrent involvement
of minimum 2 of the 5 organ systems as below

Skin and/or mucosa
• Flushing
• Pruritus
• Hives
• Angioedema

Skin and/or mucosa
• Flushing
• Pruritus
• Hives
• Angioedema

Gastrointestinal
• Vomiting
• Abdominal cramps
• Diarrhea

And either
Respiratory
• Dyspnea
• Wheezing
• Stridor
• Hypoxia

Respiratory

Nasoocular
• Nasal congestion
• Nasal pruritus
• Sneezing
• Rhinorrhea

• Dyspnea
• Wheezing
• Stridor
• Hypoxia

Or
Cardiovascular
• Hypotonia
• Syncope
• Collapse
• Incontinence

Cardiovascular
• Hypotonia
• Syncope
• Collapse
• Incontinence

Fig. 190.2 The criteria of idiopathic anaphylaxis versus mast cell activation syndrome. Note that when there is no likely cause of the reactions, if
the onset of illness is acute, a diagnosis of idiopathic anaphylaxis can only be made when either reduced blood pressure (or its symptoms such as
syncope) and/or respiratory compromise are present accompanied by the involvement of the skin mucosal tissue symptoms. (From Gulen T, Akin C.
Idiopathic anaphylaxis: A perplexing diagnostic challenge for allergists. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2021;21[2]:11. Fig. 1.)

mastocytosis or monoclonal mast cell–activating syndrome are at
increased risk for anaphylaxis, as are patients with an elevated baseline serum tryptase level.

PATHOGENESIS

Principal pathologic features in fatal anaphylaxis include acute bronchial obstruction with pulmonary hyperinflation, pulmonary edema,
intraalveolar hemorrhaging, visceral congestion, laryngeal edema, and
urticaria and angioedema. Acute hypotension is attributed to vasomotor dilation and cardiac dysrhythmias.
Most cases of anaphylaxis are believed to be the result of activation of
mast cells and basophils via cell-­bound allergen-­specific IgE molecules
(see Fig. 190.1). Patients initially must be exposed to the responsible
allergen to generate allergen-­specific IgE antibodies. In many cases the
child and the parent are unaware of the initial exposure, which may be
from passage of food proteins in maternal breast milk or exposure to
inflamed skin (e.g., eczematous lesions). When the child is reexposed
to the sensitizing allergen, mast cells and basophils, and possibly other
cells such as macrophages, release a variety of mediators (histamine,
tryptase) and cytokines that can produce allergic symptoms in any or
all target organs. Anaphylaxis may also be caused by mechanisms other
than IgE-­mediated reactions, including direct release of mediators
from mast cells by medications and physical factors (opiates, exercise,
cold), disturbances of leukotriene metabolism (aspirin and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs), immune aggregates and complement
activation (blood products), probable complement activation (radiocontrast dyes, dialysis membranes), and IgG-­mediated reactions (high
molecular weight dextran, chimeric or humanized monoclonal antibodies) (see Table 190.2).
Idiopathic anaphylaxis (IA) is a diagnosis of exclusion when no
inciting agent is identified, and other disorders have been excluded
(see Chapter 700.1). Symptoms are similar to IgE-­mediated causes
of anaphylaxis; episodes often recur (see Fig. 190.2). IA may be
secondary to mast cell activation syndrome with bone marrow

expansion of mast cells exhibiting a D816V KIT pathologic variant
or aberrant mast cell clonality on flow cytometry expressing CD117,
CD2, or CD25 markers. Associated features of IA-­associated mast
cell activation syndrome include insect (venom) sting anaphylaxis with hypotension and persistent (once recovered) elevations
of tryptase at times associated with autosomal dominant familial
hypertryptasemia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The onset of symptoms may vary depending on the cause of the
reaction. Reactions from ingested allergens (foods, medications) are
delayed in onset (minutes to 2 hours) compared with those from
injected allergens (insect sting, medications) and tend to have more
GI symptoms. Initial symptoms may include any of the following constellation of symptoms: pruritus about the mouth and face; flushing,
urticaria and angioedema, and oral or cutaneous pruritus; a sensation
of warmth, weakness, and apprehension (sense of doom); tightness
in the throat, dry staccato cough and hoarseness, periocular pruritus, nasal congestion, sneezing, dyspnea, deep cough and wheezing;
nausea, abdominal cramping, and vomiting, especially with ingested
allergens; uterine contractions (manifesting as lower back pain); and
faintness and loss of consciousness in severe cases. Some degree of
obstructive laryngeal edema is typically encountered with severe reactions. Cutaneous symptoms may be absent in up to 10% of cases, and
the acute onset of severe bronchospasm in a previously well person
with asthma should suggest the diagnosis of anaphylaxis. Sudden
collapse in the absence of cutaneous symptoms should also raise suspicion of vasovagal collapse, myocardial infarction, aspiration, pulmonary embolism, or seizure disorder. Laryngeal edema, especially
with abdominal pain, may also be a result of hereditary angioedema
(see Chapter 189.1). Symptoms in infants may not be easy to identify. Infants may manifest nonspecific symptoms such as sudden crying, fussiness, flushing, dysphonia, drooling, vomiting, and becoming
quiet or drowsy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 190 u Anaphylaxis
Table 190.3  Patient Risk Factors for Anaphylaxis

Table 190.4  Differential Diagnosis of Anaphylaxis

AGE-­RELATED FACTORS
Infants: anaphylaxis can be difficult to recognize, especially if the first
episode; patients cannot describe symptoms
Adolescents and young adults: increased risk-­taking behaviors, such
as failure to avoid known triggers and to carry an epinephrine
autoinjector consistently
Pregnancy: risk of iatrogenic anaphylaxis, as from β-­lactam
antibiotics to prevent neonatal group B streptococcal infection,
agents used perioperatively during caesarean sections, and natural
rubber latex
Older people: increased risk of death because of concomitant
disease and drugs

Anaphylaxis to exogenously administered agents
Physical factors
Exercise
Cold, heat, sunlight
Idiopathic

CONCOMITANT DISEASES
Asthma and other chronic respiratory diseases
Cardiovascular diseases
Systemic mastocytosis or monoclonal mast cell–activating syndrome
Allergic rhinitis and eczema*
Depression, cognitive dysfunction, substance misuse
DRUGS
NSAIDs
β-­Adrenergic blockers†
Mast cell destabilizers
ACE inhibitors†
Sedatives, antidepressants, narcotics, recreational drugs, and alcohol
may decrease the patient’s ability to recognize triggers and
symptoms.
Caffeine
FACTORS THAT MAY INCREASE RISK FOR ANAPHYLAXIS OR
MAKE IT MORE DIFFICULT TO TREAT
Age
Asthma
Eczema
Drugs
Alcohol
Other cofactors such as exercise, infection, menses
*Atopic diseases are a risk factor for anaphylaxis triggered by food, latex, and exercise,
but not for anaphylaxis triggered by most drugs or by insect stings.
†Those taking β-­blockers may not respond optimally to epinephrine treatment and may
need glucagon, a polypeptide with non–catecholamine-­dependent inotropic and
chronotropic cardiac effects, atropine for persistent bradycardia, or ipratropium for
persistent bronchospasm.
ACE, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
Adapted from Lieberman P, Nicklas RA, Randolph C, et al. Anaphylaxis—a practice
parameter update 2015. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2015;115(5):341–384. Table I-­9.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory studies may indicate the presence of IgE antibodies to a
suspected causative agent, but this result is not definitive. Plasma
histamine is elevated for a brief period but is unstable and difficult
to measure in a clinical setting. Plasma tryptase is more stable and
remains elevated for several hours but often is not elevated, especially
in food-­induced anaphylactic reactions. Plasma tryptase may also be
elevated with chronic renal disease, eosinophilic GI disorders, parasitic
infections, Gaucher disease, and mast cell activation syndrome or as a
familial trait.

DIAGNOSIS

A National Institutes of Health (NIH)–sponsored expert panel has
recommended an approach to the diagnosis of anaphylaxis (see Table
190.1). The differential diagnosis includes other forms of shock (hemorrhagic, cardiogenic, septic), vasopressor reactions, including flushing syndromes (e.g., carcinoid syndrome), ingestion of monosodium
glutamate, scombroidosis, and hereditary angioedema (Table 190.4).

1437

VASODEPRESSOR (VASOVAGAL) RESPONSES
Flushing syndromes
Carcinoid, pheochromocytoma, medullary carcinoma of the thyroid
Menopause
Side effects of chlorpropamide, alcohol, calcium channel blockers
Autonomic epilepsy
FOOD-­ASSOCIATED SYNDROMES
Scombroidosis
Sulfites
Monosodium glutamate (MSG)
OTHER FORMS OF SHOCK
Cardiogenic
Septic
Vascular
EXCESS ENDOGENOUS PRODUCTION OF HISTAMINE
SYNDROMES
Mast cell activation syndrome
Systemic mastocytosis
Cutaneous mastocytosis
Mast cell leukemia
Acute promyelocytic leukemia
NONORGANIC DISEASE
Panic attacks
Munchausen stridor
Vocal cord dysfunction
Undifferentiated somatoform anaphylaxis
MISCELLANEOUS
Acute urticaria with or without angioedema
Hereditary angioedema
Idiopathic angioedema
Neurologic (seizure, stroke)
Red man syndrome (vancomycin)
Capillary leak syndrome
From Dreskin SC, Stitt JM. Anaphylaxis. In: Burks AW, Holgate ST, O’Hehir RE, et al.,
eds. Middleton’s Allergy: Principles and Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:
Box 75.6, p. 1237.

In addition, panic attack, vocal cord dysfunction, pheochromocytoma,
and vancomycin-­induced flushing should be considered.

TREATMENT

Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency requiring aggressive management
with intramuscular (IM, first line) or intravenous (IV) epinephrine.
Oral (PO), IM, or IV H1 and H2 antihistamine antagonists, oxygen, IV fluids, inhaled β-­agonists, and corticosteroids are adjunctive
medications that may be used (Table 190.5 and Fig. 190.3). The initial
assessment should ensure an adequate airway with effective respiration, circulation, and perfusion. Epinephrine is the most important
medication, and there should be no delay in its administration. Epinephrine should be given by the IM route to the lateral thigh (1:1000
dilution, 0.01 mg/kg; maximum 0.5 mg). Children weighing 25 kg or
more should receive 0.3 mg IM, with many recommending 0.5 mg IM
for older adolescents. The IM dose can be repeated at intervals of 5-­15
minutes if symptoms persist or worsen. If there is no response to multiple doses of epinephrine, IV epinephrine using the 1:10,000 dilution

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1438 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 190.5  Management of a Patient with Anaphylaxis
MECHANISM(S) OF
­EFFECT

TREATMENT

DOSAGE(S)

PATIENT EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT (DEPENDENT ON SEVERITY OF SYMPTOMS)
Epinephrine (adrenaline)
α1-­, β1-­, β2-­Adrenergic
0.01 mg/kg, up to 0.3 mg IM in lateral thigh
effects
(0.5 mg autoinjectors are not available in
the United States)
Epinephrine autoinjector:
0.1 mg for 7.5-­13 kg
0.15 mg for <25 kg
0.3 mg for 25 kg or more
A second dose may be given in 5 min if
symptoms worsen or do not improve
Cetirizine (liquid)
Antihistamine (competitive Cetirizine liquid: 5 mg/5 mL
of H1 receptor)
0.25 mg/kg, up to 10 mg PO
Alternative: DiphenhyAntihistamine (competitive 1.25 mg/kg up to 50 mg PO or IM
dramine
of H1 receptor)
Transport to an emergency facility
EMERGENCY PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (DEPENDENT ON SEVERITY OF SYMPTOMS)
Epinephrine (adrenaline)
α1-­, β1-­, β2-­Adrenergic
0.01 mg/kg, up to 0.5 mg IM in lateral thigh
effects
Epinephrine autoinjector:
0.1 mg for 7.5-­13 kg
0.15 mg for <25 kg
0.3 mg for 25 kg or more
0.01 mL/kg/dose of 1:1,000 (vial) solution, up
to 0.5 mL IM
May repeat every 10-­15 min
For severe hypotension: 0.01 mL/kg/dose of
1:10,000 slow IV push

COMMENTS; ADVERSE REACTIONS
Tachycardia, hypertension, nervousness,
headache, nausea, irritability, tremor

Hypotension, tachycardia, somnolence
Hypotension, tachycardia, somnolence,
paradoxical excitement

Tachycardia, hypertension, nervousness,
headache, nausea, irritability, tremor

Supplemental oxygen and airway management
Volume Expanders
Crystalloids (normal
saline or Ringer lactate)

30 mL/kg in first hour

Colloids (hydroxyethyl
starch)
Antihistamines
Cetirizine (liquid)

10 mL/kg rapidly followed by slow infusion

Antihistamine (competitive
of H1 receptor)
Antihistamine (competitive
of H1 receptor)
Antihistamine (competitive
of H2 receptor)
Antihistamine (competitive
of H2 receptor)

Cetirizine liquid: 5 mg/5 mL
0.25 mg/kg, up to 10 mg PO
1.25 mg/kg, up to 50 mg PO, IM, or IV

Corticosteroids
Methylprednisolone

Antiinflammatory

Prednisone

Antiinflammatory

Solu-­Medrol (IV): 1-­2 mg/kg, up to 125 mg IV
Depo-­Medrol (IM): 1 mg/kg, up to 80 mg IM
1 mg/kg up, to 75 mg PO

Nebulized albuterol

β-­Agonist

0.83 mg/mL (3 mL) via mask with O2

Alternative:
Diphenhydramine
Ranitidine
Alternative: Cimetidine

1 mg/kg, up to 50 mg IV
Should be administered slowly
4 mg/kg, up to 200 mg IV
Should be administered slowly

Rate titrated against BP response
If tolerated, place patient supine with
legs raised
Rate titrated against BP response
If tolerated, place patient supine with
legs raised
Hypotension, tachycardia, somnolence
Hypotension, tachycardia, somnolence,
paradoxical excitement
Headache, mental confusion
Headache, mental confusion

Hypertension, edema, nervousness,
agitation
Hypertension, edema, nervousness,
agitation
Palpitations, nervousness, CNS
stimulation, tachycardia; use to
supplement epinephrine when
bronchospasm appears unresponsive;
may repeat

Preventive Treatment
Prescription for epinephrine autoinjector and antihistamine
Provide written plan outlining patient emergency management (may download form from http://www.aap.org or http://www.foodallergy.org;
English and Spanish versions available)
Follow-­up evaluation to determine/confirm etiology
Immunotherapy for insect sting allergy
Patient Education
Instruction on avoidance of causative agent
Information on recognizing early signs of anaphylaxis
Stress early treatment of allergic symptoms to avoid systemic anaphylaxis
Encourage wearing medical identification jewelry
BP, Blood pressure; CNS, central nervous system; IM, Intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; PO, orally; qd, every day.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 190 u Anaphylaxis

1439

Anaphylaxis preparedness
Patient presents with possible/probable acute anaphylaxis

NO

Initial assessment supports potential anaphylaxis?
e.g., non-localized urticaria after immunotherapy

Consider other diagnosis

YES
Immediate intervention
Subsequent emergency care that may be necessary
depending on response to epinephrine:
Consider:

• Assess airway, breathing,
circulation, mentation
• Inject epinephrine and
reevaluate for repeat
injection if necessary
• Supine position (if
cardiovascular
involvement suspected)

Good
clinical
response?

• Call 911 and request assistance
• Recumbent position with elevation of
lower extremity
• Establish airway
• O2
• Repeat epinephrine injection if indicated
• IV fluids if hypotensive; rapid volume
expansion
• Consider inhaled bronchodilators if
wheezing
• H1 and H2 antihistamines
• Corticosteroids

NO

YES

• Observation
Length and setting of observation
must be individualized
• Provide epinephrine autoinjector
prescription

NO IMPROVEMENT

YES

Good
NO
clinical
response?

Consultation with
allergistimmunologist

Call 911 if not already done
Consider:
• Epinephrine intravenous infusion
• Other intravenous vasopressors
• Consider glucagon

Cardiopulmonary arrest during anaphylaxis:
• CPR and ACLS measures
• Prolonged resuscitation efforts encouraged
(if necessary)
• Consider:
• High-dose epinephrine
• Rapid volume expansion
• Atropine for asystole or pulseless electrical
activity
• Transport to emergency dept. or ICU

Fig. 190.3 Algorithm for treatment of anaphylactic event in outpatient setting. ACLS, Advance cardiac life support; CPR, cardiopulmonary resusci-

tation; ICU, intensive care unit; IV, intravenous. (From Lieberman P, Nicklas RA, Oppenheimer J, et al. The diagnosis and management of anaphylaxis
practice parameter: 2010 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010;126:477–480 e471-­442.)

may be needed. If IV access is not readily available, epinephrine can be
administered via the endotracheal or intraosseous routes.
For refractory hypotension, other vasopressors may be needed. Anaphylaxis refractory to repeated doses of epinephrine in a patient receiving β-­adrenergic blockers has anecdotally been treated with glucagon.
The patient should be placed in a supine position when there is concern
for hemodynamic compromise. Fluids are also important in patients
with shock. Other drugs (antihistamines, glucocorticosteroids) have a
secondary role in the management of anaphylaxis.

Patients may experience biphasic anaphylaxis, which occurs when
anaphylactic symptoms recur after apparent resolution. The mechanism of this phenomenon is unknown, but more severe initial presentation and the need for more than one dose of epinephrine to treat
initial symptoms are risk factors for biphasic anaphylaxis. Treatment
with antihistamines or corticosteroids do not provide clear benefit for prevention of biphasic reactions. Extended observation after
resolution of initial anaphylaxis symptoms should be considered
for patients with risk factors for biphasic anaphylaxis. At discharge,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1440 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 190.6  Considerations with Epinephrine Injection for Anaphylaxis
WHY HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS FAIL TO INJECT
EPINEPHRINE PROMPTLY
• Lack of recognition of anaphylaxis symptoms; failure to diagnose
anaphylaxis
• Episode appears mild, or there is a history of previous mild
episode(s)*
• Inappropriate concern about transient mild pharmacologic effects
of epinephrine (e.g., tremor)
• Lack of awareness that serious adverse effects are almost always
attributable to epinephrine overdose or IV administration, especially
IV bolus, rapid IV infusion, or IV infusion of a 1:1,000 epinephrine
solution instead of an appropriately diluted solution (1:10,000
concentration)
WHY PATIENTS AND CAREGIVERS FAIL TO INJECT EPINEPHRINE
PROMPTLY
• Lack of recognition of anaphylaxis symptoms; failure to diagnose
anaphylaxis
• Episode appears mild, or there is a history of previous mild
episode(s)*
• H1 antihistamine or asthma puffer is used initially instead, relieving
early warning signs such as itch or cough, respectively
• Prescription for epinephrine autoinjectors (EAIs) is not provided by
physician
• Prescription for EAIs is provided but not filled at pharmacy (e.g.,
not affordable)
• Patients do not carry EAIs consistently (due to size and bulk, or
“don’t think they’ll need it”)
• Patients and caregivers are afraid to use EAIs (concern about
making an error when giving the injection or about a bad outcome)

• Patients and caregivers are concerned about injury from EAIs
• Competence in using EAIs is associated with regular allergy clinic
visits; it decreases as time elapses from first EAI instruction; regular
retraining is needed
• Difficulty in understanding how to use EAIs (15% of mothers with no
EAI experience could not fire an EAI immediately after a one-­on-­one
demonstration)
• Errors in EAI use can occur despite education, possibly related to
the design of some EAIs
WHY PATIENTS OCCASIONALLY FAIL TO RESPOND TO
EPINEPHRINE INJECTION
• Delayed recognition of anaphylaxis symptoms; delayed diagnosis
• Error in diagnosis: problem being treated (e.g., foreign body
inhalation) is not anaphylaxis
• Rapid progression of anaphylaxis†
Epinephrine†:
• Injected too late; dose too low on mg/kg basis; dose too low
because epinephrine solution has degraded (e.g., past the
expiration date, stored in a hot place)
• Injection route or site not optimal; dose took too long to be
absorbed
• Patient suddenly sits up or walks or runs, leading to the empty
ventricle syndrome
• Concurrent use of certain medications (e.g., β-­adrenergic
blockers)

*Subsequent anaphylaxis episodes can be more severe, less severe, or similar in severity.
†Median times to respiratory or cardiac arrest are 5 min in iatrogenic anaphylaxis, 15 min in stinging-­insect venom anaphylaxis, and 30 min in food anaphylaxis; however, regardless of
the trigger, respiratory or cardiac arrest can occur within 1 min in anaphylaxis.
Adapted from Leung DYM, Szefler SJ, Bonilla FA Akdis CA, Sampson HA, eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: p. 531.

referrals should be made to appropriate specialists for further evaluation and follow-­up.

PREVENTION

For patients experiencing anaphylactic reactions, the triggering agent
should be avoided, and education regarding early recognition of anaphylactic symptoms and administration of emergency medications
should be provided. Patients with food allergies must be educated in
allergen avoidance, including active reading of food ingredient labels
and knowledge of potential contamination and high-­risk situations.
Any child with food allergy and a history of asthma and a peanut, tree
nut, fish, or shellfish allergy or a previous systemic reaction should be
given an epinephrine autoinjector. The expert panel also indicates that
epinephrine autoinjectors should be considered for any patient with
IgE-­mediated food allergy. In addition, liquid cetirizine (or alternatively,
diphenhydramine) and a written emergency plan should also be provided in case of accidental ingestion or allergic reaction. A form can be
downloaded from the American Academy of Pediatrics (www.aap.org)
or Food Allergy Research & Education (www.foodallergy.org).
In cases of food-­associated exercise-­induced anaphylaxis, children
must not exercise within 2-­4 hours of ingesting the triggering food;
children with exercise-­induced anaphylaxis should exercise with a

friend, learn to recognize the early signs of anaphylaxis (sensation of
warmth, facial pruritus), and stop exercising and seek help immediately if symptoms develop. Foods associated with exercise-­induced
anaphylaxis include wheat, vegeas, nuts, fruits, and shellfish.
Children experiencing a systemic anaphylactic reaction, including respiratory symptoms, to an insect sting should be evaluated and
treated with immunotherapy, which is >90% protective. Reactions to
medications can be reduced and minimized by using oral medications
instead of injected forms and avoiding cross-­reacting medications.
Low-­osmolarity radiocontrast dyes and pretreatment can be used in
patients with suspected reactions to previous radiocontrast dye. Nonlatex gloves and materials should be used in children undergoing multiple operations.
Any child at risk for anaphylaxis should receive emergency medications (including epinephrine autoinjector), education on identification of signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis and proper administration
of medications (Table 190.6), and a written emergency plan in case of
accidental exposure. They should be encouraged to wear medical identification jewelry.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 191 u Serum Sickness

Chapter 191

Serum Sickness
Anna H. Nowak-­Wegrzyn and
Scott H. Sicherer
Serum sickness is a systemic, immune complex–mediated hypersensitivity vasculitis classically attributed to the therapeutic administration
of foreign serum proteins or other medications (Table 191.1).

ETIOLOGY

Immune complexes involving heterologous (animal) serum proteins and
complement activation are important pathogenic mechanisms in serum
sickness. Antibody therapies derived from the horse, sheep, or rabbit are
available for treatment of envenomation by the black widow spider and a
variety of snakes, for treatment of botulism, and for immunosuppression
(antithymocyte globulin [ATG]). The availability of alternative medical
therapies, modified or bioengineered antibodies, and biologics of human
origin have supplanted the use of nonhuman antisera, reducing the risk
of serum sickness. However, rabbit-­generated ATGs, which target human
T cells, continue to be widely used as immunosuppressive agents during
treatment of kidney allograft recipients; serum sickness is associated with a
late graft loss in kidney transplant recipients. A serum sickness–like reaction may be attributed to drug allergy, triggered by antibiotics (particularly cefaclor, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, anticonvulsants, prolonged
high-­dose intravenous penicillin G), infections (streptococcal infections,
hepatitis B), or rabies vaccine. In contrast to a true serum sickness, serum
Table 191.1  Proteins and Medications That Cause Serum
Sickness*
PROTEINS FROM OTHER SPECIES
Antibotulinum globulin
Antithymocyte globulin
Antitetanus toxoid
Antivenin (Crotalidae) polyvalent (horse serum based)
Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab (ovine serum based)
Antirabies globulin
Infliximab
Rituximab
Etanercept
Omalizumab
Adalimumab
Natalizumab
Anti-­HIV antibodies ([PE]HRG214)
Hymenoptera stings
Streptokinase
H1N1 influenza vaccine
Rabies vaccine

1441

sickness–like reactions do not exhibit the immune complexes, hypocomplementemia, vasculitis, and renal lesions that are seen in serum sickness
reactions.

PATHOGENESIS

Serum sickness is a classic example of a type III hypersensitivity reaction
caused by antigen-­antibody complexes. In the rabbit model using bovine
serum albumin as the antigen, symptoms develop with the appearance of
antibody against the injected antigen. As free antigen concentration falls
and antibody production increases over days, antigen-­antibody complexes
of various sizes develop in a manner analogous to a precipitin curve.
Whereas small complexes usually circulate harmlessly and large complexes are cleared by the reticuloendothelial system, intermediate-­sized
complexes that develop at the point of slight antigen excess may deposit in
blood vessel walls and tissues. There the immune microprecipitates induce
vascular (leukocytoclastic vasculitis with immune complex deposition)
and tissue damage through activation of complement and granulocytes.
Complement activation (C3a, C5a) promotes chemotaxis and adherence of neutrophils to the site of immune complex deposition. The processes of immune complex deposition and of neutrophil accumulation
may be facilitated by increased vascular permeability, because of the release
of vasoactive amines from tissue mast cells. Mast cells may be activated by
binding of antigen to IgE or through contact with anaphylatoxins (C3a).
Tissue injury results from the liberation of proteolytic enzymes and oxygen
radicals from the neutrophils.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The symptoms of serum sickness generally begin 7-­12 days after injection
of the foreign material, but may appear as late as 3 weeks afterward. The
onset of symptoms may be accelerated if there has been earlier exposure or
previous allergic reaction to the same antigen. A few days before the onset
of generalized symptoms, the site of injection may become edematous
and erythematous. Symptoms usually include fever, malaise, and rashes.
Urticaria and morbilliform rashes are the predominant types of skin eruptions (Fig. 191.1). In a prospective study of serum sickness induced by
administration of equine ATG, an initial rash was noted in most patients.
It began as a thin, serpiginous band of erythema along the sides of the
hands, fingers, feet, and toes at the junction of the palmar or plantar skin
with the skin of the dorsolateral surface. In most patients the band of erythema was replaced by petechiae or purpura, presumably because of low
platelet counts or local damage to small blood vessels. Additional symptoms include edema, myalgia, lymphadenopathy, symmetric arthralgia or
arthritis involving multiple joints, and gastrointestinal complaints, including pain, nausea, diarrhea, and melena. Symptoms typically resolve within
2 weeks of removal of the offending agent, although in unusual cases,
symptoms can persist for as long as 2-­3 months. Carditis, glomerulonephritis, Guillain-­Barré syndrome, and peripheral neuritis are rare complications. Serum sickness–like reactions from drugs are characterized
by fever, pruritus, urticaria, and arthralgias that usually begin 1-­3 weeks
after drug exposure. The urticarial skin eruption becomes increasingly

DRUGS
Antibiotics
Cefaclor
Penicillins
Trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole
Minocycline
Meropenem
Neurologic
Bupropion
Carbamazepine
Phenytoin
Sulfonamides
Barbiturates
*Based on review of the most current literature. Other medications that are not listed
might also cause serum sickness.
Adapted from Aceves SS. Serum sickness. In: Burg FD, Ingelfinger JR, Polin RA, Gershon
AA, eds. Current Pediatric Therapy. 18th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006: p. 1138.

Fig. 191.1 Serum sickness–like reaction (SSLR). Note the swollen
hand and large urticarial wheals in this girl with SSLR and arthralgias.
(From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: p. 476.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1442 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
erythematous as the reaction progresses and can evolve into dusky centers
with round plaques. Serum sickness and serum sickness–like reactions are
more likely to occur with higher doses and intermittent exposures of culprit antigens.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of serum sickness and serum sickness–like reactions includes viral illnesses with exanthems, hypersensitivity vasculitis,
Kawasaki disease, acute rheumatic fever, acute meningococcal or gonococcal infection, endocarditis, systemic-­onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis
(Still disease), Lyme disease, hepatitis, autoinflammatory syndromes, acute
annular urticaria (urticaria multiforme), Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, drug
reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), and erythema multiforme (see Chapters 193 and 686.2).

DIAGNOSIS

In most patients the diagnosis of serum sickness is made clinically based
on the characteristic pattern of acute or subacute onset of a rash, fever,
and severe arthralgia and myalgia disproportionate to the degree of swelling, occurring after exposure to a potential culprit. Patients who appear
moderately or severely ill, or who are not taking a medication that can be
readily identified as the culprit, should be evaluated with the following
laboratory tests:
•	Complete blood count and differential: Thrombocytopenia is often
present.
•	Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-­reactive protein: ESR is
usually elevated.
•	Urinalysis: Mild proteinuria, hemoglobinuria, and microscopic hematuria may be seen.
•	Serum chemistries: Including blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and
liver function tests.
•	Complement studies, including CH50, C3, and C4: Serum complement levels (C3 and C4) are generally decreased and reach a nadir at
about day 10. C3a anaphylatoxin may be increased.
•	Testing for specific infectious diseases: If indicated by the history or
physical examination.
•	Appropriate viral or bacterial cultures: If an infection is suspected.
Skin biopsies are not usually necessary for confirming the diagnosis, because the findings are variable and not specific for serum sickness. Direct immunofluorescence studies of skin lesions often reveal
immune deposits of IgM, IgA, IgE, or C3.

TREATMENT

There are no evidence-­based guidelines or controlled trials on which to
base therapy recommendations. Treatment is primarily supportive, consisting of discontinuation of the offending agent, antihistamines for pruritus, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and analgesics for low-­grade
fever and mild arthralgia. When the symptoms are especially severe, for
example, fever >38.5°C (101.3°F), severe arthralgia or myalgia, or renal
dysfunction, systemic corticosteroids can be used. Prednisone (1-­2 mg/
kg/day; maximum 60 mg/day) for 1-­2 weeks is usually sufficient. Once
the offending agent is discontinued and depending on its half-­life, symptoms resolve spontaneously in 1-­4 weeks. Symptoms lasting longer suggest
another diagnosis.

PREVENTION

The primary mode of prevention of serum sickness is to seek alternative
therapies. In some cases, non–animal-­derived formulations may be available (human-­derived botulinum immune globulin). Other alternatives are
partially digested antibodies of animal origin and engineered (humanized)
antibodies. The potential of these therapies to elicit serum sickness–like
disease appears low. When only animal-­derived antitoxin/antivenom is
available, skin tests should be performed before administration of serum,
but this procedure indicates the risk only of anaphylaxis, not of serum sickness. For patients who have evidence of anaphylactic sensitivity to horse
serum, a risk/benefit assessment must be made to determine the need
to proceed with treatment. If needed, the serum can usually be successfully administered by a process of rapid desensitization using protocols of
gradual administration outlined by the manufacturers. Serum sickness is
not prevented by desensitization or by pretreatment with corticosteroids.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 192

Food Allergy and Adverse
Reactions to Foods
Anna H. Nowak-­Wegrzyn, Hugh A. Sampson,
Amanda L. Cox, and Scott H. Sicherer
Adverse reactions to foods consist of any untoward reaction following the ingestion of a food or food additive and are classically divided
into food intolerances and food allergies. Food intolerances are nonimmunologic physiologic responses and can include metabolic, toxic,
pharmacologic, or other mechanisms. Food allergies are adverse
immunologic responses and can be IgE mediated, non–IgE mediated, or mixed (Tables 192.1 and 192.2). Food allergies appear to have
increased over the past 3 decades, primarily in westernized/industrialized countries. Worldwide, estimates of food allergy prevalence range
from 1–11% with regional variations. The vast majority of food allergies are due to peanut, tree nuts, seeds, milk, egg, soy, wheat, fish, and
Table 192.1

Adverse Food Reactions

FOOD INTOLERANCE (NON–IMMUNE SYSTEM MEDIATED,
NONTOXIC, NONINFECTIOUS)
Host Factors
Enzyme deficiencies—lactase (primary or secondary), sucrase/
isomaltase, hereditary fructose intolerance, galactosemia, alcohol
dehydrogenase deficiency
Gastrointestinal disorders—inflammatory bowel disease, irritable
bowel syndrome, pseudoobstruction, colic
Idiosyncratic reactions—caffeine in soft drinks (“hyperactivity”)
Psychologic—food phobias, obsessive/compulsive disorder
Migraines (rare)
Food Factors (Toxic or Infectious or Pharmacologic)
Infectious organisms—Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus,
Clostridium perfringens, Shigella, botulism, Salmonella, Yersinia,
Campylobacter
Toxins—histamine (scombroid poisoning), saxitoxin (shellfish)
Pharmacologic agents—caffeine, theobromine (chocolate, tea),
tryptamine (tomatoes), tyramine (cheese), benzoic acid in citrus
fruits (perioral flare)
Contaminants—heavy metals, pesticides, antibiotics
FOOD ALLERGY
IgE Mediated
Cutaneous—urticaria, angioedema, morbilliform rashes, flushing,
contact urticarial
Gastrointestinal—oral allergy syndrome, gastrointestinal anaphylaxis
Respiratory—acute rhinoconjunctivitis, bronchospasm
Generalized—anaphylactic shock, exercise-­induced anaphylaxis
Mixed IgE Mediated and Non–IgE Mediated
Cutaneous—atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis
Gastrointestinal—allergic eosinophilic esophagitis and gastroenteritis
Respiratory—asthma
Non–IgE Mediated
Cutaneous—contact dermatitis, dermatitis herpetiformis (celiac
disease)
Gastrointestinal—food protein–induced enterocolitis, proctocolitis,
and enteropathy syndromes, celiac disease
Respiratory—food-­induced pulmonary hemosiderosis (Heiner
syndrome)
Unclassified
IgE, Immunoglobulin E.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 192 u Food Allergy and Adverse Reactions to Foods 1443
shellfish, with regional variations in prevalence. It has been estimated
that 8–11% of children have food allergy, with 2.4% having multiple
food allergies. Up to 6% of children experience food allergic reactions
in the first 3 years of life, including approximately 2.5% with cow’s milk
allergy, 2% with egg allergy, and 2–3% with peanut allergy. Most children “outgrow” milk and egg allergies, with approximately 50% doing
so by school-­age. In contrast, 80–90% of children with peanut, tree nut,
or seafood allergy retain their allergy for life (Table 192.3).

Table 192.2  Differential Diagnosis of Adverse Food
Reactions
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS (WITH VOMITING AND/OR
DIARRHEA)
Structural abnormalities (pyloric stenosis, Hirschsprung disease,
reflux)
Enzyme deficiencies (primary or secondary)
Disaccharidase deficiency—lactase, fructase, sucrase-­isomaltase
Galactosemia
Malignancy with obstruction
Other: pancreatic insufficiency (cystic fibrosis), peptic disease
CONTAMINANTS AND ADDITIVES
Flavorings and preservatives—rarely cause symptoms
Sodium metabisulfite, monosodium glutamate, nitrites
Dyes and colorings—very rarely cause symptoms (urticaria, eczema)
Tartrazine
Toxins
Bacterial, fungal (aflatoxin), fish related (scombroid, ciguatera)
Infectious organisms
Bacteria (Salmonella, Escherichia coli, Shigella)
Virus (rotavirus, enterovirus)
Parasites (Giardia, Akis simplex [in fish])
Accidental contaminants
Heavy metals, pesticides
Pharmacologic agents
Caffeine, glycosidal alkaloid solanine (potato spuds), histamine
(fish), serotonin (banana, tomato), tryptamine (tomato), tyramine
(cheese)
PSYCHOLOGIC REACTIONS
Food phobias

Table 192.3

GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISK FACTORS

Allergic sensitization and food allergy development is influenced by
genetics, environment, and genome-­environment interactions (possible epigenetic effects). Family and twin studies show that family
history confers a 2-­to 10-­fold increased risk, depending on the
study setting, population, specific food, and diagnostic test. Candidate gene studies suggest that genetic variants in the HLA-­D Q
locus (HLA-­D QB1*02 and DQB1*06:03P), filaggrin, interleukin
(IL)-­10, STAT6, and FOXP3 genes are associated with food allergy,
although the results are inconsistent across different populations.
In a genome-­wide association study, differential methylation at the
HLA-­DR and -­D Q regions was associated with food allergy. Epigenetic studies implicate DNA methylation effects on IL-­4, -­5 and -­10,
and interferon (IFN)-­γ genes and in the mitogen-­activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathway.
Many environmental factors have been observed to influence
the development of food allergy. Skin exposure to foods in the setting of infantile eczema, characterized by impaired skin barrier
and inflammation, can lead to sensitization and allergy. Decreased
microbial exposure (“hygiene hypothesis”), decreased microbiome
diversity, and the specific makeup of microbial communities in the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, airway, and skin, influence allergic conditions, including food allergy (see Chapter 182). Additional environmental factors that may be associated with increased risk of food
allergy include reduced diversity of the diet, delayed introduction of
allergenic foods, vitamin D deficiency, and other factors.

PATHOGENESIS

Food intolerances are the result of a variety of nonimmunologic
mechanisms, whereas food allergy is predominantly caused by IgE-­
mediated and cell-­mediated immune mechanisms. In food allergy,
normal physiologic oral tolerance of food, which is induced largely
by regulatory T cells (Tregs) and the microbiome of the gut mucosa,
breaks down. Susceptible individuals exposed to certain allergens
generate food-­specific IgE antibodies that bind to Fcε receptors on
mast cells, basophils, macrophages, and dendritic cells, resulting in
allergic sensitization. When food allergens penetrate mucosal barriers and reach cell-­bound IgE antibodies, mediators are released
that induce vasodilation, smooth muscle contraction, and mucus
secretion, which result in symptoms of immediate hypersensitivity (allergy). Activated mast cells, basophils, and macrophages may
release several cytokines that attract and activate other cells, such
as eosinophils and lymphocytes, leading to prolonged inflammation. During acute IgE-­mediated reactions, mast cell and basophil

Natural History of Food Allergy

FOOD

USUAL AGE AT ONSET OF ALLERGY

USUAL AGE AT RESOLUTION

Hen’s egg white

0-­1 yr

7 yr (75% of cases resolve)*

Cow’s milk

0-­1 yr

5 yr (76% of cases resolve)*

Peanut

1-­2 yr

Persistent (20% of cases resolve)

Tree nuts

1-­2 yr; in adults, onset occurs after cross reactivity to birch pollen

Persistent (9% of cases resolve)

Fish

Late childhood and adulthood

Persistent†

Shellfish (crustacean)

Adulthood (in 60% of patients with this allergy)

Persistent

Wheat*

6-­24 mo

5 yr (80% of cases resolve)

Soybean*

6-­24 mo

2 yr (67% of cases resolve)

Kiwi

Any age

Unknown

Apple, carrot, and peach‡

Late childhood and adulthood

Unknown

*Studies suggest that resolution may occur at a later age, especially in children with multiple food allergies and lifetime peak food-­specific IgE >50 kUA/L.

†Fish allergy that is acquired in childhood can resolve.

‡Allergy to fresh apples, carrots, and peaches (oral allergy syndrome) is typically caused by heat-­labile proteins. Fresh fruit causes oral pruritus, but cooked fruit is tolerated. There is

generally no risk of anaphylaxis, although in rare cases, allergies to cross-­reactive lipid transfer protein can cause anaphylaxis after ingestion of fruits (e.g., peach) and vegetables.
Adapted from Lack G. Food allergy. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1252–1260.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1444 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
degranulation elicits symptoms that can affect the skin (urticaria,
angioedema, flushing, pruritus), GI tract (oral pruritus, angioedema, nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea), respiratory tract (nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, nasal pruritus, sneezing,
laryngeal edema, dyspnea, wheezing), and cardiovascular system
(dysrhythmias, hypotension, loss of consciousness). In non-­IgE
food allergies, lymphocytes, primarily food allergen–specific T
cells, secrete excessive amounts of various cytokines that lead to
a “delayed,” more chronic inflammatory process affecting the skin
(pruritus, erythematous rash), GI tract (failure to thrive, early
satiety, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea), and respiratory tract
(food-­induced pulmonary hemosiderosis). Mixed IgE and cellular
responses to food allergens can also lead to chronic disorders, such
as atopic dermatitis, asthma, eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE), and
eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Children who develop IgE-­mediated food allergies may be sensitized by food allergens penetrating the inflamed skin barrier, e.g.,
eczema, or GI barrier (referred to as class 1 food allergens), or by
food allergens that are partially homologous to plant pollens penetrating the respiratory tract (referred to as class 2 food allergens).
Any food may serve as a class 1 food allergen, but egg, milk, peanuts, tree nuts, seeds, fish, soy, and wheat account for 90% of food
allergies during childhood. Many of the major allergenic proteins of
these foods have been characterized. There is variable but significant cross reactivity with other proteins within an individual food
group. Exposure and sensitization to these proteins often occur
very early in life. Class 2 food allergens are typically vegetable, fruit,
or nut proteins that are partially homologous to pollen proteins.
With the development of seasonal allergic rhinitis from birch/oak,
grass, ragweed, or mugwort weed pollens, subsequent ingestion of
certain nuts, uncooked fruits, or vegetables provokes the pollen-­
food allergy syndrome (also called oral allergy syndrome). Intermittent ingestion of allergenic foods may lead to acute symptoms
such as urticaria or anaphylaxis, whereas prolonged exposure may
lead to poor control of chronic disorders such as atopic dermatitis
and asthma. Cell-­mediated sensitivity typically develops to class 1
allergens.
The galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose (alpha-­gal) syndrome is an IgE-­
mediated allergy to a carbohydrate allergen, and manifests as delayed
allergic reactions 2-­6 hours after ingestion of mammalian meats (pork,
beef, lamb, venison) and rarely gelatin or milk. Sensitization occurs
after multiple tick bites, in particular by the lone star tick (Amblyomma
americanum). This unique form of food allergy is seen more often in
teenagers and adults.

Table 192.4  Symptoms of Food-­Induced Allergic
Reactions
TARGET
ORGAN

Gastrointestinal Manifestations

GI food allergies are often the first form of allergy to affect infants
and young children and typically manifest as irritability, vomiting
or “spitting-­up,” diarrhea, and poor weight gain. Cell-­mediated
hypersensitivities without IgE involvement predominate, making
standard allergy tests such as skin-­prick tests and in vitro tests for
food-­specific IgE antibodies of little diagnostic value. The non–
IgE-­
mediated GI food-­
allergic disorders food protein–induced
enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES), food protein–induced allergic
proctocolitis (FPIAP), and eosinophilic GI disorders are discussed
in Chapter 192.1.
Pollen-­food allergy syndrome (oral allergy syndrome) is an
IgE-­mediated hypersensitivity to certain uncooked or unprocessed
plant-­based foods that occurs in many older children who have
pollen-­induced allergic rhinitis. Symptoms are usually confined to

DELAYED
SYMPTOMS

Cutaneous

Erythema
Pruritus
Urticaria
Morbilliform eruption
Angioedema

Erythema
Flushing
Pruritus
Morbilliform eruption
Angioedema
Eczematous rash

Ocular

Pruritus
Conjunctival erythema
Tearing
Periorbital edema

Pruritus
Conjunctival erythema
Tearing
Periorbital edema

Upper
respiratory

Nasal congestion
Pruritus
Rhinorrhea
Sneezing
Laryngeal edema
Hoarseness
Dry staccato cough

Lower
respiratory

Cough
Chest tightness
Dyspnea
Wheezing
Intercostal retractions
Accessory muscle use

Gastrointestinal
(oral)

Angioedema of the lips,
tongue, or palate
Oral pruritus
Tongue swelling

Gastrointestinal
(lower)

Nausea
Colicky abdominal pain
Reflux
Vomiting
Diarrhea

Cardiovascular

Tachycardia (occasionally
bradycardia in
anaphylaxis)
Hypotension
Dizziness
Fainting
Loss of consciousness

Other

Uterine contractions
Sense of “impending
doom”

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

From a clinical and diagnostic standpoint, it is most useful to
subdivide food hypersensitivity disorders according to the predominant target organ (Table 192.4) and immune mechanism (see
Table 192.1).

IMMEDIATE
SYMPTOMS

Cough
Dyspnea
Wheezing

Nausea
Abdominal pain
Reflux
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Hematochezia
Irritability and food
refusal with weight
loss (young children)

From Boyce JA, Assa’ad A, Burks AW, et al. Guideline for the diagnosis and
management of food allergy in the United States: report of the NIAID-­sponsored
expert panel. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010;126(6):S1–S58. Table IV, p. S19.

the oropharynx and consist of the rapid onset of oral pruritus; tingling and angioedema of the lips, tongue, palate, and throat; and
occasionally a sensation of pruritus in the ears and tightness in
the throat. Symptoms are generally short-­lived and are caused by
local mast cell activation following contact with fresh raw fruit and
vegetable proteins that cross react with birch tree pollen (including
but not limited to apple, carrot, potato, celery, hazelnuts, peanuts,
kiwi, cherry, pear), grass pollen (potato, tomato, watermelon, kiwi),

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 192 u Food Allergy and Adverse Reactions to Foods 1445
mugwort weed pollen (celery, fennel, mustard, peach), and ragweed
pollen (banana, melons such as watermelon and cantaloupe).
Acute GI allergy generally manifests as acute abdominal pain, vomiting, or diarrhea that accompanies IgE-­mediated allergic symptoms in
other target organs.

Skin Manifestations

Cutaneous food allergies are also common in infants and young
children.
Atopic dermatitis is a form of eczema that generally begins in early
infancy and is characterized by pruritus, a chronic relapsing course,
and association with asthma and allergic rhinitis (see Chapter 186).
Although not often apparent from history, at least 30% of children with
moderate to severe atopic dermatitis have IgE-­mediated food allergies.
The younger the child and the more severe the eczema, the more likely
food allergy is playing a pathogenic role in the disorder. Atopic dermatitis is a risk factor for the development of food allergy rather than a
result of food allergy.
Acute urticaria and angioedema are among the most common
symptoms of food allergic reactions (see Chapter 189). The onset
of symptoms may be very rapid, within minutes after ingestion of
the responsible allergen. Symptoms result from activation of IgE-­
bearing mast cells by food allergens that are absorbed and circulated
rapidly throughout the body. Foods most commonly implicated in
children include egg, milk, peanuts, and tree nuts, although reactions to various seeds (sesame, sunflower, poppy) and fruits (kiwi)
are becoming more common. Chronic urticaria and angioedema
are very rarely caused by food allergies. Contact urticaria may
occur in the perioral region of infants and young children, especially in those with eczema, when otherwise tolerated food causes
small, self-­resolving hives on direct skin contact while eating. In
the absence of any other symptoms, food exclusion is not generally
needed and the rash could be avoided by wiping the face during
feeding or using a barrier ointment (such as petroleum jelly) in the
perioral area before feeding.
Perioral dermatitis is a contact dermatitis often caused by substances in toothpaste, gums, lipstick, or medications. Perioral flushing
is often noted in infants fed citrus fruits and may be caused by benzoic
acid in the food. It may also occur in nursing infants. In both situations
the effect is benign. Flushing may also be caused by auriculotemporal nerve (Frey) syndrome (familial, forceps delivery), which resolves
spontaneously.

Respiratory Manifestations

Respiratory food allergies are uncommon as isolated symptoms.
Although many parents believe nasal congestion in infants to be
caused by milk allergy, studies show this not to be the case. Food-­
induced rhinoconjunctivitis symptoms typically accompany allergic symptoms in other target organs, such as skin, and consist of
typical allergic rhinitis symptoms (periocular pruritus and tearing,
nasal congestion and pruritus, sneezing, rhinorrhea). Wheezing
occurs in approximately 25% of IgE-­mediated food allergic reactions, but only 10% of asthmatic patients have food-­induced respiratory symptoms.

Anaphylaxis

Anaphylaxis (see Chapter 190) is defined as a serious, multisystem allergic reaction that is rapid in onset and potentially fatal.
Food allergic reactions are the most common cause of anaphylaxis
seen in U.S. hospital emergency departments. Fatal food-­induced
anaphylaxis is rare, with death affecting 0.03-­0.3 per million per
year. In addition to the rapid onset of cutaneous, respiratory, and
GI symptoms, patients with anaphylaxis may demonstrate cardiovascular symptoms, including hypotension, vascular collapse, and
cardiac dysrhythmias, which are presumably caused by massive

mast cell–mediator release. Food-­dependent exercise-­induced
anaphylaxis is a special form of acute IgE-­mediated food allergy in
which moderate intensity exercise performed within a few hours of
ingestion of a particular food, most commonly wheat or shellfish,
results in anaphylaxis but when ingested without exercise, there is
no allergic reaction.

DIAGNOSIS

A thorough medical history is necessary to determine whether a
patient’s symptomatology represents an adverse food reaction (see
Table 192.2), whether it is an intolerance or food allergic reaction,
and, if the latter, whether it is likely to be an IgE-­mediated or a
cell-­mediated response (Fig. 192.1). An understanding of the basic
pathophysiology and clinical presentations of different adverse
food reactions is essential and if allergy is suspected, referral to
an allergist-­immunologist is recommended. The following facts
should be established: (1) the food suspected of provoking the reaction and the quantity ingested, (2) the interval between ingestion
and the development of symptoms, because most reactions occur
within minutes to 2 hours of ingestion, (3) the types of symptoms
elicited by the ingestion, which may suggest the pathophysiology
of the adverse reaction, (4) whether ingesting the suspected food
produced similar symptoms on other occasions because reproducibility is expected, (5) whether other inciting factors, such as exercise, are necessary, and (6) time interval since last reaction to the
food because evaluation for potential resolution of the allergy may
be warranted.
Skin-­prick tests and in vitro laboratory tests are useful for demonstrating IgE sensitization, defined as presence of food-­specific IgE
antibodies. Sensitization alone is not diagnostic of a food allergy.
In general, increasingly higher serum food-­specific IgE levels or
increasingly large skin-­test wheal size (especially >8 mm diameter)
indicate a higher chance of clinical allergy. A negative serum food-­
specific IgE test or skin test result virtually excludes an IgE-­mediated
form of food allergy. In limited studies, serum food-­specific IgE levels ≥15 kUA/L for milk (≥5 kUA/L for children ≤1 year), ≥7 kUA/L
for egg (≥2 kUA/L for children <2 years), and ≥14 kUA/L for peanut
are associated with a >95% likelihood of clinical reactivity to these
foods in children with suspected allergy. Evaluation of IgE-­binding
to specific digestion-­resistant allergens that trigger reactions or
labile proteins unlikely to cause significant reactions in a food,
termed molecular or component-­resolved diagnostic (CRD) testing, can provide additional clinically relevant information. Identification of sensitization to digestion-­resistant proteins (components)
in the foods correlates with a greater chance of systemic allergic
reactions. Examples of tests for digestion-­resistant proteins include
Ara h 1, 2, 3, and 6 for peanut; Jug r 1 and Jug r 3 for walnut; Ana
o 3 for cashew; Ber e 1 for Brazil nut; and Cor a 9 and Cor a 14 for
hazelnut. Ara h 8 in peanut is a labile, birch pollen–related protein
generally not associated with significant allergic reactions, and isolated sensitization to this component is typically associated with no
or only mild oral reactions.
Importantly, most children with positive serum food-­specific IgE
or skin test responses do not react when the food is ingested. It is
therefore crucial to avoid indiscriminate testing (i.e., sending panels of food tests). In the absence of a clear history of reactivity to
a food and evidence of food-­specific IgE antibodies, definitive
studies must be performed before recommendations are made for
avoidance or the use of highly restrictive diets that may be nutritionally deficient, logistically impractical, disruptive to the family,
expensive, and/or a potential source of future feeding disorders.
IgE-­mediated food allergic reactions are generally very food specific, so the use of broad exclusionary diets, such as avoidance of all
legumes, cereal grains, or animal products, is not warranted (Table
192.5). When the earlier diagnostic modalities are not definitive,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1446 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
History, physical

Consistent with
cell-mediated
food allergy

Consistent with
intolerance, or
other non-immune
disorders

Confirm alternative
diagnosis
May require
additional tests
(e.g., breath
hydrogen, stool
culture, dietary
elimination and
rechallenge)

Moderate/severe
atopic dermatitis,
eosinophilic
gastroenteropathies
(biopsy-proven)

Consider:
confirmatory
diagnostic tests
(endoscopy,
serology for
coeliac, etc.).
Consider IgE
testing to verify
pathophysiology.

IgE antibody screening
to suspected foods to
establish potential
triggers for elimination,
otherwise devise
elimination based
upon epidemiological
variables

Trial
elimination
diet

Trial
elimination
diet

Resolution?

Resolution?

Consistent with
IgE-dependent
disorders

Test for IgE
antibody reactive
to suspect foods
Positive

Negative

Convincing
history of
anaphylaxis
to isolated
ingestion
and/or
diagnostic
test value

Food tested
is likely to be
tolerated,
but if history
suspicious,
consider
retesting and
supervised
oral food
challenge

Yes
Yes

Yes

No
Reconsider
diagnosis,
foods involved

Oral food
challenges

No

No
Reconsider
diagnosis,
foods involved

Consider oral
food challenges
if unclear cause

Oral food challenges
(deferred for foods with
diagnostic values)

Positive

Negative

Positive

Negative

Avoid
food(s)

Add food
back

Avoid
food(s)

Add food
back

Positive

Avoid
food(s)

Negative

Add food
back

Periodic reassessment based on natural history of allergy in the particular
disorder, the food(s) involved, and age of patient.

Fig. 192.1 Algorithm for diagnosis of food allergy. (From Sicherer SH. Food allergy. Lancet. 2002;360:701–710.)

Table 192.5

Clinical Implications of Cross-­Reactive Proteins in IgE-­Mediated Allergy

FOOD FAMILY

RISK OF ALLERGY TO ≥1 MEMBER
(%; APPROXIMATE)

Legumes

5–50

FEATURE(S)
If allergic to peanut, 5-20% likelihood of allergy to other legumes
(lupine, green bean, green pea, soy)
If allergic to chickpea (garbanzo bean), >50% likelihood of allergy to
lentil and/or pea.

Tree nuts (e.g., almond, cashew,
hazelnut, walnut, Brazil)

15–33

Reactions are often severe

Fish

50

Reactions can be severe

Shellfish (crustaceans)

75 (other crustaceans)
50 (mollusks)

Reactions can be severe

Grains

20

Wheat shows cross-reactivity with barley and rye

Mammalian milks

90

Cow’s milk is highly cross reactive to goat’s or sheep’s milk (92%) but
not with mare’s milk (4%)

Rosaceae (pitted fruits)

55

Risk of reactions to >3 related foods is very low (<10%); symptoms are
usually mild (pollen food allergy syndrome)

Modified from Sicherer SH. Food allergy. Lancet. 2002;360:701–710.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 192 u Food Allergy and Adverse Reactions to Foods 1447
which is a common scenario, oral food challenges (OFCs), observed
incremental feedings of a food performed under physician supervision, are useful in ruling out or confirming the presence or resolution of a food allergy. Allergists experienced in dealing with food
allergic reactions and able to treat anaphylaxis should perform food
challenges.
There are no laboratory studies to help identify foods that are
already in the diet but may be responsible for non–IgE and cell-­
mediated food reactions. Consequently, elimination diets followed
by OFCs are the only way to establish the diagnosis. This approach
may be recommended for atopic dermatitis, eosinophilic GI diseases, and some forms of contact dermatitis. Before a food challenge is initiated, the suspected food should be eliminated from the
diet for 10-­14 days for IgE-­mediated food allergy and up to 8 weeks
for some cell-­mediated disorders, such as EoE (see Chapter 192.1).
Some children with cell-­mediated reactions to cow’s milk do not
tolerate hydrolysate formulas and must receive amino acid–derived
formulas. If symptoms remain unchanged despite appropriate elimination diets, it is unlikely that food allergy is responsible for the
child’s disorder.

TREATMENT

Appropriate identification and elimination of foods responsible for
food hypersensitivity reactions are the most established and validated management strategies for food allergies. Complete elimination of common foods (milk, egg, soy, wheat, rice, chicken, fish,
peanut, nuts) is very difficult because of their widespread use in
a variety of processed foods. The lay organizations Food Allergy
Research and Education (FARE; www.foodallergy.org) and the
Asthma & Allergy Foundation of America (Kids with Food Allergies Division; www.kidswithfoodallergies.org/recipes-­diet.aspx)
provide excellent information to help parents deal with both the
practical and emotional issues surrounding these diets. Egg allergy
is not a contraindication for vaccination with measles, mumps,
rubella, or influenza vaccines, but remains a concern for the yellow
fever vaccine where referral to an allergist is recommended.
Children at risk of food-­induced anaphylaxis should be given
self-­injectable epinephrine and a written emergency plan in case of
accidental ingestion (see Chapter 190). Because many food allergies
resolve, children should be reevaluated periodically by an allergist
to determine whether they have lost their clinical reactivity. A number of clinical trials are evaluating the efficacy of oral, sublingual,
and epicutaneous (patch) immunotherapy for the treatment of IgE-­
mediated food allergies. Immunotherapy is not typically curative
but aims to provide temporary “desensitization,” or an increase in
the threshold of a food that can be consumed without triggering an
allergic reaction. Success depends on continuous treatment exposure. An FDA-­approved peanut oral immunotherapy (OIT) agent
is commercially available for use in children. Combining OIT with
anti-­IgE treatment (omalizumab) or other biologic agents is under
study and may improve safety or efficacy compared to OIT alone.
Furthermore, extensively heated milk or egg in baked products are
tolerated by the majority of milk and egg–allergic children. Regular
ingestion of baked products with milk and egg may accelerate resolution of milk and egg allergy.

PREVENTION

It was once thought that avoidance of allergenic foods and delayed
introduction to the diet would prevent allergy, but the opposite is
probably true; delayed introduction of these foods may increase the
risk of allergy, especially in children with atopic dermatitis. A trial
of early introduction of dietary peanut randomized 640 infants age
4-­11 months with severe eczema, egg allergy, or both to consume
or avoid peanut until the age 60 months. The early introduction of
peanut dramatically decreased the development of peanut allergy
among children at high risk for this allergy. A theory behind this
approach is that early oral introduction of peanut induces oral tolerance that precedes the potential sensitization to peanut that can

occur with environmental exposure to peanut via the inflamed,
disrupted skin barrier seen in infants with eczema. Infants with
severe eczema or egg allergy in the first 4-­6 months of life might
benefit from evaluation by an allergist or physician trained in management of allergic diseases to diagnose any food allergy and assist
in promptly implementing appropriate early peanut introduction.
For this high-­risk group, the clinician can perform an observed
peanut challenge for those with evidence of a positive peanut skin
test response or serum peanut-­specific IgE >0.35 kUA/L to determine whether they are clinically reactive before initiating at-­home
introduction of infant-­safe forms of peanut. Additional details for
the early introduction of peanut are available from the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID).* Analyses of
several early introduction studies have shown that early egg introduction may be associated with reduced egg allergy, while review of
data for other allergenic foods is not conclusive. There is however
no evidence that delaying the introduction of typically allergenic
foods prevents food allergy or other allergic diseases.
There is no compelling evidence to support the practice of
restricting the maternal diet during pregnancy or while breastfeeding, or for delaying introduction of various allergenic foods to
infants from atopic families. Exclusive breastfeeding for the first
4-­6 months of life is strongly encouraged but has not been shown
to reduce the development of food allergies. Potentially allergenic
foods (eggs, milk, wheat, soy, peanut/tree nut products, fish) should
be introduced and maintained in the diet in infant-­appropriate
forms after this period of exclusive breastfeeding and may prevent
the development of allergies later in life. Recent meta-­analyses have
not supported the use of hydrolyzed infant formulas in cases where
breastfeeding cannot be continued for 4-­6 months or after weaning
to prevent eczema or food allergies in high-­risk families. Modulation of the microbiome with probiotics has been an area of interest, where it may affect oral tolerance induction; however, specific
interventions have not been proven effective. Probiotic supplements in the third trimester and to the newborn infant may reduce
the incidence and severity of eczema, but have not demonstrated
effects on food allergy prevention. Other potential influences on
the infant/child microbiome are currently being studied, including
mode of delivery (vaginal vs C-­section), diet diversity, vitamin D
supplementation, and household pet exposure. With the recognition that infantile eczema increases the risk of allergic sensitization and food allergy, attention has also focused on early skin care
and aggressive treatment of infantile eczema as potential preventive measures. Because some skin preparations contain peanut or
nut oils, which may sensitize young infants, especially those with
cutaneous inflammation, such preparations should be avoided.
Table 192.6 summarizes approaches to food allergy prevention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.
Table 192.6

Approaches to Prevention of Food Allergy

RECOMMENDED
Infant-­safe forms of peanut, egg introduced around age 6 mo, not
before 4 mo
Other allergens may be introduced around this time as well
Allergy testing before introduction not usually needed (see text)
Infants with severe eczema or egg allergy may benefit from
evaluation for early peanut introduction at 4-­6 mo
Diverse infant diet
UNPROVEN/NOT RECOMMENDED
Hydrolyzed formulas
Maternal allergen avoidance during pregnancy or lactation
Purposeful delay in introducing allergens to infants
* https://www.niaid.nih.gov/diseases-­conditions/guidelines-­clinicians-­and-­patients-­food-­
allergy..

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1448 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

192.1 Non-­IgE Gastrointestinal Food Allergy
Disorders
Anna H. Nowak-­Wegrzyn, Hugh A. Sampson,
Amanda L. Cox, and Scott H. Sicherer

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

GI food allergies are often the first form of allergy to affect infants
and young children, and typically manifest as chronic irritability,
vomiting or “spitting-­up,” diarrhea, and poor weight gain. Cell-­
mediated hypersensitivities without IgE involvement (non-­
IgE)
predominate, making standard allergy tests such as skin-­prick tests
and in vitro tests for food-­specific IgE antibodies of little diagnostic
value (Table 192.7).
FPIES is a non-­IgE, cell-­mediated food allergy that can have dramatic
GI symptoms and in its severe form is considered an allergic emergency.
FPIES can present as acute or chronic phenotypes (Fig. 192.2).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Prevalence: The prevalence of FPIES ranges between 0.34% and
0.7% of infants in Israel and Spain; in a population-­based survey,
physician-­diagnosed FPIES was reported in 0.51% (95% confidence
interval [CI]; 0.420.62) of U.S. children.
Food triggers: Globally, cow’s milk is the most common trigger of
FPIES, although in countries with higher rates of breastfeeding
rather than formula feeding, complementary foods introduced
into infants’ diets early are also reported. Commonly reported
triggers include soy, oat, rice, vegetables (avocado, sweet potato),
fruits (banana), egg, fish, chicken, turkey, peanut, tree nuts, and
fish. Most infants (50–75%) react to one food; however, about
10–15% report more than three food triggers.
Pathophysiology: FPIES is characterized by a strong inflammatory response with significant elevation of CRP, neutrophils, and
platelets. There is evidence of innate immune compartment activation (monocytes, neutrophils) along with the pan-­activation
of T lymphocytes and significant elevation in levels of various
cytokines and chemokines in the peripheral blood, including IL-­
17A, IL-­22, IL-­17C, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, and a
preferential activation of nonconventional T-­cell populations,
including γδT cells.
Clinical manifestations: FPIES typically manifests in the first year of life
in an acute form as projectile, repetitive vomiting within 1-­4 hours of
food ingestion, frequently accompanied by lethargy, pallor (or dusky
appearance), and low muscle tone; in a smaller subset, vomiting is
followed by watery diarrhea in 5-­10 hours (see Fig. 192.2). Prolonged
ingestion of the causal allergen may result in abdominal distention,
bloody diarrhea, anemia, and failure to thrive, referred to as chronic
FPIES. Acute FPIES is considered to be an allergic emergency because
hypotension occurs in approximately 5–10% of patients after allergen
ingestion, which initially may be attributed to sepsis.
Diagnosis: Acute FPIES is diagnosed based on the recognition of a
constellation of symptoms, (Table 192.8; see Fig. 192.2) and allergy
tests detecting food-­specific IgE are typically negative. OFCs are
rarely required for the confirmation of the initial diagnosis, but are
utilized for evaluating resolution of FPIES. Chronic FPIES is diagnosed based on the chronic GI symptoms that resolve within days to
weeks following elimination of the allergen and recur acutely within
1-­2 hours following a subsequent feeding.
Differential diagnosis: The differential diagnosis includes GI infections (viral, bacterial), sepsis, necrotizing enterocolitis, metabolic
disorders that induce emesis and lethargy (hyperammonemias,
organic acidemias, congenital adrenal hyperplasia), very early onset inflammatory bowel disease and other immune enteropathies

(IPEX), gastroesophageal reflux (GER) disease, ileus, anatomical
small bowel obstruction, celiac disease, anaphylaxis, cyclic vomiting
syndrome, poisoning, pyloric stenosis, seizures, and primary immunodeficiencies.
Emergency management: Severe FPIES reactions are considered
allergic emergencies due to the risk of hypotension (in extreme
cases, hypovolemic shock), dehydration, and metabolic derangements including acidemia and methemoglobinemia (Fig. 192.3).
Acute management entails vigorous intravenous hydration. Additional therapies include intravenous or intramuscular ondansetron as an antiemetic, and a single dose of steroid (e.g., methylprednisolone) may be administered due to a strong inflammatory
response. Mild to moderate reactions can be managed with oral
rehydration and oral ondansetron. Epinephrine autoinjectors
and oral antihistamines are not prescribed for home management; however, vasopressors may be used for treatment of shock
in the medical setting.
Dietary management: Breastfeeding mothers rarely need to restrict
the foods that trigger symptoms in an infant following direct
feeding, unless the infant exhibits symptoms of acute or chronic
FPIES during breast milk feeding or has impaired growth. Hypoallergenic infant formulas (extensively hydrolyzed or amino
acid) are recommended in non-­breastfed infants to avoid cow’s
milk and soy. Timely introduction of solids is important for nutrition and for the development of oromotor skills. Following
acute FPIES reactions to a solid food, foods from an unrelated
food group can be chosen for introduction. Tolerance to one
food from a food group usually indicates a favorable likelihood
of tolerance to the related foods. Table 192.9 discusses practical
guidelines for dietary management of FPIES.
Monitoring for resolution: The natural history of infantile FPIES is
favorable, with the majority becoming tolerant by 3-­5 years of age;
persistent FPIES is rare. FPIES to fish and shellfish may start in
older children and in adults; the natural history of adult FPIES is
unknown. Reintroduction of foods that have caused FPIES is usually
done during a physician-­supervised OFC. Timing of reintroduction
varies based on the nutritional and social importance of the foods;
usually attempts are done 6-­24 months following the most recent
FPIES reaction to the offending food. FPIES induced by cow’s milk
may (∼10%) evolve into IgE-­mediated food allergy.
Comorbidities: FPIES is associated with an increased risk of IgE-­
mediated food allergy to other foods, atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, asthma, and EoE.
FPIAP presents in the first few months of life as blood-­streaked
stools in otherwise healthy infants that are breastfed and/or formula-­
fed (see Table 192.7). Blood loss is typically mild, but can occasionally
result in anemia. The most commonly implicated dietary triggers are
cow’s milk and soy proteins, followed by egg; their elimination, either
by maternal dietary restriction if breastfeeding or by use of hypoallergenic formulas, leads to symptom and gross blood resolution within
48-­72 hours in most infants. FPIAP is diagnosed clinically based on the
presence of blood in the stool; sigmoidoscopy with biopsy, confirming an eosinophilic inflammatory response, is no longer done in routine practice for diagnosis of FPIAP. Blood in the infant’s stool can be
attributed to multiple causes other than food allergy (see Table 192.7).
Therefore diagnosis based on clinical observation carries the risk of
overdiagnosis (especially when FPIAP is diagnosed based on detection
of microscopic blood in stool) and unnecessary dietary restrictions
resulting in delayed introduction of foods and an associated increased
risk of developing IgE sensitization. Therefore, considering benign,
nonspecific nature of the symptoms and favorable natural history, in
cases of mild to moderate FPIAP, many authorities recommend a trial
of the culprit food 2-­3 months following symptom resolution to determine whether the infant has “outgrown” the sensitivity.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 192 u Food Allergy and Adverse Reactions to Foods 1449
Table 192.7

Food Protein–Induced Gastrointestinal Syndromes
FPIAP

1 day to 1 year, later for fish
and shellfish

1 day to 6 months

Dependent on age
Infant to adolescent
of exposure to
antigen, cow’s milk
and soy up to 2 yr

Cow’s milk, soy

Cow’s milk, soy

Egg

Wheat, egg

40% both cow’s milk
and soy

Rare

Common

>50% exclusive
breastfeeding

Formula

Formula

ATOPIC BACKGROUND
Family history of atopy
40–70%
Personal history of atopy 30%

25%
22%

Unknown
22%

∼50% (often history of EoE)
∼50%

SYMPTOMS
Emesis

Projectile, repetitive,
severe
Severe in chronic FPIES
Occasionally severe
Acute, severe
15%
Moderate
Infection: viral, bacterial
Necrotizing enterocolitis,
GI obstruction (ileus,
pyloric stenosis, Meckel
diverticulum);
gastro­esophageal reflux
disease; very early onset
inflammatory bowel
disease, seizure disorder,
metabolic disorder, cardiac
disease, anaphylaxis

No

Intermittent

Intermittent

No
Moderate
No
No
No
Rectal fissure,
bleeding disorder,
vit K deficiency,
GI infection
e.g., Shigella,
inflammatory
bowel disease

Moderate
Rare
Moderate
No
Moderate
Celiac disease,
primary
immunodeficiency,
inflammatory
bowel disease

Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
No
Moderate
Gastroesophageal reflux disease,
recurrent vomiting due to other
causes, parasitic and fungal
infections, congenital rings, Crohn
disease, periarteritis, allergic vasculitis,
connective tissue diseases, bullous
pemphigoid, pemphigoid vegetans,
graft-­versus-­host disease, achalasia,
drug hypersensitivity, celiac disease,
vasculitis, carcinoma, hypereosinophilic
syndrome

LABORATORY FINDINGS
Anemia
Hypoalbuminemia
Methemoglobinemia

Moderate
Acute
May be present

Mild
Rare
No

Moderate
Moderate
No

Mild-­moderate
Mild-­severe
No

ALLERGY EVALUATION
Food skin-­prick test
Serum food allergen IgE
Total IgE
Peripheral blood eosinophilia

Majority negative†
Majority negative†
Normal
No

Negative
Negative
Negative
Occasional

Negative
Negative
Normal
No

Positive in ∼50%
Positive in ∼50%
Normal to elevated
Present in <50%

BIOPSY FINDINGS
Colitis
Lymph nodular hyperplasia
Eosinophils

Prominent
No
Prominent

Focal
Common
Prominent

No
No
Few

May be present
Yes
Prominent; also neutrophilic infiltrates,
papillary elongation, and basal zone
hyperplasia
Vomiting and diarrhea in hours to days

Age at onset

FOOD PROTEINS IMPLICATED
Most common
Cow’s milk, egg, oat, rice
Less common
Multiple food
hypersensitivities

Feeding at the time of
onset

Diarrhea
Bloody stools
Edema
Shock
Failure to thrive
Differential diagnosis

Food challenge
Treatment

Soy, chicken, turkey, fish,
pea, peanut, avocado,
sweet potato
>50% both cow’s milk and
soy if younger than 6 mo;
40–50% react to more
than one grain, 30% react
to more than one fish
Formula

FPE

EOSINOPHILIC
GASTROENTEROPATHIES*

FPIES

Emesis in 1-­4 hr; diarrhea in Rectal bleeding in
Vomiting, diarrhea,
5-­8 hr (in a subset)
6-­72 hr
or both in 40-­72 hr
Protein elimination, 80%
Protein elimination,
Protein elimination,
respond to casein
symptoms clear in
symptoms clear in
hydrolysate and symptoms
3 days with casein
1-­3 wk; rechallenge
clear in 3-­10 days;
hydrolysate; resume/
and biopsy in 1-­2 yr
rechallenge under
continue
supervision in 0.5-­2 yr
breastfeeding on
maternal
antigen-­restricted
diet; reintroduce at
home after 9-­12 mo
of age

Cow’s milk, wheat, egg white, soy,
peanut, seafood
Meats, corn, rice, fruits, vegetables,
legumes

Protein elimination, good response to
casein hydrolysate, excellent (>90%)
response to elemental diet;
symptoms clear in 2-­3 wk, excellent
acute response to oral steroids but with
high rate of relapse following
discontinuation; in EoE 30–50%
response to proton pump inhibitors,
70% to swallowed corticosteroids;
rechallenge by introducing food at
home and biopsy in 1-­2 yr

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

1450 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 192.7

Food Protein–Induced Gastrointestinal Syndromes—cont’d

Natural history
Reintroduction of the food

EOSINOPHILIC
GASTROENTEROPATHIES*

FPIES

FPIAP

FPE

Cow’s milk: 60% resolved
by 2 yr
Soy: 25% resolved by 2 yr
Supervised food challenge

Resolved by 9-­12 mo

Most cases resolve
in 2-­3 yr

Typically a prolonged, relapsing course

At home, gradually
advancing from
1 oz to full feedings
over 2 wk

Home, gradually
advancing

Home, gradually advancing

*Eosinophilic gastroenteropathies encompass esophagitis, gastritis, and gastroenterocolitis.
†If positive, may be a risk factor for persistent disease, referred to as “atypical” FPIES.
FPIES, Food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome; FPIAP, food protein–induced allergic proctocolitis; FPE, food protein–induced enteropathy; GI, gastrointestinal; EoE,
eosinophilic esophagitis.

For acute FPIES: At any age

Chronic FPIES: Usually in infancy

Major criterion:
Is there repetitive vomiting 1–4 hours after
ingestion of suspect food
+
absence of respiratory or cutaneous
(urticaria, pruritus, angioedema)
symptoms?

Is there intermittent and
progressive watery diarrhea and
progressive vomiting with regular
ingestion of the suspect food?*

No

No

Yes
Consider
other
causes

Yes

No

After strict avoidance of
suspect food, did symptoms
improve within several days?
Yes

Minor criteria: Are ≥3 present?
• 2nd episode after same suspect food
• Repetitive vomiting 1–4 h after other food
• Extreme lethargy
• Marked pallor
• Hypotension
With any
• Hypothermia
suspected
• Diarrhea within 24 h
reaction
• Need for ED visit
• Need for IV fluids

Has the patient ingested a
serving of the suspect food
after period of avoidance of
at least several weeks?

No

No
Consider
supervised
OFC†

Yes

Yes
Meets criteria for
Acute FPIES‡

No

Is/was ingestion followed 1–4 h
later by acute FPIES symptoms?
Yes
Meets criteria for
Chronic FPIES ‡

Fig. 192.2 Diagnostic algorithm for food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES). ED, Emergency department; IV, intravenous; OFC,

oral food challenge. *Chronic FPIES is described almost exclusively with cow’s milk or soy in young infants. †Without a confirmatory OFC or other
ingestion with emesis onset in 1-­4 hours, diagnosis of chronic FPIES is presumptive. ‡Based on Nowak-­Węgrzyn A, Chehade M, Groetch ME,
et al. International consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome: Executive summary—
Workgroup Report of the Adverse Reactions to Foods Committee, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2017;139:1111–1126. (From Sicherer SH, Nowak-­Węgrzyn A. Enterocolitis, proctocolitis, and enteropathies. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB,
et al., eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig. 33.2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 192 u Food Allergy and Adverse Reactions to Foods 1451
Table 192.8  	 FPIES Diagnostic Criteria
ACUTE FPIES*
MAJOR CRITERIA (BOTH
MUST BE MET), PLUS
• Vomiting 1-­4 hr after suspect
food ingestion
• Absence of immediate, IgE-­
mediated allergic symptoms
(hives, itching, swelling,
wheezing, cough)

CHRONIC FPIES†
SYMPTOMS AND SEVERITY
Milder (lower doses with
intermittent ingestion):

• Intermittent vomiting and/or
diarrhea
• Growth faltering
• No dehydration or metabolic
acidosis

Severe (higher doses with chronic
ingestion):
• Intermittent but progressive
vomiting and watery diarrhea
(occasionally with blood)
• Poor weight gain or failure to
thrive
• Possible dehydration and
metabolic acidosis, anemia,
hypoproteinemia, neutrophilia,
thrombocytosis

MINOR CRITERIA (≥3
OCCURRING WITH EPISODE)
• ≥2 episodes with same food
• One episode with a different
food
• Lethargy
• Pallor
• Need for ER visit
• Need for IV fluid support
• Diarrhea within 24 hr (usually
5-­10 hr)
• Hypotension
• Hypothermia
CRITERIA
• Resolution of symptoms
within days to weeks after
elimination of offending
food(s)
• Acute recurrence of
symptoms (vomiting in 1-­4
hr, diarrhea in <24 hr, usually
5-­10 hr) when the food is
reintroduced, following a
period of elimination
• Confirmatory OFC required
for conclusive diagnosis;
if OFC not performed
diagnosis remains
presumptive

*Major criterion must be met (both) plus at least three minor criteria.
†General criteria because of paucity of available data.

FPIES, Food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome; ER, emergency room; IV,
intravenous; OFC, oral food challenge.
Adapted from Nowak-­Węgrzyn A, Chehade M, Groetch ME, et al. International
consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food protein-­induced
enterocolitis syndrome: Executive summary-­Workgroup Report of the Adverse
Reactions to Foods Committee, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017;139(4):1111–1126.e4.

Food protein–induced enteropathy (FPE) often manifests in the
first several months of life as diarrhea, often with steatorrhea and poor
weight gain (see Table 192.7). Symptoms include protracted diarrhea,
vomiting in up to 65% of cases, failure to thrive, abdominal distention,
early satiety, and malabsorption. Anemia, edema, and hypoproteinemia
occur occasionally. Cow’s milk sensitivity is the most common cause
of FPE in young infants, but it has also been associated with sensitivity
to soy, egg, wheat, rice, chicken, and fish in older children. Celiac disease, the most severe form of FPE, occurs in about 1 per 100 of the U.S.
population, although it may be “silent” in many patients (see Chapter
384). The classic form is characterized by extensive loss of absorptive
villi and hyperplasia of the crypts, leading to malabsorption, chronic
diarrhea, steatorrhea, abdominal distention, flatulence, and weight loss
or failure to thrive. Oral ulcers and other extraintestinal symptoms secondary to malabsorption may occur. Genetically susceptible individuals (HLA-­DQ2 or HLA-­DQ8) demonstrate a cell-­mediated response
to tissue transglutaminase deamidated gliadin (a fraction of gluten),
which is found in wheat, rye, and barley.
EoE may present from infancy through adolescence, more frequently
in boys (see Chapter 370). EoE is a cell-­mediated disorder, which is
often associated with IgE-­mediated food allergies in infants and young
children, and manifests as chronic GER, intermittent emesis, food
refusal, abdominal pain, dysphagia, food impaction, irritability, sleep
disturbance, and failure to respond to conventional GER medications.
EoE is a clinicopathologic diagnosis. The diagnosis is confirmed when
15 eosinophils per high-­power field are seen on esophageal biopsies.
Treatment is possible with elimination of dietary allergens but management with medications is typically included (see Chapter 370).
Eosinophilic gastritis and gastroenteritis are additional eosinophilic
GI disorders that are far less common and can occur at any age. Eosinophilic gastritis often presents with nausea and abdominal pain or
bloating, while eosinophilic enteritis may also present with nausea,
abdominal pain or bloating with additional diarrhea, anemia, or protein loss. Eosinophilic colitis may present with loose stool or blood
in stool associated with abdominal cramping/pain. More than 50% of
patients with these disorders are atopic; however, food-­induced IgE-­
mediated reactions have been implicated only in a minority of patients.
Generalized edema secondary to hypoalbuminemia may occur in
some infants with marked protein-­losing enteropathy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1452 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

Outside medical
facility

3. Avoid suspect foods;
address nutrition and development

1. Manage acute reactions*

2. Prepare for reactions

Current reaction with ≥3 episodes of
emesis; OR moderate/severe
lethargy; OR history of severe reaction

1. Educate parent on reaction
management
2. Provide emergency letter
explaining FPIES and basics of
emergency care at medical facility**

Infant (or
restricted diet)?

Nutrition
consultation

Attempt oral
rehydration
at home

Cow’s milk
(or soy)
FPIES?

Provide plan
for dietary
advancement

Mild:
1. Attempt oral rehydration
2. Age 6 mo, consider IM
ondansetron*
3. Monitor for resolution
4–6 h from reaction onset

Offer alternatives:
• Encourage breastfeeding
• eHF, some require AAF
• And/or supervised OFC
to soy (or cow milk)

4. Offer interval food
challenges

>12–18 months from last
reaction,*** AND/OR
patient/family interested in
adding food to diet?
Yes

Absent

Present

Seek
immediate
medical attention

Consider testing for
sIgE sensitization

At medical facility
• >3 episodes of emesis
• OR any lethargy

Absent

Present

Evidence of sIgE
sensitization?
Yes

Modify based on individual circumstances*
Any of the below also present?
• Severe lethargy
• Hypotonia
• Ashen/cyanotic appearance

Absent

Moderate:
1. Age 6 mo, administer
ondansetron IM*
2. Consider placing IV access,
and administering 20 mL/kg
NS bolus**

Start first
(low risk)
Lamb, fortified
quinoa or millet
cereal

Broccoli,
Squash, carrot,
cauliflower,
white potato
parsnip, pumpkin

Sweet potato

Vegetables

Berries, plum,
watermelon,
peach

Apple, pear,
orange

Banana

Fruits

Green bean,
peanut, legumes
other than green
pea

Green pea, soy

Legumes

Other
• Monitor vital signs
• Transfer to ED/ICU for persistent or severe hypotension, extreme
lethargy, shock, or respiratory distress
• Monitor for resolution 4–6 h from onset
• Discharge if back to baseline, tolerating oral fluids, and >4–6 h
have elapsed since reaction onset
*0.15 mg/kg/dose; maximum, 16 mg
AAF, amino acid–based formula
ED, emergency department
FPIES, food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome
ICU, intensive care unit
IM, intramuscular
IV, intravenous

Wait for
guidance
(high risk)

High iron
foods

Present

Severe:
1. Place IV access, administer
NS bolus 20 mL/kg, repeat
as needed
2. Age >6 mo, administer
ondansetron IV
3. Consider methylprednisolone
IV 1 mg/kg
4. Monitor and correct acidemia,
electrolyte abnormalities,
methemoglobinemia

Introduce next
(moderate risk)

Tree nut and
seed butters

Beef, fortified
Fortified infant
grits/corn, wheat, rice and oat
or barley cereal
cereal

No

May predict more
protracted course;
risk of sIgE mediated
symptoms

Consider supervised OFC,
informed by and modified
based on:
- Understanding of typical
age of resolution
- Past reaction severity
- Family preference
- Prognostic value of sIgE
sensitization if present
- Risks of OFC procedure in
atypical FPIES with +sIgE:
Provide incremental dosing
to account for the
possibility of immediate
reactions

Cow’s milk,
poultry, egg, fish

Foods should be offered in age-appropriate forms and textures.
4–6 months (AAP) or at 6 months (WHO): Begin with thin purees,
choosing iron-rich foods first, and gradually advancing to thicker
8 months: Bite-and-dissolve textures and soft cooked foods
12 months: Modified (chopped/softened) foods from family table

mo, months
NS, normal saline
OFC, oral food challenge
sIgE, specific immunoglobulin E
WHO, World Health Organization

** Template may be downloaded at https://www.fpies.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/IFPIES-ER-Letter-2018.pdf
*** Interval can be modified at the discretion of the treating physician.

Fig. 192.3 Treatment algorithm for food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES). *Modified from Nowak-­Wegrzyn A, Chehade M, Gro-

etch ME, et al. International consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome: Executive
summary—Workgroup Report of the Adverse Reactions to Foods Committee, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2017;139:1111–1126. **Template may be downloaded at https://www.fpies.org/wp-­content/uploads/2018/08/IFPIES-­ER-­Letter-­2018.pdf.
***Interval can be modified at the discretion of the treating physician. (From Sicherer SH, Nowak-­Węgrzyn A. Enterocolitis, proctocolitis, and enteropathies. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig. 33.3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 193 u Adverse and Allergic Reactions to Drugs
Table 192.9

1453

Empiric Guidelines for Selecting Weaning Foods in Infants with FPIES

AGES AND STAGESa,b
4-­6 MO (AS PER AAP, CON)
If developmentally appropriate and safe
and nutritious foods are available
• Begin with smooth, thin, purees and
progress to thicker purees
• Choose foods that are high in iron
• Add vegetables and fruits
6 MO (AS PER WHO)
Complementary feeding should begin
no later than 6 mo of age
• In the breastfed infant, high-­iron
foods or supplemental iron (1 mg/kg/
day) is suggested by 6 mo of age
• Continue to expand variety of fruits,
vegetables, legumes, grains, meats
and other foods as tolerated
8 MO OF AGE OR WHEN
DEVELOPMENTALLY APPROPRIATE
• Offer soft-­cooked and bite-­and-­
dissolve textures from around 8 mo of
age or as tolerated by infant
12 MO OF AGE OR WHEN
DEVELOPMENTALLY APPROPRIATE
• Offer modified tolerated foods from
the family table, chopped meats, soft
cooked vegetables, grains, and fruits

LOWER RISK FOODS*

MODERATE RISK FOODS*

HIGHER RISK FOODS†

VEGETABLES
Broccoli, cauliflower, parsnip,
turnip, pumpkin, kale

Squash, carrot, white potato,
green bean (legume)

Blueberries, strawberries, plum,
watermelon, peach

Apple, pear, orange

Sweet potato, green pea
(legume)

FRUITS
Avocado, banana

HIGH-­IRON FOODS
Lamb, beef, pork, fortified
quinoa cereal, millet,
amaranth

Fortified grits and corn cereal,
wheat (whole wheat and
fortified), fortified barley cereal

Fortified, infant rice and oat
cereals.

OTHER
Tree nuts and seed butters*
(sesame, sunflower, etc.)
*Thinned with water or infant
puree for appropriate infant
texture and to prevent choking

Peanut, other legumes (other
than green pea)

Milk, soy, poultry, egg, fish,
shellfish

*Risk assessment is based on the clinical experience and the published reports of FPIES triggers.
†This is not an exhaustive list and feeding should not be limited to this list of lower and moderate risk foods. Many other foods are appropriate for infant feeding. One may consider

delaying the introduction of higher risk foods until there is a nutritional need for the food, the infant already has a diverse diet, or other lower and moderate risk foods are tolerated.
aExclusive breastfeeding until 4-­6 mo of age and continuing breastfeeding through the first year of life or longer as long as mutually desired by both mother and child.
bIf an infant tolerates a variety of early foods, subsequent introduction may be more liberal. Additionally, tolerance to one food in a food group (green pea) is considered as a

favorable prognostic indicator for tolerance of other foods from the same group (legumes).
AAP, CON, American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Nutrition; WHO, World Health Organization.
Adapted from Nowak-­Wegrzyn A, Chehade M, Groetch ME, et al. International consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food protein–induced enterocolitis
syndrome: Executive Summary—Workgroup Report of the Adverse Reactions to Foods Committee, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2017;139(4):1111–1126.e4

Chapter 193

Adverse and Allergic
Reactions to Drugs
Roland Solensky and Scott H. Sicherer
Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) can be divided into predictable
(type A) and unpredictable (type B) reactions. Predictable drug
reactions, including drug toxicity, drug interactions, and adverse
effects, are dose dependent, are related to known pharmacologic
actions of the drug, and occur in patients without any unique susceptibility. Unpredictable drug reactions are generally dose independent, often are not related to the pharmacologic actions of the
drug, and occur in patients who are genetically or otherwise predisposed. These include idiosyncratic reactions, allergic (hypersensitivity) reactions, and pseudoallergic reactions. Allergic reactions
are immune-­mediated and require prior sensitization. They manifest as signs and symptoms characteristic of an underlying allergic
mechanism (Table 193.1). Anaphylaxis is due to production of drug-­
specific IgE antibodies, and delayed cutaneous reactions are due to
drug-­specific T cells. Pseudoallergic reactions resemble allergic

reactions but are caused by non–IgE-­mediated release of mediators from mast cells and basophils, such as vancomycin-­induced
flushing. Drug-­
independent cross-­
reactive antigens can induce
sensitization manifesting as drug allergy. Patients with cetuximab-­
induced anaphylaxis have IgE antibodies in pretreatment samples
specific for galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose. This antigen is present on the
antigen-­binding portion of the cetuximab heavy chain and is similar
to structures in the ABO blood group. Sensitization to galactose-­α-­
1,3-­galactose may occur from tick bites caused by cross-­reactive tick
salivary antigens.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of ADRs in the general as well as pediatric populations
remains unknown, although data from hospitalized patients show it to
be 6.7%, with a 0.32% incidence of fatal ADRs. Databases such as the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) MedWatch program (https:
//www.fda.gov/safety/medwatch-­fda-­safety-­information-­and-­adverse-­
event-­reporting-­program) likely suffer from underreporting. Cutaneous reactions are the most common form of ADRs, with ampicillin,
amoxicillin, penicillin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/
SMX) being the most frequently implicated drugs (Tables 193.2 and
193.3). Although the majority of ADRs do not appear to be allergic in
nature, 6–10% can be attributed to an allergic or immunologic mechanism. Importantly, given the high probability of recurrence of allergic
reactions, these reactions should be preventable, and information technology–based interventions may be especially useful to reduce risk of
re-­exposure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1454 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 193.1  Classification of Drug Allergies
TYPE OF IMMUNE
RESPONSE

TYPE

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS

TYPICAL CHRONOLOGY OF THE
REACTION

1

IgE

Mast cell and basophil
degranulation

Anaphylactic shock
Angioedema
Urticaria
Bronchospasm

Within 1-­6 hr after the last intake of the drug

2

IgG and complement

IgG and complement-­
dependent cytotoxicity

Cytopenia

5-­15 days after the start of the eliciting drug

3

IgM or IgG and
complement or FcR

Deposition of immune
complexes

Serum sickness
Urticaria
Vasculitis

7-­8 days for serum sickness/urticaria
7-­21 days after the start of the eliciting drug
for vasculitis

4a

Th1 (IFN-­γ)

Monocytic inflammation

Eczema

1-­21 days after the start of the eliciting drug

4b

Th2 (IL-­4 and IL-­5)

Eosinophilic inflammation

Maculopapular exanthem,
DRESS

1 to several days after the start of the
eliciting drug for MPE
2-­6 wk after the start of the eliciting drug for
DRESS

4c

Cytotoxic T cells
(perforin, granzyme B,
FASL)

Keratinocyte death
mediated by CD4 or
CD8

Maculopapular exanthem,
SJS/TEN, pustular
exanthem

1-­2 days after the start of the eliciting drug
for fixed drug eruption
4-­28 days after the start of the eliciting drug
for SJS/TEN

4d

T cells (IL-­8/CXCL8)

Neutrophilic inflammation

Acute generalized
exanthematous pustulosis

Typically 1-­2 days after the start of the
eliciting drug (but could be longer)

CXCL8, C-­X-­C motif chemokine ligand 8; DRESS, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; FASL, FAS ligand; FcR, Fc receptor; IFN-­γ , interferon gamma; IgE,
immunoglobulin E; IL, interleukin; MPE, malignant pleural effusion; SJS , Stevens-­Johnson syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis; Th1, Th2, T-­helper cell type 1 and type 2.
From Demoly P, Adkinson NF, Brockow K, et al. International Consensus on drug allergy. Allergy. 2014;69(4):420–437.

Table 193.2  Heterogeneity of Drug-­Induced Allergic Reactions
ORGAN-­SPECIFIC REACTIONS

CLINICAL FEATURES

EXAMPLES OF CAUSATIVE AGENTS
Allopurinol, aminopenicillins, cephalosporins,
antiepileptic agents, antibacterial
sulfonamides
β-­Lactam antibiotics
Platinum agents

Cutaneous lupus

Diffuse fine macules and papules evolve over days after
drug initiation
Delayed-­type hypersensitivity
Onset within minutes of drug initiation
Potential for anaphylaxis
Usually IgE mediated
Hyperpigmented plaques
Recur at same skin or mucosal site
Acneiform
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP)
Tense blisters
Flaccid blisters
Fever, erosive stomatitis, ocular involvement, purpuric macules
on face and trunk with <10% epidermal detachment
Similar features as SJS but >30% epidermal detachment
Mortality as high as 50%
Erythematous/scaly plaques in photodistribution

Hematologic
Hepatic

Hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, granulocytopenia
Hepatitis, cholestatic jaundice

Pulmonary
Renal

Pneumonitis, fibrosis
Interstitial nephritis, membranous glomerulonephritis

CUTANEOUS
Exanthems
Urticaria, angioedema
Fixed drug eruption
Pustules
Bullous
SJS
TEN

MULTIORGAN REACTIONS
Anaphylaxis
DRESS
Serum sickness
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis

Urticaria/angioedema, bronchospasm, gastrointestinal
symptoms, hypotension
IgE-­and non–IgE-­dependent reactions
Cutaneous eruption, fever, eosinophilia, hepatic dysfunction,
lymphadenopathy
Urticaria, arthralgias, fever
Arthralgias, myalgias, fever, malaise
Cutaneous or visceral vasculitis

Tetracycline, sulfonamides, NSAIDs,
carbamazepine
Acneiform: corticosteroids, sirolimus
AGEP: antibiotics, calcium-­channel blockers
Furosemide, vancomycin
Captopril, penicillamine
Antibacterial sulfonamides, anticonvulsants,
oxicam NSAIDs, allopurinol
Same as SJS
Hydrochlorothiazide, calcium channel blockers,
ACEIs
Penicillins, quinine, sulfonamides
Para-­aminosalicylic acid, sulfonamides,
phenothiazines
Nitrofurantoin, bleomycin, methotrexate
Penicillin, sulfonamides, gold, penicillamine,
allopurinol
β-­Lactam antibiotics, platins
Anticonvulsants, sulfonamides, minocycline,
allopurinol
Heterologous antibodies, infliximab
Hydralazine, procainamide, isoniazid
Hydralazine, penicillamine, propylthiouracil

ACEI, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitor; DRESS, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; SJS, Stevens-­Johnson
syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Adapted from Khan DA, Solensky R. Drug allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010;125:S126–S137. Table 1, p. S127.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 193 u Adverse and Allergic Reactions to Drugs
Table 193.3  Delayed Hypersensitivity Drug Rashes by
Category
MACULOPAPULAR EXANTHEMS: ANY DRUG CAN PRODUCE A
RASH SEVERAL DAYS INTO THE COURSE
Allopurinol
Antibiotics: penicillins, ampicillin, sulfonamides
Antiepileptics: phenytoin, phenobarbital
Antihypertensives: thiazide diuretics, calcium channel blockers
Radiocontrast material
Gold salts
Hypoglycemic drugs
Meprobamate
Phenothiazines
Quinine
DRUG REACTION WITH EOSINOPHILIA AND SYSTEMIC
SYMPTOMS (DRESS)
Anticonvulsants: phenytoin, phenobarbital, valproate, lamotrigine,
carbamazepine
Antibiotics: sulfonamides, minocycline, dapsone, ampicillin,
ethambutol, isoniazid, linezolid, metronidazole, rifampin,
streptomycin, vancomycin
Allopurinol
NSAIDs: celecoxib, ibuprofen, diclofenac
Phenothiazines
STEVENS-­JOHNSON SYNDROME/TOXIC EPIDERMAL
NECROLYSIS
Sulfonamides, phenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, allopurinol,
amikacin, phenothiazines, acetazolamide, gold, nitrofurantoin,
pentazocine, tetracycline, quinidine
ACUTE GENERALIZED EXANTHEMATOUS PUSTULOSIS
Antibiotics: penicillins, macrolides, cephalosporins, clindamycin,
imipenem, fluoroquinolones, isoniazid, vancomycin, minocycline,
doxycycline, linezolid, gentamicin, sulfonamides
Antimalarials: chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine
Antifungals: terbinafine, nystatin, amphotericin B, fluconazole,
itraconazole
Anticonvulsants: carbamazepine
Calcium-­channel blockers
Furosemide, thiazides
Systemic corticosteroids
Protease inhibitors
COLLAGEN VASCULAR OR LUPUS-­LIKE REACTIONS
Procainamide, hydralazine, phenytoin, penicillamine, trimethadione,
methyldopa, carbamazepine, griseofulvin, nalidixic acid, oral
contraceptives, propranolol
ERYTHEMA NODOSUM
Oral contraceptives, penicillins, sulfonamides, diuretics, gold, clonidine,
propranolol, opiates
FIXED DRUG REACTIONS
Phenolphthalein, barbiturates, gold, sulfonamides, penicillins,
tetracycline, quinolones, carbamazepine, NSAIDs
Note: See Chapter 686 and Table 686.5.
NSAID, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug.
Adapted from Duvic M. Urticaria, drug hypersensitivity rashes, nodules and tumors, and
atrophic diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 25th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 440.3.

PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Immunologically mediated ADRs have been classified according
to the Gell and Coombs classification: immediate hypersensitivity
reactions (type I), cytotoxic antibody reactions (type II), immune
complex reactions (type III), and delayed-­type hypersensitivity
reactions (type IV) (see Table 193.1). Immediate hypersensitivity
reactions occur when a drug or drug metabolite interacts with preformed drug-­specific IgE antibodies that are bound to the surfaces
of tissue mast cells and/or circulating basophils. The cross linking of adjacent receptor-­bound IgE by antigen causes the release

1455

of preformed and newly synthesized mediators, such as histamine
and leukotrienes, that contribute to the clinical development of
urticaria, bronchospasm, or anaphylaxis. Cytotoxic antibody reactions involve IgG or IgM antibodies that recognize drug antigen
on the cell membrane. In the presence of serum complement, the
antibody-­coated cell is either cleared by the monocyte-­macrophage
system or is destroyed. Examples are drug-­induced hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia. Immune complex reactions are caused
by soluble complexes of drug or metabolite in slight antigen excess
with IgG or IgM antibodies. The immune complex is deposited in
blood vessel walls and causes injury by activating the complement
cascade, as seen in serum sickness. Clinical manifestations include
fever, urticaria, rash, lymphadenopathy, and arthralgias. Symptoms
typically appear 1-­3 weeks into the course of the offending drug and
persist for days to weeks after the drug is discontinued. Delayed-­
type hypersensitivity reactions are mediated by cellular immune
mechanisms. They are subdivided into four categories involving
activation and recruitment of monocytes (type IVa), eosinophils
(type IVb), CD4+ or CD8+ T cells (type IVc), and neutrophils (type
IVd). Examples include drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) and Stevens-­Johnson syndrome (SJS) (see Chapter
686.2). Not all allergic drug reactions can be easily classified using
the Gell and Coombs system.
Non–IgE-­mediated immediate-­type reactions mimic Gell and
Coombs type I reactions, with indistinguishable symptoms and
signs. The most common drugs associated with these reactions
are vancomycin, fluoroquinolones, and opiates, which cause nonspecific mast cell degranulation via interaction with the surface
receptor MrgprX2. Because these reactions do not require prior
sensitization (unlike IgE-­mediated reactions), they may occur with
first exposure.
The pharmacologic interaction with immune receptors concept (p-­i
concept) is another type of drug hypersensitivity classification. In this
scheme, a drug binds noncovalently to a T-­cell receptor, which leads to
an immune response through interaction with a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) receptor. In this scenario, no sensitization (i.e.,
previous exposure) is required because there is direct stimulation of
memory and effector T cells analogous to the concept of superantigens.
Although the various mechanistic schemes of drug-­induced allergic
reactions are useful, not all drug allergic reactions can be categorized
using these various classification systems.

Stevens-­Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal
Necrolysis

Blistering mucocutaneous disorders induced by drugs encompass a
spectrum of reactions, including SJS and toxic epidermal necrolysis
(TEN; see Chapters 686.2, 695.2 and 695.3). Although their pathophysiology remains incompletely understood, HLA associations
including HLA-­
B*1502 with carbamazepine-­
induced TEN have
been recognized, and the pathogenic roles of drug-­specific cytotoxic T cells and granulysin have been reported. SJS is defined as
the epidermal detachment of <10%, TEN is >30% detachment,
and overlap syndrome is 10–30% detachment. The features of SJS
include confluent purpuric macules on face and trunk and severe,
explosive mucosal erosions, usually at more than one mucosal surface, accompanied by fever and constitutional symptoms. Ocular
involvement may be particularly severe, and the liver, kidneys, and
lungs may also be involved. TEN, which appears to be related to
keratinocyte apoptosis, manifests as widespread areas of confluent erythema followed by epidermal necrosis and detachment with
severe mucosal involvement. Skin biopsy differentiates subepidermal cleavage characteristic of TEN from intraepidermal cleavage
characteristic of the scalded-­skin syndrome induced by staphylococcal toxins. The risks of infection and mortality remain high, but
improved outcomes have been demonstrated by immediate withdrawal of the implicated drug, early transfer to a burn unit, and
aggressive supportive care. Additional management is reviewed in
Chapter 695.3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1456 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic
Symptoms

DRESS (i.e., drug-­induced hypersensitivity syndrome) is a potentially
life-­threatening reaction that has been described primarily with anticonvulsants, although many other medications have been implicated
(see Tables 193.2 and 193.3; see Chapter 686.2). It is likely less common
in children compared with adults. DRESS is characterized by fever,
maculopapular rash, facial edema, eosinophilia, generalized lymphadenopathy, and potentially life-­threatening damage of one or more
organs, usually hepatic or renal. Onset is delayed, usually 2-­8 weeks
after initiation of the medication. It has been associated with reactivation of human herpesvirus 6. Treatment is withdrawal of the medication, systemic steroids, and supportive care, but symptoms can worsen
or persist for weeks to months after the drug has been discontinued.

Drug Metabolism and Adverse Reactions

Most drugs and their metabolites are not immunologically detectable until they have become covalently attached to a macromolecule.
This multivalent hapten-­protein complex forms a new immunogenic
epitope that can elicit T-­and B-­lymphocyte responses. Penicillins are
highly reactive with proteins and can directly haptenate protein carriers, without prior metabolism, possibly accounting for the higher frequency of immune-­mediated hypersensitivity reactions with this class
of antibiotics.
Incomplete or delayed metabolism of some drugs can give rise to
toxic metabolites. Hydroxylamine, a reactive metabolite produced by
cytochrome P450 oxidative metabolism, may mediate adverse reactions to sulfonamides. Patients who are slow acetylators appear to be at
increased risk. In addition, cutaneous reactions in patients with AIDS
treated with TMP/SMX, rifampin, and other drugs may be caused by
glutathione deficiency resulting in toxic metabolites. Serum sickness–
like reactions due to cefaclor may result from an inherited propensity
for hepatic biotransformation of drugs into toxic or immunogenic
metabolites.

Risk Factors for Hypersensitivity Reactions

Risk factors for ADRs include prior exposure, previous reactions, age
(20-­49 years), route of administration (parenteral or topical), dose
(high), and dosing schedule (intermittent), and genetic predisposition. Atopy does not appear to predispose patients to allergic reactions
to low molecular weight compounds, but asthmatics who experience
allergic reactions are likely at increased risk of more serious reactions,
analogous to food-­allergic patients. Atopic patients also appear to be
at greater risk for pseudoallergic reactions induced by radiocontrast
media (RCM). Pharmacogenomics has an important role in identifying individuals at risk for certain drug reactions.

DIAGNOSIS

Skin testing is the most rapid and sensitive method of demonstrating the presence of IgE antibodies to a specific allergen. It can be
performed with high molecular weight compounds, such as foreign
antisera, hormones, enzymes, and toxoids. Reliable skin testing can
also be performed with penicillin, but not with most other antibiotics. Most immunologically mediated ADRs are caused by metabolites rather than by parent compounds, and the metabolites for most
drugs other than penicillin have not been defined. In addition, many
metabolites are unstable or must combine with larger proteins to be
useful for diagnosis. Testing with nonstandardized reagents requires
caution in interpretation of both positive and negative results, because
some drugs can induce nonspecific irritant reactions. Whereas a wheal
and flare reaction is suggestive of drug-­specific IgE antibodies, a negative skin test result does not exclude the presence of such antibodies
because the relevant immunogen may not have been used as the testing
reagent.
In vitro tests (radioallergosorbent test or enzyme-­linked immunoassay) for IgE-­mediated penicillin allergy have lower sensitivity
and comparable specificity compared with skin testing. The positive
and negative predictive values (NPVs) of skin testing for antibiotics
other than penicillin are not well established. Nevertheless, positive

immediate hypersensitivity skin test responses using nonirritant concentrations of nonpenicillin antibiotics may be interpreted as a presumptive risk of an immediate reaction to such agents.
Results of direct and indirect Coombs tests are often positive in
drug-­induced hemolytic anemia. Assays for specific IgG and IgM have
been shown to correlate with a drug reaction in immune cytopenia,
but in most other reactions, such assays are not diagnostic. In general,
many more patients express humoral or T-­cell immune responses to
drug determinants than express clinical disease. Serum tryptase is
elevated with systemic mast cell degranulation and can be seen with
drug-­associated reactions such as anaphylaxis; however, not all patients
with well-­defined anaphylaxis show increased serum tryptase levels.
Patch testing is the most reliable technique for diagnosis of contact
dermatitis caused by topically applied drugs. Graded drug challenge
is an incremental (usually two-­step) administration of a drug under
medical supervision and is used in patients who are deemed unlikely
to be allergic to the drug. Unlike desensitization, there is no attempt to
modify the underlying immune response. Patients who pass a graded
challenge are proven to not be allergic to the drug.

TREATMENT

Drug desensitization alters the immune response to a medication and
allows allergic patients to receive it safely. However, the induced tolerance is temporary and if treatment is interrupted, hypersensitivity returns, and patients are again at risk of reacting to the drug. Drug
desensitization has classically been used for IgE-­mediated allergy, such
as penicillin, but the procedure has been successfully applied to immediate non–IgE-­mediated reactions, such as taxanes. Rapid desensitization
is indicated in patients who are either proven or are strongly suspected
to have an immediate-­type drug allergy and for whom an alternate drug
is not available or appropriate. The procedure warrants close monitoring
and preparedness to treat possible anaphylaxis. Depending on the clinical stability of the patient and the severity of the previous reaction (or
symptoms during a previous desensitization), it may be performed in
outpatient or inpatient settings. Premedications are used for non–IgE-­
mediated hypersensitivity (such as taxanes and biologic agents), but
not for IgE-­mediated allergy (such as antibiotics). Desensitization can
be performed via parenteral or oral routes. The starting dose is typically
1/10,000 of the full dose, and the dose is doubled every 15 minutes until
the full dose is reached. Desensitization has a very high success rate and
breakthrough allergic reactions occur about 20–30% of the time, but
they are usually mild and do not necessitate aborting the procedure.

Penicillin Allergy

Penicillin allergy is self-­reported by approximately 10% of patients, but
following evaluation, about 95% of these individuals are shown to not
be allergic and able to tolerate penicillins. This incongruity is due to
the reaction being the result of the underlying infection (or interaction between the infectious agent and the antibiotic), mislabeling a predictable reaction as allergic, and the waning of penicillin-­specific IgE.
Being labeled as penicillin allergic is not benign, because patients are
more likely to be treated with less effective, more toxic, or more expensive antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones, vancomycin, later generation
cephalosporins, and clindamycin. This prescribing practice compromises optimal medical care and increases costs. Penicillin “allergy”
has been associated with increased antimicrobial resistance (such as
vancomycin-­resistant Enterococcus and methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus), increased Clostridium difficile colitis, increased surgical
site infections, prolonged length of hospital stays, increased intensive
care admissions, increased hospital readmissions, and increased mortality. Removal of the penicillin allergy label leads to improved antibiotic selection with decreased use of broad-­spectrum antibiotics and
decreased healthcare utilization (fewer outpatient visits, fewer emergency department [ED] visits, and fewer hospital days). Therefore a
proactive effort should be made to de-­label penicillin allergy whenever possible. Ideally, this is done electively such as when patients are
well and not in immediate need of antibiotic treatment. De-­labeling of
penicillin allergy is endorsed by the CDC, allergy/immunology, and
infectious disease societies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 193 u Adverse and Allergic Reactions to Drugs
The penicillin β-­lactam ring opens to form various reactive intermediates, which then interact with self-­proteins to stimulate immune
reactions. Penicillin skin test reagents are based on the immunochemistry, and they are broadly grouped into major and minor allergenic
determinants. (Table 193.4) The positive predictive value of penicillin
skin testing is ∼80% for immediate type reactions. Alternatively, 95% or
more of penicillin skin test–negative patients tolerate these antibiotics.
The major determinant (penicilloyl-­polylysine [PPL]) should always
be used for skin testing, but there is controversy regarding the relative
importance of various minor determinants (penicillin G, penicilloate,
penilloate and ampicillin/amoxicillin) and what effect this has on the
NPV. Although PPL is commercially available in the United States as
Pre-­Pen, the minor determinants are not. Penicillin G and IV ampicillin can be diluted and used off-­label for skin testing, but penicilloate
and penilloate require synthesis; therefore they are more difficult to
obtain.
Patients who are positive on penicillin skin testing should avoid
penicillins but consider being reevaluated at a later time, because
penicillin allergy wanes and resolves in most (but not all) individuals. If administration of penicillin is deemed necessary, desensitization
can be performed. Skin test–negative patients should ideally undergo
an amoxicillin challenge, to unequivocally prove lack of allergy. This
alleviates the fear and reluctance on the part of the patient, patient’s
family, or future prescribing clinicians to treat with penicillins. Additionally, effort should be made to remove the penicillin allergy label in
all electronic medical systems (hospitals, clinics, private offices, pharmacies, etc.).
The traditional approach to de-­label penicillin allergy has been
to first perform penicillin skin testing in all patients with suggestive
penicillin allergy histories and then challenge with amoxicillin (if skin
testing is negative). However, in recent years several publications have
challenged this standard, particularly in the pediatric population, by
instead directly challenging “low-­risk” patients with amoxicillin (without preceding skin testing). Patients deemed appropriate for direct

Table 193.4  Penicillin Skin Test Reagents
REAGENT*

CONCENTRATION USED FOR
SKIN TESTING

Penicilloyl-­polylysine (PPL)

6 × 10−5 M

Penicillin G

10,000 units/mL

Penicilloate

0.01 M

Penilloate

0.01 M

Ampicillin/amoxicillin

3-­25 mg/mL

*PPL is the major allergenic determinant; all the other reagents are minor determinants.

1457

amoxicillin challenge are those with maculopapular and urticaria
eruptions, without other respiratory, cardiovascular, oropharyngeal
symptoms, angioedema, and vesicular or exfoliative eruptions. Using
this strategy, the rate of observed reactions ranged from 5% to 10%
and were no more severe than the historical reactions. For comparison,
up to 7% of children (without a previous history of allergy) treated
with aminopenicillins develop cutaneous eruptions. The cause of these
rashes is presumed to be the underlying infection (typically viral) or
an interaction between the infectious agent and the antibiotic. The
best characterized example is patients with Epstein-­Barr infection,
almost 100% of whom develop a nonpruritic morbilliform rash when
treated with ampicillin. Pediatric patients who undergo direct amoxicillin challenge should be observed in a clinical setting for at least 1
hour, with preparedness to treat potential allergic reactions including
anaphylaxis.
Resensitization is the redevelopment of penicillin allergy after initial
resolution. Resensitization after oral treatment with penicillins is rare
in both pediatric and adult patients, including after repeated courses,
and comparable to the rate of sensitization. Therefore repeat penicillin skin testing is not indicated in patients with a history of penicillin
allergy who have tolerated one or more courses of oral penicillin. Data
on resensitization after parenteral treatment with penicillins is more
limited, but routine repeat penicillin skin testing is likely not necessary in patients with a history of penicillin allergy who have tolerated
one or more courses of parenteral penicillin. Consideration may be
given to retesting individuals with recent or particularly severe previous reactions.

β-­Lactam Cross Reactivity

Penicillins, cephalosporins, carbapenems, and aztreonam share a common β-­lactam ring and hence the potential for allergic cross reactivity. Additionally, some penicillins and cephalosporins share identical
R group side chains, and these are another source of potential allergic
cross reactivity (Table 193.5). Combining published reports of patients
proven to be allergic via positive penicillin skin testing and then challenged with cephalosporins, only about 2% experienced allergic reactions. This is similar to the incident rate of new drug reactions to
structurally dissimilar medications in patients with prior drug allergies
(because patients with a history of drug allergy are more likely to react
to structurally unrelated drugs). If cephalosporin skin testing (using
nonirritating concentrations) is performed in penicillin skin test–positive subjects before challenging with cephalosporins, the reaction rate
decreased to 0%.
In general, the preferred approach to patients with a history of penicillin allergy is to electively de-­label the allergy because this greatly
simplifies all future β-­
lactam administration recommendations by
allowing treatment with any β-­lactam antibiotics. Given that less than
5% of patients with an unverified penicillin allergy are truly allergic and
2% of those who are allergic cross react with cephalosporins, the chance

Table 193.5  Groups of β-­Lactam Antibiotics That Share Identical Side Chains*
IDENTICAL R1-­GROUP SIDE CHAINS
Amoxicillin
Cefadroxil
Cefprozil
Cefatrizine

Ampicillin
Cefaclor
Cephalexin
Cephradine
Cephaloglycin
Loracarbef

IDENTICAL R2-­GROUP SIDE CHAINS
Cephalexin
Cefotaxime
Cefadroxil
Cephalothin
Cephradine
Cephaloglycin
Cephapirin

Ceftriaxone
Cefotaxime
Cefpodoxime
Cefditoren
Ceftizoxime
Cefmenoxime

Cefoxitin
Cephaloridine
Cephalothin

Cefamandole
Cefonicid

Ceftazidime
Aztreonam

Cefuroxime
Cefoxitin

Cefotetan
Cefamandole
Cefmetazole
Cefpiramide

Cefaclor
Loracarbef

Ceftibuten
Ceftizoxime

*Each column represents a group with identical side chains.
From Solensky R, Khan DA. Drug allergy: an updated practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2010;105:273e1–273e78. Tables 16, 17, p. 273e49.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1458 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
of a cephalosporin reaction is extremely low at approximately 0.1% (5%
× 2% = 0.1%). Therefore most experts and guidelines recommend that for
patients with a history of nonanaphylactic penicillin allergy, cephalosporins may be administered without prior testing or additional precautions.
In patients with a history of penicillin anaphylaxis (or those positive
on penicillin skin testing), cephalosporin graded challenge is preferred
because the chance of reaction is still very low.
There are rare patients who have selective IgE-­mediated allergy
to aminopenicillins but tolerate penicillin VK and penicillin G. The
allergic determinant is an R-­group side chain, rather than the core
β-­lactam portion of the molecule. In these patients, the positive
challenge rate to cephalosporins sharing identical side group chains
(such as ampicillin/cephalexin or amoxicillin/cefadroxil; see Table
193.5) is higher, or about 16%. Therefore, in such patients, administration of cephalosporins with identical side group chains should
be avoided, given via two-­step graded challenge or desensitization,
whereas treatment with other cephalosporins does not require a
more cautious approach.
The data on allergic cross reactivity between penicillins and carbapenems mirror the discussion on penicillin/cephalosporin cross
reactivity. Patients with unconfirmed penicillin allergy treated with
carbapenems showed a higher reaction rate compared to patients
without a history of penicillin allergy. In studies of penicillin skin
test–positive patients challenged with carbapenems, none of 680
reacted; four carbapenem skin test–positive patients were not challenged. Therefore it is recommended that patients with a history of
penicillin allergy may receive carbapenems in usual fashion or via
two-­step graded challenge.
Aztreonam is the only monobactam and the only β-­lactam antibiotic
that contains a monocyclic ring structure, in contrast to the bicyclic
core of other β-­lactams. In vitro, skin testing and challenge studies
have demonstrated no evidence of allergic cross reactivity between
penicillins and aztreonam, including no positive aztreonam challenges
in penicillin skin test–positive patients. Therefore patients with a history of penicillin allergy may receive aztreonam in the usual fashion. The only β-­lactam that shows cross reactivity with aztreonam is
ceftazidime, because these two antibiotics share an identical R-­group
side chain. Hence, patients allergic to aztreonam or ceftazidime should
avoid the other antibiotic.

Sulfonamides

The most common type of reaction to sulfonamide antibiotics is a
maculopapular eruption that occurs about a week into treatment. The
incidence of immediate reactions, such as urticaria/angioedema or
anaphylaxis, is rare and less frequent than with β-­lactam antibiotics.
On the other hand, sulfonamides are the most common antibiotic to
cause severe cutaneous delayed reactions (SCARs), such as SJS, TEN,
and DRESS. Hypersensitivity reactions to sulfonamides occur with
greater frequency in HIV-­infected individuals. For patients with history of typical delayed maculopapular rashes, both graded one- or
two-­step challenge and desensitization protocols have been shown to
be effective in HIV-­positive and non–HIV-­positive patients. Because
the success rate of graded challenge and desensitization appears comparable, it is not clear that the various desensitization protocols truly
modify the immune response. These regimens are not intended for
individuals with a history of SJS or TEN. There is no evidence of allergic cross reactivity between sulfonamide antibiotics and nonantibiotic
sulfonamides (such as celecoxib, thiazides, furosemide, acetazolamide,
sumatriptan, and others).

Macrolides

Macrolides cause allergic reactions less frequently than penicillins,
cephalosporins, or sulfonamides. The most common reactions are
delayed onset maculopapular eruptions and urticaria, and they occur
in about 1% of patients. IgE-­
mediated reactions are uncommon,
limited to case series, and anaphylactic reactions are extremely rare.
When pediatric patients with convincing histories of allergic reactions
undergo formal evaluation, less than 10% are confirmed to be allergic. Skin testing with a nonirritating concentration of macrolides may

provide useful information in those patients with immediate reaction
histories. However, in patients with an anticipated clinical need for
macrolides, graded challenge without preceding testing is used most
commonly, given the high likelihood of success and rare nature of
anaphylaxis.

Antiretroviral Agents

There are several categories of antiretroviral drugs to treat HIV (reverse
transcriptase inhibitors, protease inhibitors, entry inhibitors, and integrase inhibitors) and all have been implicated in hypersensitivity reactions, which usually present as delayed onset and range from mild
self-­limited maculopapular eruptions to life-­threatening SJS/TEN or
DRESS. Hypersensitivity to abacavir is a well-­recognized, multiorgan,
potentially life-­threatening reaction that occurs in HIV-­infected children and adults. Rechallenge is strictly contraindicated, because subsequent reactions may be more rapid and severe than the initial reaction.
Importantly, these reactions have been associated with the presence of
the MHC class I allele HLA-­B*5701, and HLA testing has shown very
high sensitivity and NPV. Therefore genetic screening for HLA-­B*5701
is part of guideline-­based therapy when abacavir is initially prescribed.

Chemotherapeutic Agents

Hypersensitivity reactions to chemotherapeutic drugs have been
described, most notably to platinum agents and taxanes. The clinical pattern of immediate reactivity to platinum agents, along with
skin test findings, is consistent with an IgE-­mediated mechanism.
Hence reactions occur after patients tolerated several previous treatments. In contrast, immediate reactions to paclitaxel and docetaxel
usually occur with first exposure and the risk lessens with repeated
exposure. They are believed to be due to emulsifying agents such
as Cremophor-­EL, which result in complement activation and generation of anaphylatoxins. Rapid desensitization (most typically a
12-­step protocol) is effective for both IgE and non–IgE-­mediated
type reactions.

Biologics

An increasing number of biologic agents have become available for the
treatment of autoimmune, allergic, cardiovascular, infectious, and neoplastic diseases. Their use may be associated with a variety of ADRs,
including hypersensitivity reactions. Given the occurrence of anaphylaxis, including cases with delayed onset and protracted progression in
spontaneous postmarketing adverse event reports, the FDA issued a
black box warning regarding risk of anaphylaxis and need for patient
monitoring with use of omalizumab (see Chapter 185).

Vaccines

Anaphylactic reactions to vaccines are very rare, occurring at a rate
of approximately one event per million administrations, and they
may be due to various vaccine components such as antibiotics, preservatives, stabilizers, virus-­inactivating compounds, residual animal proteins, and latex. Measles mumps rubella (MMR) vaccine has
been shown to be safe in egg-­allergic patients (although rare reactions to gelatin or neomycin can occur). Egg-­allergic patients are not
at higher risk of reacting to both inactivated and live influenza vaccine than those without egg allergy. Skin testing with the influenza
vaccine is no longer recommended for egg-­allergic patients but may
be helpful if allergy to the vaccine itself is suspected. The American
Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (AAAAI)/American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (ACAAI) Joint
Task Force on Practice Parameters recommend that “Influenza vaccines should be administered to individuals with egg allergy of any
severity, just as they would be to individuals without egg allergy.”
The incidence of anaphylactic reactions following mRNA COVID­19 vaccines may be higher (2.5-­4.7 events per million). However,
following evaluation by allergists/immunologists, most patients
reporting immediate-­type reactions to the first vaccine dose are
able to tolerate the second dose, arguing against an IgE-­mediated
mechanism. Therefore the true rate of anaphylaxis is likely lower.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 193 u Adverse and Allergic Reactions to Drugs
It is uncertain whether patients with underlying atopic conditions
or other allergies are at increased risk of reacting to these vaccines. Although polyethylene glycol (PEG) (a component of mRNA
COVID vaccines) has been proposed to be a possible culprit, there
is limited evidence for the relationship.

1459

in glucose control is attained. Insulin skin testing and desensitization
are required if insulin treatment is subsequently interrupted for >24-­48
hours.

Radiocontrast Media

In North America, perioperative anaphylaxis is most frequently due
to antibiotics, whereas in European series, neuromuscular blockers
are the most common culprit. Other potential causes include induction agents, opioids, colloids and plasma expanders, chlorhexidine,
sugammadex, and latex. The mechanism responsible may be IgE-­
mediated or non–IgE-­mediated. Previous surgeries are a risk factor
for IgE-­mediated reactions because they require prior sensitization.
Patients who have experienced perioperative anaphylaxis should
be screened for possible mast cell disease. Skin testing with agents
known to cause IgE-­mediated reactions is useful and can help prevent recurrent reactions during subsequent surgeries. Sometimes,
despite a thorough evaluation, an underlying cause for perioperative anaphylaxis is not detected.

Immediate type allergic reactions to RCM may occur after intravascular administration, and during myelograms or retrograde pyelograms.
The pathogenic mechanism has classically been thought to be non–
IgE-­mediated mast cell activation (anaphylactoid). However, there is
growing evidence that some immediate reactions are IgE mediated.
This may be because use of older high-­osmolar RCM agents has been
replaced by low-­and iso-­osmolar agents. One approach to patients
with previous RCM reactions who require another diagnostic study
is to choose an alternate agent and premedicate with prednisone and
diphenhydramine. Another approach is to perform skin testing with
the culprit and alternate RCM agents, with the results guiding the
choice of treatment. The latter method appears to be more useful when
the historical reactions are severe (i.e., anaphylactic). There is no evidence that seafood or iodine allergy is associated with or predisposes
to RCM reactions.

Local Anesthetics

Aspirin and Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs

Perioperative Agents

ADRs associated with local anesthetic agents are primarily nonallergic and include vasovagal, psychomotor, sympathetic stimulation, and
toxic reactions. IgE-­mediated reactions are exceedingly rare. Patients
with suspected local anesthetic allergy should be referred to an allergist/immunologist for skin testing followed by a graded challenge. This
procedure invariably finds a local anesthetic the patient is able to tolerate, in the rare individuals who are allergic to one of these agents.
Although local anesthetics can be broadly grouped into esters (group
I) and amides (group II), allergic cross reactivity within these groups is
only relevant for delayed Gell and Coombs type IV reactions, not type
I reactions.

Insulin

Insulin use has been associated with a spectrum of ADRs, including local and systemic IgE-­mediated reactions, hemolytic anemia,
serum sickness reactions, and delayed-­type hypersensitivity. In general, human insulin is less allergenic than porcine insulin, which is
less allergenic than bovine insulin, but for individual patients, porcine or bovine insulin may be the least allergenic. Patients treated
with nonhuman insulin have had systemic reactions to recombinant human insulin even on the first exposure. More than 50% of
patients who receive insulin develop antibodies against the insulin
preparation, although there may not be any clinical manifestations.
Local cutaneous reactions usually do not require treatment and
resolve with continued insulin administration, possibly because of
IgG-­blocking antibodies. More severe local reactions can be treated
with antihistamines or by splitting the insulin dose between separate administration sites. Local reactions to the protamine component of neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin may be avoided by
switching to lente insulin. Immediate-­type reactions to insulin,
including urticaria and anaphylactic shock, are unusual and almost
always occur after reinstitution of insulin therapy in sensitized
patients.
Insulin therapy should not be interrupted if a systemic reaction to
insulin occurs, and continued insulin therapy is essential. Skin testing may identify a less antigenic insulin preparation. The dose following a systemic reaction is usually reduced to one-­third, and successive
doses are increased in 2-­to 5-­unit increments until the dose resulting

Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and other NSAIDs have been associated
with several types of allergic reactions. Reactions that are caused by
modifying effects on arachidonic acid metabolism, namely respiratory
reactions (in patients with underlying aspirin-­exacerbated respiratory
disease [AERD]) and urticarial reactions (in patients with underlying
chronic idiopathic urticaria), show cross reactivity with other NSAIDs,
as one would expect. Patients with AERD and aspirin-­sensitive patients
with chronic idiopathic urticaria tolerate drugs that selectively block
the cyclooxygenase-­2 (COX-­2) enzyme, such as celecoxib. On the
other hand, acute urticarial or anaphylactic reactions in otherwise normal individuals are medication specific. There are no skin or in vitro
tests to identify patients allergic to ASA or other NSAIDs.
Except for respiratory reactions in asthmatics, there are no data on
the incidences of reactions to ASA/NSAIDs in children; however, clinical experience suggests that it is much lower than in adults. Furthermore, only 20% of children reporting NSAID allergy are confirmed to
be allergic when challenged. The incidence of AERD in children with
asthma has been investigated in six prospective studies, the rate varied
from 0% to 28%, and there was a trend for more respiratory reactions
in adolescents compared with younger children. Overall, the data indicate that ASA sensitivity in asthmatic children under the age of 10 is
rare and increases thereafter.
Patients with AERD whose nasal disease or asthma is poorly controlled with use of medications are candidates for ASA desensitization.
This procedure, unlike antibiotic or chemotherapy desensitization,
involves administration of the drug to cautiously induce a respiratory reaction (rather than prevent it), following which patients enter
a refractory phase that can be maintained with continued administration of ASA. Long-­term studies of adults maintained on chronic ASA
desensitization demonstrated improved clinical outcomes for both
upper and lower respiratory diseases. ASA desensitization is rarely
performed in children because severe, poorly controlled AERD is
encountered very infrequently in the pediatric population, and aspirin
is not routinely recommended for children because of the risk of Reyes
syndrome.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Rheumatic Diseases of
Childhood (Connective
Tissue Disease, Collagen
Vascular Diseases)
Chapter 194

Evaluation of Suspected
Rheumatic Disease
C. Egla Rabinovich
Rheumatic diseases are defined by the constellation of results of the
physical examination, autoimmune markers and other serologic
tests, tissue pathology, and imaging. Defined diagnostic criteria exist
for most rheumatic diseases. Recognition of clinical patterns remains
essential for diagnosis because there is no single diagnostic test, and
tests may be positive in the absence of disease. Further complicating
diagnosis, children sometimes present with partial criteria that evolve
over time or with features of more than one rheumatic disease (overlap syndromes). The primary mimics of rheumatic diseases are infection and malignancy but also include metabolic, orthopedic, immune
deficiencies, autoinflammatory diseases, and chronic pain conditions.
Exclusion of possible mimicking disorders is essential before initiation
of treatment for a presumptive diagnosis, especially corticosteroids.
After careful evaluation has excluded nonrheumatic causes, referral to
a pediatric rheumatologist for confirmation of the diagnosis and treatment should be considered.

SYMPTOMS SUGGESTIVE OF RHEUMATIC DISEASE

There are no classic symptoms of rheumatic diseases, but common
symptoms include joint pain, fever, fatigue, and rash. Presenting signs
and symptoms help direct the evaluation and limit unnecessary testing.
Once a differential diagnosis is developed based on history and physical findings, a directed assessment assists in determining the diagnosis.
Arthralgias are common in childhood and are a frequent reason
for referral to pediatric rheumatologists. Arthralgias without physical
findings for arthritis suggest infection, malignancy, orthopedic conditions, benign syndromes, or pain syndromes such as fibromyalgia
(Table 194.1). Although rheumatic diseases may manifest as arthralgias, arthritis is a stronger predictor of the presence of rheumatic
disease and a reason for referral to a pediatric rheumatologist. The
timing of joint pain along with associated symptoms, including poor
sleep and interference with normal activities, provides important clues.
Poor sleep, debilitating generalized joint pain that worsens with activity, school absences, and normal physical and laboratory findings in
an adolescent suggest an amplified pain syndrome (see Chapter 212).
If arthralgia is accompanied by a history of dry skin, hair loss, fatigue,
growth disturbance, or cold intolerance, testing for thyroid disease
is merited. Nighttime awakenings because of severe pain along with
decreased platelet or white blood cell (WBC) count or, alternatively, a
very high WBC count, may lead to the diagnosis of malignancy, especially marrow-­occupying lesions such as acute lymphocytic leukemia

PART

XIV

and neuroblastoma. Pain with physical activity suggests a mechanical problem such as an overuse syndrome or orthopedic condition.
An adolescent presenting with knee pain aggravated by walking up
stairs and on patellar distraction likely has patellofemoral syndrome.
Children age 3-­10 years with a history of episodic pain occurring
at night, especially after increased daytime physical activity, that is
relieved by rubbing but who have no limp or complaints in the morning likely have growing pains. There is often a positive family history
for growing pains, which may aid in this diagnosis. Intermittent pain
in a child, especially a girl 3-­10 years old, that is increased with activity
and is associated with hyperextensible joints on examination likely has
benign hypermobility syndrome. Many febrile illnesses cause arthralgias that improve when the temperature normalizes, and arthralgias
are part of the diagnostic criteria for acute rheumatic fever (ARF; see
Chapter 229.1).
Arthralgia may also be a presenting symptom of pediatric systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and chronic childhood arthritis such as
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). Interestingly, many children with
JIA do not complain of joint symptoms at presentation. Other symptoms more suggestive of arthritis include morning stiffness, joint swelling, limited range of motion, pain with joint motion, gait disturbance,
fever, and fatigue or stiffness after physical inactivity (gelling phenomenon). A diagnosis of JIA cannot be made without the finding of arthritis on physical examination (see Chapters 196 and 197). No laboratory
test is diagnostic of JIA.
Fatigue is a nonspecific symptom that may point to the presence of a
rheumatic disease but is also common in nonrheumatic causes, such as
viral infections, pain syndromes, depression, and malignancy. Fatigue,
rather than the specific complaints of muscle weakness, is a common
presenting complaint in juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM). It is also
frequently present in SLE, vasculitis, and chronic childhood arthritis.
Overwhelming fatigue with inability to attend school is more suggestive of chronic fatigue syndrome, pediatric fibromyalgia, or other
amplified pain syndrome.

SIGNS SUGGESTIVE OF RHEUMATIC DISEASE

A complete physical examination is essential in any child with suspected rheumatic disease, because subtle physical findings may further
refine the differential diagnosis. In addition, many rheumatic diseases
have multisystem effects, and a stepped assessment should focus on
delineating the extent of organ system involvement (e.g., skin, joints,
muscle, hepatic, renal, cardiopulmonary).
Presence of a photosensitive malar rash that spares the nasolabial
folds is suggestive of SLE (Table 194.2; see Fig. 199.1A). Diffuse facial rash
is more indicative of JDM. A hyperkeratotic rash on the face or around
the ears may represent discoid lupus (see Fig. 199.1D). A palpable purpuric rash on the extensor surfaces of the lower extremities points to IgA
vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein purpura) (see Fig. 210.2A). Less localized purpuric rashes and petechiae are present in systemic vasculitis or
blood dyscrasias, including coagulopathies. Nonblanching erythematous
papules on the palms are seen in vasculitis, SLE, and endocarditis. Gottron papules (see Fig. 200.3) and heliotrope rashes (see Fig. 200.2) along
with erythematous rashes on the elbows and knees are pathognomonic

1460
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 194 u Evaluation of Suspected Rheumatic Disease

1461

Table 194.1  Symptoms Suggestive of Rheumatic Disease
SYMPTOM

RHEUMATIC DISEASE(S)

POSSIBLE NONRHEUMATIC DISEASES CAUSING SIMILAR SYMPTOMS

Fevers

Systemic JIA, SLE, vasculitis, acute rheumatic
fever, sarcoidosis, MCTD

Malignancies, infections and postinfectious syndromes, inflammatory bowel
disease, periodic fever (autoinflammatory) syndromes, Kawasaki disease, HSP*

Arthralgias

JIA, SLE, rheumatic fever, JDM, vasculitis,
scleroderma, sarcoidosis

Hypothyroidism, trauma, endocarditis, other infections, pain syndromes,
growing pains, malignancies, overuse syndromes

Weakness

JDM, myositis secondary to SLE, MCTD, and
deep localized scleroderma

Muscular dystrophies, metabolic and other myopathies, hypothyroidism

Chest pain

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis, SLE (with associated
pericarditis or costochondritis)

Costochondritis (isolated), rib fracture, viral pericarditis, panic attack,
hyperventilation

Back pain

Enthesitis-­related arthritis, juvenile ankylosing
spondylitis

Vertebral compression fracture, diskitis, intraspinal tumor, spondylolysis,
spondylolisthesis, bone marrow–occupying malignancy, pain syndromes,
osteomyelitis, muscle spasm, injury

Fatigue

SLE, JDM, MCTD, vasculitis, JIA

Pain syndromes, chronic infections, chronic fatigue syndrome, depression

HSP, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura; JDM, juvenile dermatomyositis; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; MCTD, mixed connective tissue disease; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
*Also know as IgA vasculitis.

Table 194.2  Signs Suggestive of Rheumatic Disease
SIGN

RHEUMATIC DISEASES

COMMENTS

NONRHEUMATIC CAUSES

Malar rash

SLE, JDM

SLE classically spares nasolabial folds

Sunburn, parvovirus B19 (fifth
disease), Kawasaki disease

Oral ulcers

SLE, Behçet disease

Behçet disease also associated with genital
ulcers

HSV infection, PFAPA syndrome

Purpuric rash

Vasculitis (e.g., ANCA-­associated
vasculitis), HSP*

HSP* typically starts as small lesions on lower
extremities and buttocks that coalesce

Meningococcemia, thrombocytopenia,
clotting disorders

Gottron papules

JDM

Look for associated heliotrope rash, periungual
telangiectasias

Psoriasis, eczema

Arthritis

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis,
SLE, vasculitis, HSP*, MCTD,
scleroderma, acute rheumatic
fever, reactive arthritis

Chronic joint swelling (>6 wk) required for
diagnosis of JIA; MCTD associated with
diffuse puffiness of hands

Postviral arthritis, reactive arthritis,
trauma, infection, Lyme disease,
Kawasaki disease, malignancy,
overuse syndromes

ANCA, Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; HSP, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura; HSV, herpes simplex virus; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; JDM, juvenile dermatomyositis; MCTD,
mixed connective tissue disease; PFAPA, periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenitis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
*Also know as IgA vasculitis.

of JDM. Dilated capillary loops in the nail beds (periungual telangiectasias; see Fig. 200.4) are common in JDM, scleroderma, and secondary Raynaud phenomenon. An evanescent macular rash associated with
fever is part of the diagnostic criteria for systemic-­onset arthritis (see Fig.
196.12). Sun sensitivity or photosensitive rashes are indicative of SLE or
JDM but can also be caused by antibiotics.
Mouth ulcers are part of the diagnostic criteria for SLE and Behçet
disease (see Fig. 199.1C); painless nasal ulcers and erythematous
macules on the hard palate are also common in SLE. Cartilage loss
in the nose, causing a saddle nose deformity, is classically present in
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis;
see Fig. 210.8) but is also seen in relapsing polychondritis and syphilis. Alopecia can be associated with SLE but is also found in localized
scleroderma (see Fig. 201.4) and JDM. Raynaud phenomenon may be
a primary benign idiopathic disorder or can be a presenting complaint
in the child with scleroderma, lupus, mixed connective tissue disease
(MCTD), or an overlap syndrome. Diffuse lymphadenopathy is present in many rheumatic diseases, including SLE, polyarticular JIA, and
systemic JIA. Irregular pupils may represent the insidious and unrecognized onset of uveitis associated with JIA. Erythematous conjunctivae may be a result of uveitis or episcleritis associated with JIA, SLE,
sarcoidosis, spondyloarthropathies, or vasculitis.
A pericardial rub and orthopnea are suggestive of pericarditis, often
seen in systemic JIA, SLE, and sarcoid. Coronary artery dilation is
strongly suggestive of Kawasaki disease and multisystem inflammatory
syndrome in children (MIS-­C) but may also be a finding in systemic
arthritis and other forms of systemic vasculitis. Interstitial lung disease,

suggested by dyspnea on exertion or the finding of basilar rales with
decreased carbon monoxide diffusion capacity, occurs in SLE, MCTD,
and systemic sclerosis. Signs consistent with pulmonary hemorrhage
point to granulomatosis with polyangiitis, microscopic angiitis, or SLE.
Pulmonary vascular aneurysms are indicative of Behçet disease.
Arthritis is defined by the presence of intraarticular swelling or
two or more of the following findings on joint examination: pain on
motion, loss of motion, erythema, and heat. Arthritis is present in
all the chronic childhood arthritis syndromes, along with SLE, JDM,
vasculitis, Behçet disease, sarcoidosis, Kawasaki disease, and Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura. Nonrheumatic causes of arthritis include malignancy, septic arthritis, Lyme disease, osteomyelitis, viral infections
(e.g., rubella, hepatitis B, parvovirus B19, chikungunya), and postinfectious etiologies such as Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV), ARF, and reactive
arthritis. ARF typically involves a migratory (lasting hours to days),
painful arthritis. Pain on palpation of long bones is suggestive of malignancy. Specific muscle testing for weakness should be performed in a
child presenting with fatigue or difficulty with daily tasks, because both
these symptoms may be manifestations of muscle inflammation.

LABORATORY TESTING

There are no specific screening tests for rheumatologic disease. Once
a differential diagnosis is determined, appropriate testing can be performed (Tables 194.3 and 194.4). Initial studies are generally performed
in standard local laboratories. Screening for specific autoantibodies can
be performed in commercial laboratories, but confirmation of results
in a tertiary care center immunology laboratory is often necessary.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1462 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 194.3  Autoantibody Specificity and Disease Associations
ANTIBODY

DISEASE

PREVALENCE (%)

SPECIFICITY

Antinuclear antibody (ANA)

SLE, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis,
dermatomyositis, scleroderma,
psoriatic arthritis, MCTD

—

Associated with increased risk of uveitis in JIA
and psoriatic arthritis
Up to 30% of children testing positive for ANAs
have no underlying rheumatic disease

Double-­stranded DNA (dsDNA)

SLE

60-­70

High specificity for SLE; associated with lupus
nephritis

Smith (Sm)

SLE

20-­30

Highly specific for SLE; associated with lupus
nephritis

Smooth muscle (Sm)

Autoimmune hepatitis

—

—

Pm-­Scl (polymyositis-­scleroderma)

Sclerodermatomyositis

—

—

SSA (Ro)

SLE, Sjögren syndrome

25-­30

Associated with neonatal lupus syndrome,
subacute cutaneous lupus, thrombocytopenia

SSB (La)

SLE, Sjögren syndrome

25-­30

Usually coexists with anti-­SSA antibody

Ribonuclease protein (RNP)

MCTD, SLE

30-­40

Suggestive of MCTD unless meets criteria for
SLE

Histone

Drug-­induced lupus, SLE

—

—

Centromere

Limited cutaneous systemic
sclerosis

70

Nonspecific for systemic sclerosis

Topoisomerase I (Scl-­70)

Systemic sclerosis

—

Rare in childhood

Antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (ANCAs)

Vasculitis

—

—

Cytoplasmic (cANCAs)/PR3-­ANCA

—

cANCAs associated with granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (Wegener), cystic fibrosis

Perinuclear (pANCAs)/MPO-­ANCA

—

pANCAs associated with microscopic polyangiitis,
polyarteritis nodosa, SLE, inflammatory bowel
disease, cystic fibrosis, primary sclerosing
cholangitis, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura,
Kawasaki disease, Churg-­Strauss syndrome

50-­90

Specific for JIA (RF+), may be positive before RF

Anticitrullinated protein (ACPA);
also called anti–cyclic citrullinated
protein (anti-­CCP)

RF-­positive JIA

MCTD, Mixed connective tissue disease; MPO-­ANCA, antimyeloperoxidase; PR3-­ANCA, antiproteinase 3; RF, rheumatoid factor; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Adapted from Aggerwal A. Clinical application of tests used in rheumatology. Indian J Pediatr 2002;69:889–892.

For initial workup of rheumatic disease, a CBC with differential,
alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase (ALT/AST), albumin,
BUN/creatinine, urinalysis, creatine phosphokinase/lactate dehydrogenase (CPK/LDH), and inflammatory markers (sedimentation rate
and CRP) are recommended. Further appropriate testing depends on
clinical concern (see Table 194.4).
One essential laboratory test for rheumatic disease assessment is
the complete blood count (CBC), because it yields many diagnostic
clues. Elevated WBC count is compatible with malignancy, infection,
systemic JIA, and vasculitis. Leukopenia can be postinfectious, especially viral, or caused by SLE or malignancy. Lymphopenia is more
specific for SLE than is leukopenia. Platelets are acute-­phase reactants
and are therefore elevated with inflammatory markers. Exceptions
are a bone marrow–occupying malignancy, such as leukemia or neuroblastoma, SLE, and early Kawasaki disease. Anemia is nonspecific
and may be caused by any chronic illness, but hemolytic anemia (positive Coombs test result) may point to SLE or MCTD. Rheumatoid
factor (RF) is present in <10% of children with JIA and thus has poor
sensitivity as a diagnostic tool; RF may be elevated by infections such
as endocarditis, tuberculosis, syphilis, and viruses (parvovirus B19,
hepatitis B and C, mycoplasma), as well as primary biliary cirrhosis
and malignancies. In a child with chronic arthritis, RF serves as a
prognostic indicator.
Inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP, ferritin, procalcitonin) are nonspecific and are elevated in infections,

malignancies, and rheumatic diseases (Table 194.5). Their levels
may also be normal in rheumatic diseases such as arthritis, scleroderma, and dermatomyositis. The advantages of a CRP include rapid
response to inflammatory stimuli, wide range of clinically relevant
values, the fact that it is unaffected by age or gender, it is precise
and reproducible, and it can be measured on stored sera. Sedimentation rates have classically been used as markers of inflammation,
but they can be affected by anemia, red cell morphology, and drugs
such as intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG); they require a fresh
blood sample; and they are slow to respond to clinical changes.
Inflammatory marker measurements in general are more useful
in rheumatic diseases for following response to treatment than as
diagnostic tests.
Muscle enzymes include AST, ALT, CPK, aldolase, and LDH, any of
which may be elevated in JDM and in other diseases causing muscle
breakdown. Muscle-­building supplements, medications, and extreme
physical activity may also cause muscle breakdown and enzyme elevations. AST, ALT, and aldolase may also be elevated in liver disease, and
a γ-­glutamyltransferase (GGT) measurement may help differentiate
muscle or liver source.
The use of an antinuclear antibody (ANA) measurement as a screening test is not recommended because it has low specificity. A positive
ANA test result may be induced by infection, especially EBV infection, endocarditis, and parvovirus B19 infection. The ANA test result
is also positive in up to 30% of normal children, and ANA level is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 194 u Evaluation of Suspected Rheumatic Disease

1463

Table 194.4  Evaluation Based on Suspected Diagnosis of Rheumatic Disease
SUSPECTED RHEUMATIC
DISEASE(S)

INITIAL EVALUATION

FURTHER EVALUATION

SUBSPECIALTY EVALUATION

Systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE)
Mixed connective tissue disease
(MCTD)

CBC, ESR, ANA, ALT, AST, CPK,
creatinine, albumin, total protein,
urinalysis, BP, thyroid profile

If ANA test result is positive:
anti-­SSA (Ro), anti-­SSB (La),
anti-­Smith, and anti-­RNP
Abs; anti-­dsDNA Ab, C3, C4,
Coombs, spot urine protein/
creatinine ratio, CXR

Antiphospholipid Abs, lupus
anticoagulant, anti–β2-­glycoprotein,
echocardiogram; consider renal
biopsy, PFTs, bronchoscopy with
lavage, HRCT of chest; consider
lung biopsy

Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM)

CBC, CPK, ALT, AST, LDH, aldolase,
ANA; check gag reflex

Consider MRI of muscle

Consider electromyography and
possible muscle biopsy, PFTs,
swallowing study, serum neopterin

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)

CBC, ESR, creatinine, ALT, AST,
consider anti–streptolysin O/
anti–DNAase B for streptococcus-­
induced arthritis, Epstein-­Barr
virus titers, Lyme titer, parvovirus
B19 titer, plain radiograph of joints

Consider Ab titers to unusual
infectious agents, purified
protein derivative, RF, ANA,
HLA-­B27, anti-­CCP

MRI

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(Wegener granulomatosis)

CBC, ANCA, AST, ALT, albumin,
creatinine, ESR, urinalysis, CXR, BP

Spot urine protein/creatinine
ratio, anti–myeloperoxidase
and anti–proteinase-­3 Abs,
PFTs

Bronchoscopy with lavage, HRCT
chest; consider lung and kidney
biopsies

Sarcoidosis

CBC, electrolytes, AST, ALT,
albumin, creatinine, calcium,
phosphorous, ACE, BP

CXR, PFTs

Consider testing for Blau syndrome
in infants (see Chapter 200); HRCT
of chest; consider renal and lung
biopsy

Localized scleroderma

Skin biopsy, CBC, ESR

Systemic scleroderma

ANA, CBC, ESR, BP, AST, ALT, CPK,
creatinine, CXR

Serum IgG, ANA, RF, single-­stranded
DNA Ab, antihistone Ab, CPK
Anti-­Scl70, PFTs

HRCT of chest, echocardiogram,
upper GI radiography series

Ab, Antibody; ACE, angiotensin-­converting enzyme (normally elevated in childhood; interpret with caution); ALT, alanine transaminase; ANA, antinuclear antibody; anti-­dsDNA Ab,
anti–double-­stranded DNA antibody; AST, aspartate transaminase; BP, blood pressure; CBC, complete blood count; CCP, cyclic citrullinated protein; CPK, creatine phosphokinase;
CXR, chest x-­ray; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; GI, gastrointestinal; HRCT, high-­resolution CT; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PFTs, pulmonary function tests; RF, rheumatoid
factor; RNP, ribonucleoprotein.

Table 194.5  Conditions Associated with Elevated
C-­Reactive Protein Levels
NORMAL OR MINOR ELEVATION (<1 mg/dL)
Vigorous exercise
Common cold
Pregnancy
Gingivitis
Seizures
Depression
Insulin resistance and diabetes
Several genetic polymorphisms
Obesity
MODERATE ELEVATION (1-­10 mg/dL)
Myocardial infarction
Malignancies
Pancreatitis
Mucosal infection (bronchitis, cystitis)
Most systemic autoimmune diseases
Rheumatoid arthritis
Influenza and adenovirus infections
MARKED ELEVATION (>10 mg/dL)
Acute bacterial infection (80–85%)
Major trauma, surgery
Systemic vasculitis
MIS-­C
MIS-­C, Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
From Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al., eds. Kelley & Firestein’s Textbook of
Rheumatology, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017, Table 57-­4, p. 849.

increased in those with a first-­degree relative with a known rheumatic
disease. In the majority of children with a positive ANA without signs
of a rheumatic disease on initial evaluation, autoimmune disease does
not develop over time, so this finding does not necessitate referral
to a pediatric rheumatologist. A positive ANA test result is found in
many rheumatic diseases, including JIA, in which it serves as a predictor of the risk for inflammatory eye disease (see Chapter 196). Once a
positive ANA test result is discovered in a child, the need for specific
autoantibody testing is directed by the presence of clinical signs and
symptoms (see Table 194.3).

IMAGING STUDIES

Plain radiographs are useful in evaluation of arthralgias and arthritis,
as they offer reassurance in benign pain syndromes and their findings
may be abnormal in malignancies, osteomyelitis, and long-­standing
chronic juvenile arthritis. Musculoskeletal ultrasound can be useful
in evaluation of synovitis and joint effusion. MRI findings are abnormal in inflammatory myositis and suggest the optimal site for biopsy.
MRI is more sensitive than plain radiographs in detecting the presence
of early erosive arthritis and demonstrates increased joint fluid, synovial
enhancement, and sequela of trauma with internal joint derangement.
MRI is also helpful in ruling out infection or malignancy. Cardiopulmonary evaluation is suggested for diseases commonly affecting the
heart and lung, including SLE, systemic scleroderma, MCTD, JDM,
and sarcoid, as clinical manifestations may be subtle. This evaluation,
which may include echocardiogram, pulmonary function tests, and
high-­resolution CT of the lungs along with consideration of bronchoalveolar lavage, is generally performed by a pediatric rheumatologist to
whom the patient is referred (see Table 194.4).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 195 u Treatment of Rheumatic Diseases
Table 195.1  Multidisciplinary Treatment of Rheumatic
Diseases in Childhood
Accurate diagnosis
and education of
family

Pediatric rheumatologist
Pediatrician
Nurse

• Disease-­related education
• Medication administration (injection
­teaching)
• Safety monitoring

Social worker

• Facilitation of school services
• Resource identification (community,
government, financial, advocacy groups,
vocational rehabilitation)

Physical medicine and
rehabilitation

Physical therapy

Leflunomide

Dermatology

Sulfasalazine

Ophthalmology

• Eye screening for uveitis
• Screening for medication-­related
ocular toxicity (hydroxychloroquine,
glucocorticoids)

Nephrology

Gastroenterology
Nutrition

• Addressing undernourishment
from systemic illness and obesity/
overnourishment from glucocorticoids

School integration

• Individualized educational plan (IEP) or 504
plan

Peer-­group relationships
Individual and family counseling
Coordination of care

Hydroxychloroquine sulfate is an antimalarial drug important in the treatment of SLE and dermatomyositis, particularly cutaneous manifestations
of disease and to reduce lupus flares. It is not indicated to treat JIA because
of lack of efficacy. The most significant potential adverse effect is retinal
toxicity, which occurs rarely but results in irreversible color blindness or
loss of central vision. Complete ophthalmologic examinations, including
assessment of peripheral vision and color fields, are conducted at baseline
and every 6-­12 months to screen for retinal toxicity. Retinal toxicity is rare
(1/5,000 patients) and is associated with weight-­based dosing exceeding 6.5 mg/kg/day; therefore recommended dosing is 5 mg/kg/day, not
to exceed 400 mg/day. Other potential adverse effects include rash, skin
discoloration, gastric irritation, bone marrow suppression, central nervous
system (CNS) stimulation, and myositis.

Orthopedics

• Splinting to reduce joint contractures/
deformities and lessen stress on joints;
adaptive devices for activities of daily living

Physical and
psychosocial growth
and development

Hydroxychloroquine

Leflunomide is a DMARD approved for treatment of RA and also offers an
alternative to MTX for treatment of JIA. MTX outperformed leflunomide
for treatment of JIA in a randomized trial (at 16 weeks, 89% of patients
receiving MTX achieved a 30% response rate vs 68% of those receiving
leflunomide), although both drugs were effective. Dosing is oral, once
daily, and weight based: 10 mg for children 10 to <20 kg, 15 mg for children 20-­40 kg, and 20 mg for children >40 kg. Adverse reactions include
paresthesias and peripheral neuropathy, GI intolerance, elevated liver
transaminases and hepatic failure, cytopenias, alopecia, and teratogenesis.
Leflunomide has a long half-­life, and in cases in which discontinuation
of the agent is required, a drug elimination protocol with cholestyramine
may be indicated. Avoidance of pregnancy is essential. Laboratory tests
(e.g., CBC, LFTs) are monitored every 4 weeks for the first 6 months of
treatment, then every 8-­12 weeks.

• Addressing deficits in joint or muscle
mobility, limb-­length discrepancies, gait
abnormalities, and weakness

Occupational therapy

Consultant team

1465

Involvement of patient and family as active
team members
Communication among healthcare
­providers
Involvement of school (school nurse) and
community (social worker) resources

qualitatively different from that observed with treatment of neoplasms. Adverse effects include elevated liver enzyme values (15%);
GI toxicity (13%); stomatitis (3%); headache (1–2%); and leukopenia, interstitial pneumonitis, rash, and alopecia (<1%). Hepatotoxicity observed among adults with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) treated
with MTX has raised concern about similar problems in children.
Analysis of liver biopsy specimens in children with JIA undergoing
long-­term MTX treatment has revealed occasional mild fibrosis but
no evidence of even moderate liver damage. Patients receiving MTX
should be counseled to avoid alcohol, smoking, and pregnancy. Folic
acid (1 mg daily) is given as an adjunct to minimize adverse effects.
Lymphoproliferative disorders have been reported in adults treated
with MTX, primarily in association with Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV)
infection. Regression of lymphoma may follow withdrawal of MTX.
Monitoring laboratory tests for MTX toxicity include CBC and LFTs
at regular intervals, initially every 8-­12 weeks for the first 3-­6 months of
treatment, then every 12 weeks, with more frequent intervals after dosing
adjustments or in response to abnormal values.

Sulfasalazine is used to treat children with polyarticular JIA, oligoarticular JIA, and the peripheral arthritis and enthesitis associated with juvenile
ankylosing spondylitis. In JIA, sulfasalazine 50 mg/kg/day (adult maximum: 3,000 mg/day, divided bid) achieves greater improvement in joint
inflammation, global assessment parameters, and laboratory parameters
than placebo. More than 30% of sulfasalazine-­treated patients withdraw
from the treatment because of adverse effects, primarily GI irritation and
skin rashes. Sulfasalazine is associated with severe systemic hypersensitivity reactions, including Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome. Sulfasalazine is
generally considered contraindicated in children with active systemic JIA
because of increased hypersensitivity reactions. Sulfasalazine should not
be used in patients with sulfa or salicylate hypersensitivity or porphyria.
Monitoring laboratory tests for sulfasalazine toxicity include CBC,
LFTs, serum creatinine/blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and urinalysis, every
other week for the first 3 months of treatment, monthly for 3 months, then
every 3 months.

Mycophenolate Mofetil

Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is an immunosuppressive drug approved
by the FDA for organ transplant rejection. MMF is used primarily for
treatment of lupus, uveitis, and autoimmune skin manifestations. In adult
clinical trials, MMF was noninferior to cyclophosphamide for induction
therapy of lupus nephritis, with a potential for fewer adverse effects (infection, gonadal toxicity). Dosing is based on body surface area (BSA): 600
mg/m2 orally twice daily, with maximum dosage limits varying by formulation and BSA. The most common adverse reaction is GI intolerance;
infections, cytopenias, and secondary malignancies are also reported.

Glucocorticoids

Glucocorticoids are given through oral, intravenous (IV), ocular, topical, and intraarticular administration as part of treatment of rheumatic
disease. Oral corticosteroids are foundational treatment for moderate
to severe lupus, dermatomyositis, and most forms of vasculitis; their
long-­term use is associated with many well-­described, dose-­dependent
complications, including linear growth suppression, cushingoid features, osteoporosis, avascular necrosis, hypertension, impaired glucose
tolerance, mood disturbance, and increased infection risk. Glucocorticoids should be tapered to the lowest effective dose over time and
DMARDs introduced as steroid-­sparing agents.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

CLASSIFICATION
Nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs)‡
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Disease-­modifying
antirheumatic drugs
(DMARDs)

Janus kinase inhibitor

THERAPEUTIC†

INDICATION†

DOSE

Etodolaca

PO once-­daily dose:
20-­30 kg: 400 mg
31-­45 kg: 600 mg
46-­60 kg: 800 mg
>60 kg: 1,000 mg

Ibuprofena

40 mg/kg/day PO in 3 divided
doses
Max 2,400 mg/day

Naproxena

15 mg/kg/day PO in 2 divided
doses
Max 1,000 mg/day

Celecoxiba

10-­25 kg: 50 mg PO bid
>25 kg: 100 mg PO bid

Meloxicama

0.125 mg/kg PO daily
Max 7.5 mg

Methotrexatea

ADVERSE REACTIONS

MONITORING

JIA
Spondyloarthropathy
Pain
Serositis
Cutaneous vasculitis
Uveitis

GI intolerance (abdominal
pain, nausea), gastritis,
hepatitis, tinnitus, anemia,
pseudoporphyria, aseptic
meningitis, headache, renal
disease

CBC, LFTs, BUN/creatinine,
urinalysis at baseline, then
every 6-­12 mo

10-­20 mg/m2/wk (0.35-­0.65 mg/kg/
wk) PO
20-­30 mg/m2/wk (0.65-­1 mg/kg/wk)
SC; higher doses better absorbed
by SC injection

JIA
Uveitis

GI intolerance (nausea, vomiting),
hepatitis, myelosuppression,
mucositis, teratogenesis,
lymphoma, interstitial
pneumonitis

CBC, LFTs at baseline,
monthly ×3, then every
8-­12 wk

Leflunomide

PO once daily:
10 to <20 kg: 10 mg
20-­40 kg: 15 mg
>40 kg: 20 mg

JIA

Hepatitis, hepatic necrosis,
cytopenias, mucositis,
teratogenesis, peripheral
neuropathy

CBC, LFTs, at baseline,
monthly ×6, then every
8-­12 wk

Hydroxychloroquine

5 mg/kg PO daily; do not exceed
5 mg/kg/daily
Max 400 mg daily

SLE
JDMS
Antiphospholipid
antibody syndrome

Retinal toxicity, GI intolerance,
rash, skin discoloration, anemia,
cytopenias, myopathy, CNS
stimulation, death (overdose)

Ophthalmologic screening
every 6-­12 mo

Sulfasalazinea

30-­50 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
Adult max 3 g/day

Spondyloarthropathy,
JIA

GI intolerance, rash,
hypersensitivity reactions,
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome,
cytopenias, hepatitis, headache

CBC, LFTs, BUN/creatinine,
urinalysis at baseline,
every other wk ×3 mo,
monthly ×3, then every
3 mo

Tofacitiniba

Oral solution (1 mg/mL)
Use for ≥2 yr and ≥10 kg;
10 to <20 kg: 3.2 mg twice daily
20 to <40 kg: 4 mg twice daily
≥40 kg: 5 mg twice daily or
Immediate-­release tablet (5 mg),
5 mg twice daily

Polyarticular JIA

Infection, headache, increased
HDL, cytopenias, potential
increased malignancy risk,
potential increased thrombosis
risk

CBC, LFTs at baseline, then
every 3 mo; lipids 4-­8
wk after initiation, then
periodically

1466 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Table 195.2  Therapeutics for Childhood Rheumatic Diseases*

Table 195.2  Therapeutics for Childhood Rheumatic Diseases*—cont’d
CLASSIFICATION
Tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-­α antagonists

INDICATION†

DOSE

ADVERSE REACTIONS

MONITORING

JIA
Spondyloarthropathy
Psoriatic arthritis
Uveitis

Injection site reaction, infection,
rash, cytopenias, lupus-­like
syndrome, potential increased
malignancy risk

TB test; anti-­dsDNA, CBC

0.8 mg/kg SC once weekly (max
50 mg/dose) or 0.4 mg/kg SC
twice weekly (max 25 mg/dose)

JIA

Injection site reactions, infections,
rash, demyelinating disorders,
cytopenias, potential increased
malignancy risk

TB test; CBC

Golimumaba

80 mg/m2 IV at 0 and 4 wk, then
every 8 wk

Polyarticular JIA
Spondyloarthropathy
Psoriatic arthritis

Infusion reactions, hepatitis,
potential increased malignancy
risk

TB test; anti-­dsDNA, LFTs

Infliximab

5-­10 mg/kg IV every 4-­8 wk

JIA
Spondyloarthropathy
Uveitis
Sarcoidosis

Infusion reactions, hepatitis,
potential increased malignancy
risk

TB test; anti-­dsDNA, LFTs

Abatacepta

IV every 2 wk ×3 doses, then
monthly for ≥6 yr of age:
<75 kg: 10 mg/kg
75-­100 kg: 750 mg
>100 kg: 1,000 mg

JIA

Infection, headache, potential
increased malignancy risk

Adalimumaba

SC once every other wk:
10 to <15 kg: 10 mg
15 to <30 kg: 20 mg
≥30 kg: 40 mg

Etanercepta

SC once weekly:
10 to <25 kg: 50 mg
≥25 to <50 kg: 87.5 mg
≥50 kg: 125 mg
Rituximab

575 mg/m2, max 1,000 mg, IV on
days 1 and 15

SLE

Infusion reactions, lymphopenia,
reactivation hepatitis B, rash,
serum sickness, arthritis, PML

Anti-­BLyS antibody

Belimumabe

10 mg/kg IV every 2 wk ×3 doses,
then every 4 wk

SLE

Infusion reactions, infection,
depression

Interleukin (IL)-­1 antagonist

Anakinra

1-­2 mg/kg/daily
Adult max 100 mg

Systemic JIA
CAPS

Injection site reactions, infection

Canakinumabb

Given SC every 8 wk (CAPS) every
4 wk (systemic JIA):
15-­40 kg: 2 mg/kg (up to 3 mg/kg
if needed)
>40 kg: 150 mg

CAPS
Systemic JIA

Injection site reaction,
infection, diarrhea, nausea,
vertigo, headache

IV:
<30 kg: 10 mg/kg/dose every 4 wk
≥30 kg: 8 mg/kg/dose every 4 wk;
maximum dose: 800 mg/dose
SC:
<30 kg: 162 mg/dose once every
3 wk
≥30 kg: 162 mg/dose once every
2 wk

Polyarticular JIA

CBC, BMP; consider
monitoring quantitative
IgG

CBC

Continued

1467

Anti-­CD20 (B-­cell) antibody

Chapter 195 u Treatment of Rheumatic Diseases

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Modulate T-­cell activation

THERAPEUTIC†

THERAPEUTIC†

CLASSIFICATION

INDICATION†

DOSE

ADVERSE REACTIONS

MONITORING

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

IL-­6 antagonist

Tocilizumaba

≥2 yr and ≥30 kg: 8 mg/kg/dose
every 2 wk
≥2 yr and ≤30 kg: 12 mg/kg/dose
every 2 wk

Systemic JIA

Infusion reactions, elevated
LFTs, elevated lipids,
thrombocytopenia, infections

CBC, LFTs, platelet count,
serum lipid profile

Intravenous immune
globulin

IVIGc

1,000-­2,000 mg/kg IV infusion
For JDMS, give monthly

Kawasaki disease
JDMS
SLE

Infusion reaction, aseptic
meningitis, renal failure

Serum creatinine, BUN, IgG
level

Cytotoxic

Cyclophosphamide

0.5-­1 g/m2 IV (max 1.5 g) monthly
for 6 mo induction, then every
2-­3 mo
Oral regimen: 1-­2 mg/kg/daily; max
150 mg/daily

SLE
Vasculitis
JDMS
Pulmonary hemorrhage

Nausea, vomiting,
myelosuppression, mucositis,
hyponatremia, alopecia,
hemorrhagic cystitis, gonadal
failure, teratogenesis, secondary
malignancy

CBC

Immunosuppressive

Mycophenolate mofetil

Oral suspension: max 1,200 mg/m2/
day PO (up to 2 g/day) divided
bid
Capsules: max 1,500 mg/day PO
for BSA 1.25-­1.5 m2, 2 g/day PO
for BSA >1.5 m2 divided bid

SLE
Uveitis

GI intolerance (diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting), renal impairment,
neutropenia, teratogenesis,
secondary malignancy, PML

CBC, BMP

Glucocorticoids

Prednisonea,d-­f

0.05-­2 mg/kg/day PO given in 1-­4
divided doses; max varies by
individual (80 mg/daily)
Adverse effects are dose
dependent; lowest effective dose
should be used

SLE
JDMS
Vasculitis
JIA
Uveitis
Sarcoidosis

Cushing syndrome, osteoporosis,
increased appetite, weight gain,
striae, hypertension, adrenal
suppression, hyperglycemia,
infection, avascular necrosis

Blood glucose, potassium
Blood pressure

Methylprednisolonea,d-­g

0.5-­1.7 mg/kg/day or 5-­25 mg/m2/
day IM/IV in divided doses every
6-­12 hr
For severe manifestations: 30 mg/
kg/dose (max 1 g) daily for 1-­5
days

SLE
JDMS
Vasculitis
Sarcoidosis
Localized scleroderma

Intraarticular

Dose varies by joint and
formulation

JIA

Subcutaneous atrophy, skin
hypopigmentation, calcification,
infection

Prednisolone ophthalmic
suspension

1-­2 drops into eye up to every hr
while awake
Needs monitoring by
ophthalmologist

Uveitis

Ocular hypertension, glaucoma,
nerve damage, cataract,
infection

Ophthalmologic exam

*Consult a clinical pharmacology reference for current dosing and monitoring guidelines and complete list of known adverse effects.
†Therapeutics used in practice may not have an FDA-­approved indication. Individual therapeutics annotated with FDA-­approved indication as follows: a, JIA; b, CAPS; c, Kawasaki disease; d, sarcoidosis; e, SLE; f, uveitis; g, dermatomyositis.
‡Many more products are available in this class.
bid, Twice daily; BLys, B-­lymphocyte stimulator; BMP, basic metabolic panel; BSA, body surface area; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CAPS, cryopyrin-­associated periodic syndrome; CBC, complete blood count; CNS, central nervous system;
dsDNA, double-­stranded DNA; GI, gastrointestinal; IM, intramuscular(ly); IV, intravenous(ly); IVIG, intravenous immune globulin; JDMS, juvenile dermatomyositis; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; LFTs, liver function tests; PML, progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy; PO, by mouth; SC, subcutaneous(ly); SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TB, tuberculosis

1468 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Table 195.2  Therapeutics for Childhood Rheumatic Diseases*—cont’d

Chapter 195 u Treatment of Rheumatic Diseases
Intravenous corticosteroids have been used to treat severe, acute
manifestations of systemic rheumatic diseases such as SLE, dermatomyositis, and vasculitis. The IV route allows for higher doses to obtain
an immediate, profound antiinflammatory effect. Methylprednisolone
10-­30 mg/kg/dose up to a maximum of 1 g, given over 1 hour daily for
1-­5 days is the IV preparation of choice. Although generally associated with fewer adverse effects than oral corticosteroids, IV steroids are
associated with significant and occasionally life-­threatening toxicities,
such as cardiac arrhythmia, acute hypertension, hypotension, hyperglycemia, shock, pancreatitis, and avascular necrosis.
Ocular corticosteroids are prescribed by ophthalmologists as ophthalmologic drops or injections into the soft tissue surrounding the
globe (sub–Tenon capsule injection) for active uveitis. Long-­
term
ocular corticosteroid use leads to cataract formation and glaucoma.
Current ophthalmologic management with methotrexate and biologic
therapy, especially TNF inhibitors, have significantly decreased the frequency of eye complications of JIA-­associated uveitis.
Intraarticular corticosteroids are frequently used as initial therapy
for children with oligoarticular JIA or as bridge therapy while awaiting efficacy of a DMARD in polyarticular disease. Most patients have
significant clinical improvement within 3 days. Duration of response
depends on steroid preparation used, joint affected, and arthritis subtype; the anticipated response rate to knee injection is 60–80% at 6
months. Intraarticular administration may result in subcutaneous
atrophy and hypopigmentation of the skin at the injection site, as well
as subcutaneous calcifications along the needle track.

JANUS KINASE INHIBITORS

Another effective class of DMARDs is the Janus kinase inhibitors, collectively known as JAKinibs. In immune cells, these drugs inhibit intracellular signaling through the JAK-­STAT pathway in immune cells by
binding to various Janus kinases (in humans, JAK 1, JAK 2, JAK 3, and
TYK2), thereby negating the response to extracellular cytokine ligation of immune cell receptors. Inhibition affects lymphocyte activation,
function, and survival. Many JAKinibs are currently available, including tofacitinib, baricitinib, ruxolitinib, and upadacitinib. Currently, only
tofacitinib has FDA approval in pediatric rheumatic disease.
Tofacitinib is a small-­molecule, oral JAKinib of the JAK1, JAK3, and,
to a lesser extent, JAK2 enzymes. Tofacitinib has FDA approval for
treatment of polyarticular JIA (age ≥2 years and weight ≥10 kg) with
twice-­daily dosing: 3.2 mg bid for 10-­20 kg, 4 mg bid for 20-­40 kg, and
5 mg bid for >40 kg. It is available as an oral solution (1 mg/mL) and as
oral tablets (5 mg). Adverse reactions include increased risk of serious
infections, thrombosis including pulmonary and deep venous/arterial,
and gastrointestinal perforations; the most common adverse reactions
are upper respiratory infections, diarrhea, and headache.

Biologic Agents

Biologic agents are proteins that have been engineered to target and
modulate specific components of the immune system, with the goal of
decreasing the inflammatory response. Antibodies have been developed
to target specific cytokines such as IL-­1 and IL-­6 or to interfere with
specific immune cell function through depletion of β cells or suppression of T-­cell activation (Table 195.3). Biologic agents have increased
the therapeutic options for treating rheumatic disease recalcitrant to
nonbiologic therapies, and in some cases biologics are first-­line interventions. A primary concern is the increased risk of malignancy when
biologics are combined with other immunosuppressants.

Tumor Necrosis Factor-­α Antagonists

Three TNF antagonists have an FDA indication for treatment of children
with moderate to severe polyarticular JIA (etanercept, adalimumab, and
golimumab). Etanercept is a genetically engineered fusion protein consisting of two identical chains of the recombinant extracellular TNF receptor
monomer fused with the Fc domain of human immunoglobulin G1. Etanercept binds both TNF-­α and lymphotoxin-­α (formerly called TNF-­β) and
inhibits their activity. Three fourths of children with active polyarticular
JIA that fails to respond to MTX demonstrate response to etanercept after
3 months of therapy. Dosing is 0.8 mg/kg subcutaneously weekly (max 50
mg/dose) or 0.4 mg/kg SC twice weekly (max 25 mg/dose). Adalimumab

1469

Table 195.3  Method of Action of Biologic Therapies
Studied in Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
DRUG

METHOD OF ACTION

Etanercept

Soluble TNF p75 receptor fusion protein that
binds to and inactivates TNF-­α

Infliximab

Chimeric human/mouse monoclonal antibody
that binds to soluble TNF-­α and its membrane-­
bound precursor, neutralizing its action

Adalimumab

A humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody that
binds to TNF-­α

Abatacept

Soluble, fully human fusion protein of the
extracellular domain of CTLA-­4, linked to a
modified Fc portion of the human IgG1. It acts
as a costimulatory signal inhibitor by binding
competitively to CD80 or CD86, where it
selectively inhibits T-­cell activation

Tocilizumab

A humanized anti–human IL-­6 receptor
monoclonal antibody

Anakinra

An IL-­1 receptor antagonist (IL-­1RA)

CTLA, Cytotoxic T lymphocyte–associated antigen; IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis
factor.
From Beresford MW, Baildam EM. New advances in the management of juvenile
idiopathic arthritis. Part 2. The era of biologicals. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed.
2009;94:151–156.

is a fully human anti-­TNF monoclonal antibody (mAb) used alone or in
combination with MTX. In a placebo-­controlled withdrawal-­design study,
children continuing to receive adalimumab were less likely to experience
disease flares (43% vs 71%) even if they were also taking MTX (37% vs
65%). Adalimumab is administered subcutaneously every other week at
a dose of 10 mg for children weighing 10 to <15 kg, 20 mg for children
weighing 15 to <30 kg, and 40 mg for those weighing ≥30 kg. Golimumab
is a human mAb that binds to both soluble and transmembrane bioactive
forms of TNF. It has FDA approval for use in polyarticular JIA at dosing
of 80 mg/m2 IV with initial doses at 0 and 4 weeks and then every 8 weeks
thereafter. Non-­FDA approved uses include psoriatic arthritis.
Infliximab, a chimeric mouse-­human mAb, was tested in a randomized
controlled trial (RCT) for use in JIA but did not achieve study end-­points.
However, it is FDA approved for pediatric inflammatory bowel disease and
has been used “off label” for treatment of polyarticular JIA, uveitis, Behçet
syndrome, and sarcoidosis. Certolizumab pegol, a pegylated humanized
antibody against TNF, is approved by the FDA for RA, psoriatic arthritis,
and ankylosing spondylitis in adults and is currently in pediatric trials for
treatment of polyarticular JIA.
The most common adverse effects are injection site reactions that
diminish over time. TNF blockade is associated with an increased frequency of serious systemic infections, including sepsis, dissemination of
latent tuberculosis (TB), and invasive fungal infections in endemic areas.
TNF blockade should not be initiated in patients with a history of chronic
or frequent recurrent infections. TB testing should be done before initiation of therapy with TNF antagonists. If test results are positive, antitubercular treatment must be administered before anti-­TNF treatment can be
started. Theoretically, the risk of malignancy increases with TNF-­α antagonists. Case reports describe the development of lupus-­like syndromes, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, interstitial lung disease, demyelinating syndromes,
antibody formation to the drug, rashes, cytopenias, anaphylaxis, serum
sickness, and other reactions. The benefit/risk profile appears favorable
after a decade of experience with this therapeutic class; the safety of longer-­
term suppression of TNF function is unknown.

Modulator of T-­Cell Activation

Abatacept is a selective inhibitor of T-­cell costimulation resulting in T-­cell
anergy. It is FDA approved for treatment of moderate to severe polyarticular JIA. In a double-­blind withdrawal RCT in children whose disease
had not responded to DMARDs, 53% of placebo-­treated patients vs 20%
of abatacept-­treated patients experienced disease flares during the withdrawal period. The frequency of adverse events did not differ between the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1470 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
groups. Abatacept is administered IV every other week for three doses
(<75 kg: 10 mg/kg/dose; 75-­100 kg: 750 mg/dose; >100 kg: 1,000 mg/dose;
maximum 1,000 mg/dose at 0, 2, and 4 weeks) and then monthly thereafter. Abatacept administered by SC injection was given FDA approval in
March 2017 for children ≥4 years old for treatment of polyarticular JIA at
doses given weekly: 50 mg for 10-­25 kg, 87.5 mg for ≥25 to <50 kg, and
125 mg for ≥50 kg.

B-­Cell Depletion

Rituximab is a chimeric mAb to the antigen CD20, a transmembrane protein on the surface of B-­cell precursors and mature B lymphocytes. This
antibody induces B-­cell apoptosis and causes depletion of circulating and
tissue-­based B cells. Antibody production is not completely abrogated
because plasma cells are not removed. Rituximab has FDA approval for
treatment of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) and microscopic
polyangiitis (MPA) in children greater than 2 years of age. It is approved
for treatment of adult RA and may also have a role in treatment of SLE,
particularly its hematologic manifestations. Adverse events include serious infusion reactions, cytopenias, hepatitis B virus reactivation, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, serum sickness, vasculitis, and a rare but
fatal side effect, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Resistance to
rituximab may develop over time in patients being treated for lymphoma.
Belimumab is a human mAb to B-­lymphocyte stimulator (BLys) that
negatively affects B-­cell proliferation, differentiation, and long-­term survival by inhibiting binding of BLys to its receptors on B cells. It is FDA
approved for treatment of pediatric SLE in children age 5 years and older.
For this indication, it is given as an IV infusion (10 mg/kg) every 2 weeks
for the first three doses, then every 4 weeks thereafter. Side effects associated with belimumab include increased risk of serious infections, allergic
(hypersensitivity) reactions, and changes in mood.

Table 195.4  Predisposing Factors for Immunoglobulin-­
Induced Adverse Effects
ADVERSE EFFECT

PREDISPOSING FACTORS

Flulike symptoms

High dose, rapid infusion rate,
accompanying infection, previous
adverse effects

Dermatologic adverse
effects

High dose, rapid infusion rate,
accompanying infection, male
patients with chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy

Arrhythmia and
hypotension

History of heart disease

Transfusion-­related acute
lung injury

Rapid infusion rate

Thrombotic events

High dose, rapid infusion
rate, advanced age, being
bedridden, diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, dyslipidemia, prior/
current thrombosis, preexisting
atherosclerotic disease, elevated
serum viscosity, oral contraceptive
use, hereditary hypercoagulable state,
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura

Aseptic meningitis

High dose

Renal impairment

Rapid infusion rate, advanced age,
renal insufficiency, nephrotic
syndrome, diabetes mellitus,
dehydration, sepsis paraproteinemia,
nephrotoxic drugs, hemolysis,
sucrose-­containing preparations

Hemolysis

High dose, rapid infusion rate,
non-­O blood group, underlying
inflammatory state

Interleukin-­1 Antagonists

Anakinra, a recombinant form of the human IL-­1 receptor antagonist,
competitively inhibits binding of IL-­1α and IL-­1β to the natural receptor, interrupting the cytokine proinflammatory cascade. Anakinra has
been approved for RA in adults. In meta-­analyses of treatments for RA,
anakinra was outperformed by TNF-­α antagonists but has a special niche
in pediatric rheumatology for treatment of systemic JIA (sJIA) and other
autoinflammatory syndromes, such as cryopyrin-­associated periodic syndrome (CAPS). The medication is dosed SC, 1-­2 mg/kg, once daily. An IL-­
1β mAb, canakinumab, is FDA approved for use in CAPS, dosed SC every
8 weeks, and sJIA, dosed SC every 4 weeks. Adverse reactions include significant injection site reactions and increased bacterial infections.

Interleukin-­6 Receptor Antagonist

Tocilizumab is an anti–IL-­6 receptor antibody binding to both soluble and
membrane-­associated receptors. Tocilizumab has FDA approval for treatment of sJIA and polyarticular JIA. Adverse reactions include transaminase and lipid elevations. Tocilizumab is given as an IV infusion every 2
weeks (sJIA) to 4 weeks (polyarticular JIA), and SC for polyarticular JIA
162 mg every 3 weeks for those <30 kg and every 2 wk for ≥30 kg.

Intravenous Immune Globulin

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is thought to be beneficial in
various clinical conditions. IVIG significantly improves the short-­and
long-­term natural history of Kawasaki disease. Open studies have supported benefit for juvenile dermatomyositis, lupus-­associated thrombocytopenia, and polyarticular JIA. IVIG is given as 1-­2 g/kg/dose,
administered once monthly. It has been occasionally associated with
severe, systemic allergy-­like reactions and postinfusion aseptic meningitis (headache, stiff neck) (Table 195.4).

Cytotoxics
Cyclophosphamide

Cyclophosphamide requires metabolic conversion in the liver to its active
metabolites, which alkylate the guanine in DNA, leading to immunosuppression by inhibition of the S2 phase of mitosis. The subsequent decrease
in numbers of T and B lymphocytes results in diminished humoral and
cellular immune responses. Cyclophosphamide infusions (500-­1,000 mg/
m2) given monthly for 6 months, then every 3 months for 12-­18 months,

From Guo Y, Tian X, Wang X, Xiao Z. Adverse effects of immunoglobulin therapy.
Frontiers Immunol. 2018;9:1299, Table 2.

have been shown to reduce the frequency of renal failure in patients with
lupus and diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis. Open trials suggest
efficacy in severe CNS lupus. Oral cyclophosphamide (1-­2 mg/kg/day)
is effective as induction treatment of severe antineutrophilic cytoplasmic
antibody (ANCA)–associated vasculitis and other forms of systemic vasculitis, as well as interstitial lung disease or pulmonary hemorrhage associated with rheumatic disease.
Cyclophosphamide is a potent cytotoxic drug associated with significant toxicities. Potential short-­term adverse effects include nausea,
vomiting, anorexia, alopecia, mucositis, hemorrhagic cystitis, and bone
marrow suppression. Long-­term complications include an increased
risk for sterility and cancer, especially leukemia, lymphoma, and bladder cancer. In adult women with lupus treated with IV cyclophosphamide, 30–40% become infertile; the risk of ovarian failure appears to
be significantly lower in adolescent and premenarchal girls. Ovarian
suppression with an inhibitor of gonadotropin-­releasing hormone to
preserve fertility is currently being studied.

Other Drugs

Azathioprine is sometimes used to treat ANCA-­associated vasculitis
after induction therapy or to treat SLE. Cyclosporine has been used
occasionally in the treatment of dermatomyositis on the basis of
uncontrolled studies and is helpful in the treatment of macrophage
activation syndrome complicating sJIA (see Chapter 207). Case reports
describe the successful use of thalidomide, or its analog lenalidomide,
as treatment for sJIA, inflammatory skin disorders, and Behçet disease.
Several drugs commonly used in the past to treat arthritis are no longer part of standard treatment, including salicylates, gold compounds, and
d-­penicillamine.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1471

Chapter 196

Juvenile Idiopathic
Arthritis
Eveline Y. Wu and C. Egla Rabinovich
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is the most common rheumatic
disease in children and one of the more common chronic illnesses of
childhood. JIA represents a heterogeneous group of disorders sharing
the clinical manifestation of arthritis. The etiology and pathogenesis
of JIA are largely unknown, and the genetic component is complex,
making clear distinction among various subtypes difficult. As a result,
several classification schemes exist, each with its own limitations.
The former classification of the American College of Rheumatology
(ACR) uses the term juvenile rheumatoid arthritis and categorizes the
disease into three onset types (Table 196.1). Attempting to standardize
nomenclature, the International League of Associations for Rheumatology (ILAR) proposed a different classification using the term
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (Table 196.2), inclusive of all subtypes of
chronic juvenile arthritis. We refer to the ILAR classification criteria;
see Chapter 197 for enthesitis-­related arthritis (ERA) and psoriatic JIA
(Tables 196.3 and 196.4).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The worldwide incidence of JIA ranges from 0.8 to 22.6 per 100,000
children per year, with prevalence ranges from 7 to 401 per 100,000.
These wide-­ranging numbers reflect population differences, particularly environmental exposure and immunogenetic susceptibility,
along with variations in diagnostic criteria, difficulty in case ascertainment, and lack of population-­based data. An estimated 300,000
U.S. children have arthritis, including 100,000 with a form of JIA.
Oligoarthritis is the most common subtype (40–50%), followed by
polyarthritis (25–30%) and systemic JIA (5–15%) (see Table 196.4).
More females than males are affected in both oligoarticular (3:1) and
polyarticular (5:1) JIA but are equally affected in systemic JIA (sJIA).
The peak age at onset is 2-­4 years for oligoarticular disease. Age of
onset has a bimodal distribution in polyarthritis, with peaks at 2-­4
years and 10-­14 years. sJIA occurs throughout childhood, with a peak
at 1-­5 years.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology and pathogenesis of JIA are not completely understood,
although both immunogenetic susceptibility and an external trigger
are considered necessary. Twin and family studies suggest a substantial

Table 196.1  Criteria for the Classification of Juvenile
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Age at onset: <16 yr
Arthritis (swelling or effusion, or the presence of two or more of the
following signs: limitation of range of motion, tenderness or pain
on motion, increased heat) in one or more joints
Duration of disease: ≥6 wk
Onset type defined by type of articular involvement in the first 6 mo
after onset:
Polyarthritis: five or more inflamed joints
Oligoarthritis: four or fewer inflamed joints
Systemic-­onset disease: arthritis with rash and a characteristic
quotidian fever
Exclusion of other forms of juvenile arthritis
Adapted from Cassidy JT, Levison JE, Bass JC, et al. A study of classification criteria for
a diagnosis of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 1986;29:274–281.

role for genetic factors. JIA is a complex genetic trait in which multiple
genes may affect disease susceptibility. Variants in major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II regions have indisputably
been associated with different JIA subtypes. Non-­HLA candidate loci
are also associated with JIA, including polymorphisms in the genes
encoding protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor 22 (PTPN22),
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, macrophage inhibitory factor, interleukin (IL)-­6 and its receptor, and IL-­1α. Possible nongenetic triggers
include bacterial and viral infections, enhanced immune responses to
bacterial or mycobacterial heat shock proteins, abnormal reproductive
hormone levels, and joint trauma.

PATHOGENESIS

JIA is an autoimmune disease associated with alterations in both
humoral and cell-­mediated immunity. T lymphocytes have a central
role, releasing proinflammatory cytokines favoring a type 1 helper
T-­lymphocyte response. Studies of T-­cell receptor expression confirm
recruitment of T lymphocytes specific for synovial non–self-­antigens.
B-­cell activation, immune complex formation, and complement activation also promote inflammation. Inheritance of specific cytokine alleles
may predispose to upregulation of inflammatory networks, resulting in
systemic disease or more severe articular disease.
sJIA is characterized by dysregulation of the innate immune system
with a lack of autoreactive T cells and autoantibodies. It therefore may
be more accurately classified as an autoinflammatory disorder, which
may transition to an autoimmune process once actual arthritis develops (Fig. 196.1). The IL-­1 family of cytokines is key to disease pathogenesis, which is strongly supported by the marked responsiveness to
IL-­1 inhibitors. IL-­18 in particular is a central driver, and serum IL-­18
levels are markedly elevated in children with sJIA.
All these immunologic abnormalities cause inflammatory synovitis,
characterized pathologically by villous hypertrophy and hyperplasia
with hyperemia and edema of the synovial tissue. Vascular endothelial
hyperplasia is prominent and is characterized by infiltration of mononuclear and plasma cells with a predominance of T lymphocytes (Fig.
196.2). Advanced and uncontrolled disease leads to pannus formation
and progressive erosion of articular cartilage and contiguous bone
(Figs. 196.3 and 196.4).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Arthritis must be present ≥6 weeks to make a diagnosis of any JIA
subtype. Arthritis is defined by intraarticular swelling or the presence
of two or more of the following signs: limitation in range of motion
(ROM), tenderness or pain on motion, and warmth. Initial symptoms
may be subtle or acute and often include morning stiffness with a limp
or gelling after inactivity. Easy fatigability and poor sleep quality may
be present. Involved joints are often swollen, warm to the touch, and
uncomfortable on movement or palpation with reduced ROM, but
usually are not erythematous. Arthritis in large joints, especially knees,
initially accelerates linear growth and causes the affected limb to be
longer, resulting in a discrepancy in limb lengths. Continued inflammation stimulates rapid and premature closure of the growth plate,
resulting in shortened bones.
Oligoarthritis is defined as involving four or fewer joints within the
first 6 months of disease onset, and often only a single joint is involved
(see Table 196.4). It predominantly affects the large joints of the lower
extremities, such as the knees and ankles (Fig. 196.5). Isolated involvement of upper-­extremity large joints is less common. Those in whom
disease never develops in four or more joints are regarded as having
persistent oligoarticular JIA, whereas evolution of disease in five
or more joints after 6 months changes the classification to extended
oligoarticular JIA and is associated with a worse prognosis. Isolated
involvement of the hip is almost never a presenting sign and suggests
ERA (see Chapter 197) or a nonrheumatic cause. The presence of a
positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) test confers increased risk for
asymptomatic anterior uveitis, requiring periodic slit-­lamp examination (Table 196.5). ANA positivity may also be correlated with younger
age at disease onset, females, asymmetric arthritis, and fewer involved
joints over time.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 196.2
 International
League
of Associations
for Rheumatology
Classification
of Juvenile
Idiopathic
Arthritis
(JIA)
1472
Part XIV
u Rheumatic
Diseases
of Childhood
(Connective
Tissue Disease,
Collagen
Vascular
Diseases)
CATEGORY

DEFINITION

EXCLUSIONS

Systemic JIA

Arthritis in one or more joints with, or preceded by, fever of ≥2 wk
in duration that is documented to be daily (quotidian*) for at
least 3 days and accompanied by one or more of the following:
1.	Evanescent (nonfixed) erythematous rash
2.	Generalized lymph node enlargement
3.	Hepatomegaly or splenomegaly or both
4.	Serositis†

a.	Psoriasis or a history of psoriasis in patient or first-­
degree relative
b.	Arthritis in an HLA-­B27–positive male beginning
after the sixth birthday
c.	Ankylosing spondylitis, enthesitis-­related arthritis,
sacroiliitis with IBD, Reiter syndrome, or acute
anterior uveitis, or history of one of these disorders
in a first-­degree relative
d.	Presence of IgM RF on at least two occasions at
least 3 mo apart

Oligoarthritis

Arthritis affecting one to four joints during the first 6 mo of
disease; two subcategories are recognized:
1.	Persistent oligoarthritis—affecting four or fewer joints
throughout the disease course
2.	Extended oligoarthritis—affecting five or more joints after the
first 6 mo of disease

a, b, c, d (above)
plus
e. Presence of systemic JIA in the patient

Polyarthritis
(RF negative)

Arthritis affecting five or more joints during the first 6 mo of
disease; a test for RF is negative

a, b, c, d, e

Polyarthritis
(RF positive)

Arthritis affecting five or more joints during the first 6 mo of
disease; two or more tests for RF at least 3 mo apart during the
first 6 mo of disease are positive

a, b, c, e

Psoriatic arthritis

Arthritis and psoriasis or arthritis and at least two of the following:

b, c, d, e

1.	Dactylitis‡

2.	Nail pitting§ and onycholysis
3.	Psoriasis in first-­degree relative
Enthesitis-­related
arthritis

Arthritis and enthesitis¶ or arthritis or enthesitis with at least two of
the following:

a, d, e

1.	Presence of or history of sacroiliac joint tenderness or
inflammatory lumbosacral pain, or both**
2.	Presence of HLA-­B27 antigen
3.	Onset of arthritis in a male >6 yr old
4.	Acute (symptomatic) anterior uveitis
5.	History of ankylosing spondylitis, enthesitis-­related arthritis,
sacroiliitis with IBD, Reiter syndrome, or acute anterior uveitis in
first-­degree relative
Undifferentiated
arthritis

Arthritis that fulfills criteria in no category or two or more of the
above categories

*Quotidian fever is defined as a fever that rises to 39°C (102.2°F) once daily and returns to 37°C (98.6°F) between fever peaks.
†Serositis refers to pericarditis, pleuritis, or peritonitis or some combination of the three.
‡Dactylitis is swelling of one or more digit(s), usually in an asymmetric distribution, that extends beyond the joint margin.
§A minimum of two pits on any one or more nails at any time.
¶Enthesitis is defined as tenderness at the insertion of a tendon, ligament, joint capsule, or fascia to bone.
**Inflammatory lumbosacral pain refers to lumbosacral pain at rest with morning stiffness that improves on movement.
IBD, Inflammatory bowel disease; RF, rheumatoid factor.
From Firestein GS, Budd RC, Harris ED Jr, et al., eds. Kelley’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2009.

Table 196.3  Characteristics of ACR and ILAR Classifications of Childhood Chronic Arthritis
PARAMETER

ACR (1977)

ILAR (1997)

Term

Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA)

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)

Minimum duration

≥6 wk

≥6 wk

Age at onset

<16 yr

<16 yr

Four or fewer joints in first 6 mo after presentation

Pauciarticular

Oligoarthritis:
Persistent: four or fewer joints for course of disease
Extended: four or more joints after 6 mo

Four or more joints in first 6 mo after presentation

Polyarticular

Polyarthritis, RF negative
Polyarthritis, RF positive

Fever, rash, arthritis

Systemic onset

Systemic

Other categories included

Exclusion of other forms

Psoriatic arthritis
Enthesitis-­related arthritis
Undifferentiated:
Fits no other category
Fits more than one category

Inclusion of psoriatic arthritis, inflammatory bowel
disease, ankylosing spondylitis

No (see Chapter 197)

Yes

ACR, American College of Rheumatology; ILAR, International League of Associations for Rheumatology; RF, rheumatoid factor.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PEAK AGE AT
ONSET (yr)

FEMALE:MALE
RATIO

% OF ALL JIA
CASES

ARTHRITIS
PATTERN

EXTRAARTICULAR
FEATURES

LABORATORY
INVESTIGATIONS

Systemic
arthritis

1-­5

1:1

5-­15

Polyarticular, often
affecting knees,
wrists, and ankles;
also fingers, neck,
and hips

Daily fever;
evanescent rash;
pericarditis;
pleuritis

Anemia; WBC ↑↑; ESR ↑↑; CRP
↑↑; ferritin ↑; platelets ↑↑
(normal or ↓ in MAS)

Less responsive to standard treatment
with MTX and anti-­TNF agents;
consider IL-­1 or IL-­6 inhibitors in
resistant cases or as first-­line therapy

Oligoarthritis

2-­4

3:1

40-­50 (but ethnic
variation)

Knees ++; ankles,
fingers +

Uveitis in 30% of
cases

ANA positive in 60%; other
test results usually normal;
may have mildly ↑ ESR/CRP

NSAIDs and intraarticular
corticosteroids; MTX occasionally
required

RF negative

2-­4 and 10-­14

3:1 and 10:1

20-­35

Symmetric or
asymmetric; small
and large joints;
cervical spine;
temporomandibular
joint

Uveitis in 10%

ANA positive in 40%; RF
negative; ESR ↑ or ↑↑; CRP ↑
or normal; mild anemia

Standard therapy with MTX and
NSAIDs; then, if nonresponsive,
anti-­TNF agents or other biologics,
including abatacept, indicated as
first-­line therapy

RF positive

9-­12

9:1

<10

Aggressive symmetric
polyarthritis

Rheumatoid nodules
in 10%; low-­grade
fever

RF positive; ESR ↑↑; CRP ↑/
normal; mild anemia

Long-­term remission unlikely; early
aggressive therapy is warranted

Psoriatic
arthritis

2-­4 and 9-­11

2:1

5-­10

Asymmetric arthritis
Uveitis in 10%;
of small or medium-­
psoriasis in 50%
sized joints

ANA positive in 50%; ESR
↑; CRP ↑ or normal; mild
anemia

NSAIDs and intraarticular
corticosteroids; MTX, anti-­TNF
agents

Enthesitis-­
related
arthritis

9-­12

1:7

5-­10

Predominantly
lower limb joints
affected; sometimes
axial skeleton
(but less than in
adult, ankylosing
spondylitis)

80% of patients positive for
HLA-­B27

NSAIDs and intraarticular
corticosteroids; consider
sulfasalazine as alternative to MTX;
anti-­TNF agents

ILAR SUBTYPE

NOTES ON THERAPY

Polyarthritis:

Acute anterior
uveitis; association
with reactive
arthritis and
inflammatory
bowel disease

ILAR, International League of Associations for Rheumatology; ANA, antinuclear antibody; CRP, C-­reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; MAS, macrophage activation syndrome; MTX, methotrexate; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs; RF, rheumatoid factor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; WBC, white blood cell count.
From Firestein GS, Budd RC, Harris ED Jr, et al., eds. Kelley’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2009.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1473

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 196.4  Overview of Main Features of Subtypes of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA)

1474 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
IFNγlow
NK cell
IFNγlow
IFNγlow
environment?

3

4
Th1 fate/role?

X

Necrotic
granulocyte

4

IL-18R
3
DAMPs 1
(S100A8/A9/A12)

(i)NKT cells

6

7

IFNγlow
environment?

γδTCR

*

i.e. IPP
2

IL-18

Granulocyte

IL-18R

Proliferation 2
IL-17 expression

Th17 fate/role?

IL-1β

1

DAMPs
(S100A8/A9/A12)

7

γδT cells

IL-18

IL-1R
2

PAMPs
1

IL-17

HLA-DRB1*11
*
DAMPs
(S100A8/A9)

IL-6
others

Ag

Intracellular
5
role?

*
Presentation?

7
CD4+ T cell fate?

5
αβTCR

Monocyte

Innately
adaptive

Innate

Adaptive

Arthritic sJIA

Febrile sJIA
Disease progression

Fig. 196.1 Innately adaptive or truly autoimmune: a pathophysiologic model for disease progression in systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA).
Innate immune cells, such as myeloid cells (granulocytes, monocytes) and natural killer (NK) cells, are relevant during the acute febrile phase of
systemic JIA. (1) Myeloid cells release interleukin-­1 (IL-­1) family cytokines (IL-­1β, IL-­18) and other proinflammatory cytokines, which can either be triggered by infection (pathogen-­associated molecular patterns [PAMPs]) or result from pattern-­recognition receptor activation by damage-­associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs) released from stressed or necrotic cells. (2) Together with γδ T-­cell receptor (γδ TCR) activation by endogenous ligands
(i.e., isopentenyl pyrophosphate [IPP]) or bacterial ligands, IL-­1 and IL-­18 can trigger IL-­17 expression from γδ T cells, while (3) IL-­18 fails to trigger
interferon-­γ (IFNγ) expression from NK cells because of a defective IL-­18 receptor (IL-­18R). (4) Similarly, systemic JIA Th1 cells express only low levels
of IFNγ. Both cell types may contribute to hypophysiologic IFNγ levels, potentially promoting IL-­17 expression in disease. Although a genetic association or alterations in frequencies have been reported, the pathomechanistic roles of (5) HLA-­DRB1*11 (whether antigen [Ag] presentation or
intracellular function) or (6) invariant NKT (iNKT) and (7) CD4+ T cells in disease progression are yet largely unclear. Thus current data imply that innately adaptive immune cells bridging innate and adaptive immunity, rather than classic B or T lymphocytes, play a central role in promoting disease
progression in systemic JIA. (From Kessel C, Hedrich CM, Foeil D. Innately adaptive or truly autoimmune: is there something unique about systemic
juvenile idiopathic arthritis? Arth Rheumatol. 2020;72:210–219, Fig. 2, p. 214)

Polyarthritis is characterized by inflammation of five or more joints
in both upper and lower extremities (Figs. 196.6 and 196.7). Rheumatoid factor (RF)–positive polyarthritis resembles the characteristic
symmetric presentation of adult rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatoid

nodules on the extensor surfaces of the elbows, spine, and over the
Achilles tendons, although unusual, are associated with a more severe
course and almost exclusively occur in RF-­positive individuals (Fig.
196.8). Micrognathia reflects chronic temporomandibular joint

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1475

Fig. 196.2 Synovial biopsy specimen from a 10-­yr-­old child with oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis. There is a dense infiltration of
lymphocytes and plasma cells in the synovium.

Fig. 196.4 MRI with gadolinium of a 10-­yr-­old child with juvenile idi-

opathic arthritis (same patient as in Fig. 196.2). The dense white signal
in the synovium near the distal femur, proximal tibia, and patella reflects
inflammation. MRI of the knee is useful to exclude ligamentous injury,
chondromalacia of the patella, and tumor.

Fig. 196.3 Arthroscopy in the shoulder of a child with juvenile idi-

opathic arthritis showing pannus formation and cartilage erosions.
(Courtesy Dr. Alison Toth.)

disease (Fig. 196.9). Cervical spine involvement (Fig. 196.10), manifesting as decreased neck extension, occurs with a risk of atlantoaxial
subluxation and neurologic sequelae. Hip disease may be subtle, with
findings of decreased or painful ROM on examination (Fig. 196.11).
Systemic JIA is characterized by arthritis (may not be evident on
initial presentation), fever, rash, and prominent visceral involvement,
including hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and serositis (pericarditis). The characteristic fever, defined as spiking temperatures to
≥39°C (102.2°F), occurs on a daily or twice-­daily basis for at least 2
weeks, with a rapid return to normal or subnormal temperatures (Fig.
196.12). The fever is often present in the evening and is frequently
accompanied by a characteristic faint, erythematous, macular rash. The
evanescent salmon-­colored lesions, classic for sJIA, are linear or circular and are usually distributed over the trunk and proximal extremities
(Fig. 196.13). The classic rash is nonpruritic and migratory with lesions
lasting <1 hour. Koebner phenomenon, a cutaneous hypersensitivity
in which classic lesions are brought on by superficial trauma, is often
present. Heat can also evoke rash. Fever, rash, hepatosplenomegaly, and
lymphadenopathy are present in >70% of affected children. Without
arthritis, the differential diagnosis includes the episodic fever (autoinflammatory) syndromes (see Chapter 204), infection (endocarditis,
rheumatic fever, brucellosis, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in
children [MIS-­C]), other rheumatic disorders (systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE], vasculitis syndromes, serum sickness, Kawasaki

Fig. 196.5 Oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis with swelling and
flexion contracture of the right knee.

disease, sarcoidosis, Castleman disease), inflammatory bowel disease,
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis syndromes, and malignancy
(leukemia, neuroblastoma, lymphoma). Some children initially present with only systemic features and evolve over time, but definitive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1476 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 196.5  Frequency of Ophthalmologic Examination in
Patients with Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
REFERRAL
• Patients should be referred at the time of diagnosis, or suspicion,
of JIA
INITIAL SCREENING EXAMINATION
• Should occur as soon as possible and no later than 6 wk from
referral
• Symptomatic ocular patients should be seen within a week of
referral
ONGOING SCREENING
• Screening at 2-­monthly intervals from onset of arthritis for 6 mo
• Followed by 3-­4 monthly screening for time outlined below
OLIGOARTICULAR JIA, PSORIATIC ARTHRITIS, AND
ENTHESITIS-­RELATED ARTHRITIS IRRESPECTIVE OF ANA
STATUS, ONSET UNDER 11 YR
AGE AT ONSET (YR)

LENGTH OF SCREENING (YR)

<3

8

3-­4

6

5-­8

3

9-­10

1

Fig. 196.6 Hands and wrists of a child with polyarticular juvenile idi-

opathic arthritis, rheumatoid factor negative. Notice the symmetric involvement of the wrists, metacarpophalangeal joints, and proximal and
distal interphalangeal joints. In this photograph, there is cream with
occlusive dressing on the patient’s right hand in preparation for placement of an intravenous line for administration of a biologic agent.

POLYARTICULAR, ANA-­POSITIVE JIA, ONSET <10 YR
AGE AT ONSET (YR)

LENGTH OF SCREENING (YR)

<6

5

6-­9

2

Polyarticular, ANA-­negative JIA, onset <7 yr
5-­yr screening for all children
Systemic JIA and rheumatoid factor–positive polyarticular JIA
• Uveitis risk very low; however, diagnostic uncertainty in the early
stages and overlap of symptoms may mean initial screening is
indicated
All categories, onset >11 yr
• 1-­yr screening for all children
After stopping immunosuppression (e.g., methotrexate)
• Two-­monthly screening for 6 mo, then revert to previous
screening frequency as above
After discharge from screening
• Patients should receive advice about regular self-­monitoring
by checking vision uniocularly once weekly and when to seek
medical advice
• Screening may need to continue indefinitely in situations where
a young person may be unable to detect a change in vision or
be unwilling to seek re-­referral
• Annual check by optometrist as a useful adjunct
Data from Clarke SLN, Sen ES, Ramanan AV. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis-­associated
uveitis. Pediatr Rheumatol. 2016;14:27.

diagnosis requires the presence of arthritis. Arthritis may affect any
number of joints, but the course is classically polyarticular; may be very
destructive; and can include hip, cervical spine, and temporomandibular joint involvement.
Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS; see Chapter 207) is a rare
but potentially fatal complication of sJIA that can occur at any time
(onset, medication change, active or remission) during the disease
course. It is also referred to as secondary hemophagocytic syndrome or
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) (see Chapter 556.2). There
is increasing evidence that sJIA/MAS and HLH share similar functional defects in granule-­
dependent cytotoxic lymphocyte activity.
In addition, sJIA-­associated MAS and HLH share genetic variants in
approximately 35% of patients with sJIA/MAS. MAS classically manifests as acute onset of high-­spiking fevers, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and encephalopathy. Laboratory evaluation shows

A

B

Fig. 196.7 Progression of joint destruction in a child with polyarticular

juvenile idiopathic arthritis, rheumatoid factor positive, despite doses
of corticosteroids sufficient to suppress symptoms in the interval between radiographs. A, Radiograph of the hand at onset. B, Radiograph
taken 4 years later, showing a loss of articular cartilage and destructive changes in the distal and proximal interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints as well as destruction and fusion of wrist bones.

thrombocytopenia and leukopenia with elevated liver enzymes, lactate
dehydrogenase, ferritin, and triglycerides. Patients may have purpura
and mucosal bleeding, as well as elevated fibrin split product values and
prolonged prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times. The ESR falls
because of hypofibrinogenemia and hepatic dysfunction, a feature useful in distinguishing MAS from a flare of systemic disease (Table 196.6).
An international consensus panel developed a set of classification criteria for sJIA-­associated MAS, including hyperferritinemia (>684 ng/
mL) and any two of the following: thrombocytopenia (≤181 × 109/L),
elevated liver enzymes (aspartate transaminase >48 U/L), hypertriglyceridemia (>156 mg/dL), and hypofibrinogenemia (≤360 mg/dL) (see
Table 196.6). These criteria apply to a febrile patient suspected of sJIA
and in the absence of disorders such as immune-­mediated thrombocytopenia, infectious hepatitis, familial hypertriglyceridemia, or visceral
leishmaniasis. A relative change in laboratory values is likely more relevant in making an early diagnosis than are absolute normal values. A
bone marrow aspiration and biopsy may be helpful in diagnosis, but

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1477

Fig. 196.8 Rheumatoid nodules overlying bony prominences in an
adolescent with rheumatoid factor–positive polyarthritis. (From Rosenberg AM, Oen KG. Polyarthritis. In: Cassiday JT, Petty RE, Laxer RM,
et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2011: Fig 15-­5, p. 257.)

Fig. 196.10 Radiograph of the cervical spine of a child with active

juvenile idiopathic arthritis showing fusion of the neural arch between
joints C2 and C3, narrowing and erosion of the remaining neural arch
joints, obliteration of the apophyseal space, and loss of the normal lordosis.

Fig. 196.11 Severe hip disease in 13-­yr-­old male with active systemic

juvenile idiopathic arthritis exhibiting destruction on the right.

evidence of hemophagocytosis is not always evident. Emergency treatment with high-­dose intravenous methylprednisolone, cyclosporine,
or anakinra may be effective. Severe cases may require therapy similar
to that for primary HLH (see Chapter 556.2).
An inflammatory lung disease has also recently been recognized as
a rare but life-­threatening complication in children with sJIA. Children can present with little to no respiratory symptoms; acute clubbing
can be an early indicator. The predominant pathology is pulmonary
alveolar proteinosis and/or endogenous lipoid pneumonia. Compared
with children without lung disease, children with sJIA and lung disease
are younger at diagnosis, have a history of MAS, have higher serum
IL-­18 levels, and have higher exposure and adverse reaction rates to
cytokine inhibitors. Given the more severe disease course, lung disease
in children with sJIA requires a high index of suspicion and prompt
evaluation.
Bone mineral metabolism and skeletal maturation are adversely
affected in children with JIA, regardless of subtype. Children with JIA
have decreased bone mass (osteopenia), which appears to be associated
with increased disease activity. Increased levels of cytokines such as
TNF-­α and IL-­6, both key regulators in bone metabolism, have deleterious effects on bone both within the joint and systemically in the axial

41
Temperature (°C)

Fig. 196.9 CT scan of the temporomandibular joint of a child with

juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Radiograph shows destruction of the femoral head and acetabula, joint space narrowing, and subluxation of left
hip. The child had received corticosteroids systemically for 9 years.

40
39
38
37
36
35

0

2

4

6

8

10

12 14
Days

16

18

20

22

24

Fig. 196.12 High-­spiking intermittent fever in a 3-­yr-­old child with
systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis. (From Ravelli A, Martini A. Juvenile
idiopathic arthritis. Lancet 2007;369:767–778.)

and appendicular bones. Abnormalities of skeletal maturation become
most prominent during the pubertal growth spurt.

DIAGNOSIS

JIA is a clinical diagnosis without any diagnostic laboratory tests. The
meticulous clinical exclusion of other diseases and many mimics is
therefore essential. Laboratory studies, including tests for ANA and RF,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1478 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Fig. 196.13 The rash of systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis is

salmon-­colored, macular, and nonpruritic. Individual lesions are transient and occur in crops over the trunk and extremities. (From American
College of Rheumatology. Clinical Slide Collection on the Rheumatic
Diseases. Atlanta, GA: ACR. Copyright 1991, 1995, 1997.)

Table 196.6  Macrophage Activation Syndrome (MAS)
LABORATORY FEATURES*
1.	Cytopenias
2.	Abnormal liver function tests
3.	Coagulopathy (hypofibrinogenemia)
4.	Decreased erythrocyte sedimentation rate
5.	Hypertriglyceridemia
6.	Hyponatremia
7.	Hypoalbuminemia
8.	Hyperferritinemia
9.	Elevated sCD25 and sCD163
CLINICAL FEATURES*
1.	Nonremitting fever
2.	Hepatomegaly
3.	Splenomegaly
4.	Lymphadenopathy
5.	Hemorrhages
6.	Central nervous system dysfunction (headache, seizures, lethargy,
coma, disorientation)
HISTOPATHOLOGIC FEATURES*
1.	Macrophage hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow aspirate
2.	Increased CD163 staining of the bone marrow
PROPOSED CRITERIA FOR MAS IN SJIA†
1.	Serum ferritin >684 ng/mL and
2.	Any two of the following:
•
•
•
•

Thrombocytopenia (≤181 × 109/L)
Elevated liver enzymes (aspartate transaminase >48 U/L)
Hypertriglyceridemia (>156 mg/dL)
Hypofibrinogenemia (≤360 mg/dL)

*From Ravelli A, Grom A, Behrens E, Cron R. Macrophage activation syndrome as part
of systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis: Diagnosis, genetics, pathophysiology and
treatment. Genes Immun. 2012;13:289–298.
†From Ravelli A, Minoia F, Davì S, et al. 2016 Classification criteria for macrophage
activation syndrome complicating systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis: a European
League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology/Paediatric
Rheumatology International Trials Organisation collaborative initiative. Arthritis
Rheumatol. 2016;68:566–576.

are only supportive or prognostic, and their results may be normal in
patients with JIA (see Tables 196.1, 196.3, and 196.4).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis for arthritis is broad, and a careful,
thorough investigation for other underlying etiology is imperative
(Table 196.7). History, physical examination, laboratory tests, and

radiography may help exclude other possible causes. Arthritis can
be a presenting manifestation for any of the multisystem rheumatic
diseases of childhood, including SLE (see Chapter 199), juvenile
dermatomyositis (see Chapter 200), sarcoidosis (see Chapter 209),
and the vasculitic syndromes (see Chapter 210). In scleroderma
(see Chapter 201), limited ROM caused by sclerotic skin overlying a joint may be confused with sequelae from chronic inflammatory arthritis. Acute rheumatic fever is characterized by exquisite
joint pain and tenderness, remittent fever, and migratory polyarthritis. Autoimmune hepatitis can also be associated with an acute
arthritis.
Many infections are associated with arthritis, and a recent history
of infectious symptoms may help make a distinction. Viruses, including parvovirus B19, rubella, Epstein-­Barr virus, hepatitis B virus, and
HIV, can induce a transient arthritis. Arthritis may follow enteric infections (see Chapter 198). Lyme disease should be considered in children with oligoarthritis living in or visiting endemic areas (see Chapter
268). Although a history of tick exposure, preceding flulike illness, and
subsequent rash should be sought, these are not always present. Monoarticular arthritis unresponsive to antiinflammatory treatment may be
the result of chronic mycobacterial or other infection, such as Kingella
kingae, and the diagnosis is established by synovial fluid analysis (polymerase chain reaction [PCR]) or biopsy. Acute onset of fever and a
painful, erythematous, hot joint suggests septic arthritis (see Chapter
726). Isolated hip pain with limited ROM suggests suppurative arthritis, osteomyelitis (see Chapter 725), toxic synovitis, Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes
disease, slipped capital femoral epiphysis, and chondrolysis of the hip
(see Chapter 719).
Lower-­extremity arthritis and tenderness over insertion of ligaments and tendons, especially in a male child, suggest ERA (see Chapter 197). Psoriatic arthritis can manifest as limited joint involvement
in an unusual distribution (e.g., small joints of the hand and ankle)
years before the onset of cutaneous disease. Inflammatory bowel disease may manifest as oligoarthritis, usually affecting joints in the lower
extremities, as well as gastrointestinal symptoms, elevations in ESR,
and microcytic anemia.
Many conditions present solely with arthralgia (i.e., joint pain).
Hypermobility may cause joint pain, especially in the lower extremities. Growing pains should be suspected in a child age 4-­12 years
complaining of leg pain in the evening with normal investigative
studies and no morning symptoms. Nocturnal pain that awakens
the child also alerts to the possibility of a malignancy. An adolescent with missed school days may suggest a diagnosis of fibromyalgia (see Chapter 211.3).
Children with leukemia or neuroblastoma may have joint or bone
pain resulting from malignant infiltration of the bone, synovium, or
more often the bone marrow, sometimes months before demonstrating
lymphoblasts on peripheral blood smear. Physical examination may
reveal no tenderness, a deeper pain with palpation of the bone, or pain
out of proportion to exam findings. Malignant pain often awakens the
child from sleep and may cause cytopenias. Because platelets are an
acute-­phase reactant, a high ESR with leukopenia and a low-­normal
platelet count may also be a clue to underlying leukemia. In addition,
the characteristic quotidian fever of sJIA is absent in malignancy. Bone
marrow examination is necessary for diagnosis. Some diseases, such
as cystic fibrosis, diabetes mellitus, and the glycogen storage diseases,
have associated arthropathies. Swelling that extends beyond the joint
can be a sign of lymphedema or IgA vasculitis (formerly Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura; see Chapter 210.1). A peripheral arthritis indistinguishable from JIA occurs in the humoral immunodeficiencies
(see Chapter 165), such as common variable immunodeficiency and
X-­
linked agammaglobulinemia. Skeletal dysplasias associated with
a degenerative arthropathy are diagnosed from their characteristic
radiologic abnormalities.
Systemic onset of JIA often presents as a fever of unknown origin
(see Chapter 222). Important considerations in the differential diagnosis include infections (endocarditis, brucellosis, cat-­scratch disease,
Q fever, mononucleosis), autoinflammatory disease (see Chapter 204),
malignancy (leukemia, lymphoma, neuroblastoma), and HLH.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1479
Table 196.7  Conditions Causing Arthritis or Extremity Pain
RHEUMATIC AND INFLAMMATORY DISEASES
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Scleroderma
Sjögren syndrome
Behçet disease
Overlap syndromes
Antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)–associated vasculitis
Sarcoidosis
Kawasaki syndrome
IgA vasculitis (formerly Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis
SERONEGATIVE SPONDYLOARTHROPATHIES
Juvenile ankylosing spondylitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Psoriatic arthritis
Reactive arthritis associated with urethritis, iridocyclitis, and
mucocutaneous lesions
INFECTIOUS ILLNESSES
Bacterial arthritis (septic arthritis, Staphylococcus aureus, Kingella
kingae, pneumococcal, gonococcal, Haemophilus influenzae)
Lyme disease
Viral illness (parvovirus, rubella, mumps, Epstein-­Barr, hepatitis B,
chikungunya)
Fungal arthritis
Mycobacterial infection
Spirochetal infection
Endocarditis
REACTIVE ARTHRITIS
Acute rheumatic fever
Reactive arthritis (postinfectious caused by Shigella, Salmonella,
Yersinia, Chlamydia, post-streptococcal, or meningococcus)
Serum sickness
Toxic synovitis of the hip
Postimmunization
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Immunoglobulin A deficiency
Common variable immunodeficiency disease (CVID)
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
CONGENITAL AND METABOLIC DISORDERS
Gout
Pseudogout
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Thyroid disease (hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism)
Hyperparathyroidism
Vitamin C deficiency (scurvy)
Hereditary connective tissue disease (Marfan syndrome,
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome)
Fabry disease
Farber disease
Fucosidosis
Amyloidosis (familial Mediterranean fever)

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Hematologic abnormalities often reflect the degree of systemic or articular inflammation, with elevated white blood cell (WBC) and platelet
counts and a microcytic anemia. Inflammation may also cause elevations in ESR and CRP, although it is not unusual for both to be normal
in children with JIA.

BONE AND CARTILAGE DISORDERS
Trauma
Patellofemoral syndrome
Hypermobility syndromes
Osteochondritis dissecans
Avascular necrosis (including Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease)
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Osteolysis
Benign bone tumors (including osteoid osteoma)
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Rickets
Idiopathic multicentric osteolysis
Camptodactyly-­arthropathy-­coxa vara-­pericarditis syndrome
Progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia
Pachydermodactyly
NEUROPATHIC DISORDERS
Peripheral neuropathies
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Charcot joints
NEOPLASTIC DISORDERS
Leukemia
Neuroblastoma
Lymphoma
Bone tumors (osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma)
Histiocytic syndromes
Synovial tumors
HEMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Hemophilia
Hemoglobinopathies (including sickle cell disease)
MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERS
Autoinflammatory diseases
Recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis
Pigmented villonodular synovitis
Plant-­thorn synovitis (foreign body arthritis)
Myositis ossificans
Eosinophilic fasciitis
Tendinitis (overuse injury)
Raynaud phenomenon
Hemophagocytic syndromes
PAIN SYNDROMES
Fibromyalgia
Growing pains
Depression (with somatization)
Complex regional pain syndrome

Elevated ANA titers are present in 40–85% of children with oligoarticular or polyarticular JIA but are rare with sJIA. ANA seropositivity
is associated with increased risk of chronic uveitis in JIA. Approximately 5–15% of patients with polyarticular JIA are seropositive for RF.
Anti–cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, as with RF, is a marker of
more aggressive disease. Both ANA and RF seropositivity can occur in
association with transient events, such as viral infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1480 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Children with sJIA usually have striking elevations in inflammatory markers and WBC and platelet counts. Hemoglobin levels are low,
typically 7-­10 g/dL, with indices consistent with anemia of chronic
disease. The ESR is usually high, except in MAS. Although immunoglobulin levels tend to be high, ANA and RF are uncommon. Ferritin
values are typically elevated and can be markedly increased in MAS
(>10,000 ng/mL). In the setting of MAS, all cell lines have the potential
to decline precipitously because of the consumptive process. A low or
normal WBC count and/or platelet count in a child with active sJIA
should raise concerns for MAS.

Fig. 196.14 Early (6 month duration) radiographic changes of juve-

nile idiopathic arthritis. Soft tissue swelling and periosteal new bone
formation appear adjacent to the second and fourth proximal interphalangeal joints.

A

Early radiographic changes of arthritis include soft tissue swelling,
periarticular osteopenia, and periosteal new-­bone apposition around
affected joints (Fig. 196.14). Continued active disease may lead to
subchondral erosions, loss of cartilage with varying degrees of bony
destruction, and fusion. Characteristic radiographic changes in the
cervical spine, most frequently in the neural arch joints at C2-­C3 (see
Fig. 196.10), may progress to atlantoaxial subluxation. MRI is more
sensitive than radiography to detect early changes (Fig. 196.15).

TREATMENT

The goals of treatment are to achieve disease remission, prevent or halt
joint damage, and foster normal growth and development. All children with JIA need individualized treatment plans, and management
is tailored according to disease subtype and severity, presence of poor
prognostic indicators, and response to medications. Disease management also requires monitoring for potential medication toxicities (see
Chapter 195).
Children with oligoarthritis often show partial response to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), with improvement in
inflammation and pain (Table 196.8). Those who have no or partial
response after 4-­6 weeks of treatment with NSAIDs or who have functional limitations such as joint contracture or leg-­length discrepancy
benefit from injection of intraarticular corticosteroids. Triamcinolone
hexacetonide is a long-­lasting preparation that provides a prolonged
response. A substantial fraction of patients with oligoarthritis show
no response to NSAIDs and injections and therefore require treatment
with disease-­modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), including conventional synthetic DMARDs (csDMARDs) like methotrexate, and, if
no response, biologic DMARDs (bDMARDs) like TNF inhibitors.
NSAIDs alone rarely induce remission in children with polyarthritis
or sJIA. Methotrexate is the oldest and least toxic of the csDMARDs
available for adjunctive therapy. It may take 6-­12 weeks to see the
effects of methotrexate. Failure of methotrexate monotherapy warrants
the addition of a bDMARD. bDMARDs that inhibit proinflammatory
cytokines, such as TNF-­α, IL-­1, and IL-­6, demonstrate excellent disease
control. TNF-­α antagonists (e.g., etanercept, adalimumab, golimumab)
are used to treat children with an inadequate response to methotrexate, poor prognostic factors, or severe disease onset. Early aggressive
therapy with a combination of methotrexate and a TNF-­α antagonist
may result in earlier achievement of clinically inactive disease. Abatacept, a selective inhibitor of T-­cell activation, and tocilizumab, an IL-­6

B

Fig. 196.15 MRI of the wrist in a child with wrist arthritis. A, Multiple erosions of carpal bones. B, After administration of gadolinium contrast agent,
uptake is consistent with active synovitis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1481
Table 196.8  Pharmacologic Treatment of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA)
TYPICAL
MEDICATIONS

TYPICAL DOSES

NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS
Naproxen
15 mg/kg/day PO divided bid (maximum
dose 500 mg bid)
Ibuprofen
Meloxicam

Leflunomide*

Initial 12.5 mg/kg PO daily; increase by
10 mg/kg/day
Maintenance: 40-­50 mg/kg divided bid
(maximum dose 2 g/day)
10-­20 mg PO daily

BIOLOGIC AGENTS
Anti–Tumor Necrosis Factor-­α
Etanercept
0.8 mg/kg SC weekly or 0.4 mg/kg SC twice
weekly (maximum dose 50 mg/wk)
Infliximab*
Adalimumab
Golimumab

Polyarthritis
Systemic
Oligoarthritis
Same as above

40 mg/kg/day PO divided tid (maximum
dose 800 mg tid)
0.125 mg/kg PO once daily (maximum dose Same as above
15 mg daily)

DISEASE-­MODIFYING ANTIRHEUMATIC DRUGS
Methotrexate
0.5-­1 mg/kg PO or SC weekly (maximum
dose 25 mg/wk)
Sulfasalazine

JIA SUBTYPE

3-­10 mg/kg IV q4-­8wk
10 to <15 kg: 10 mg SC every other week
15 to <30 kg: 20 mg SC every other week
>30 kg: 40 mg SC every other week
80 mg/m2 IV wk 0 and 4 and then q8 wk

750 mg/m2 IV 2 wk × 2 (maximum dose
1,000 mg)

Gastritis, renal and hepatic toxicity,
pseudoporphyria
Same as above
Same as above

Polyarthritis
Systemic
Persistent or extended oligoarthritis
Polyarthritis

Nausea, vomiting, oral ulcerations, hepatic
toxicity, blood count dyscrasias,
immunosuppression, teratogenicity
GI upset, allergic reaction, pancytopenia,
renal and hepatic toxicity,
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome

Polyarthritis

GI upset, hepatic toxicity, allergic rash,
alopecia (reversible), teratogenicity
(needs washout with cholestyramine)

Polyarthritis
Systemic
Persistent or extended oligoarthritis
Same as above
Same as above

Immunosuppressant, concern for
malignancy, demyelinating disease, lupus-­
like reaction, injection site reaction
Same as above, infusion reaction
Same as above

Same as above

Same as above

Anticytotoxic T-­Lymphocyte–Associated Antigen-­4 Immunoglobulin
Abatacept
<75 kg: 10 mg/kg/dose IV q4wk
Polyarthritis
75-­100 kg: 750 mg/dose IV q4wk
>100 kg: 1,000 mg/dose IV q4wk
SC once weekly:
10 to <25 kg: 50 mg
≥25 to <50 kg: 87.5 mg
≥50 kg: 125 mg
Anti-­CD20
Rituximab*

SIDE EFFECT(S)

Immunosuppressant, concern for
malignancy, infusion reaction

Polyarthritis

Immunosuppressant, infusion reaction,
progressive multifocal encephalopathy

Interleukin-­1 Inhibitors
Anakinra*
1-­2 mg/kg SC daily

Systemic

Canakinumab

Systemic

Immunosuppressant, GI upset, injection
site reaction
Immunosuppressant, headache, GI upset,
injection site reaction
Immunosuppressant, allergic reaction,
dyslipidemia, injection site reaction

Rilonacept*

4 mg/kg/dose SC q4wk (maximum dose
300 mg)
2.2 mg/kg/dose SC weekly (maximum dose
160 mg)

Systemic

Interleukin-­6 Receptor Antagonist
Tocilizumab
<30 kg:
Systemic
12 mg/kg/dose IV q2wk (maximum dose
800 mg)
162 mg SC q2wk
≥30 kg:
8 mg/kg/dose IV q2wk (maximum dose 800 mg)
162 mg SC weekly
<30 kg:
Polyarthritis
10 mg/kg/dose IV q4wk (maximum dose
800 mg)
162 mg SC q3wk
≥30 kg:
8 mg/kg/dose IV q4wk
162 mg SC q2wk
Janus Kinase Inhibitors
Tofacitinib
10 to <20 kg: 3.2 mg PO bid
20 to <40 kg: 4 mg PO bid
≥ 40 kg = 5 mg PO bid

Polyarthritis

*Not indicated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use in JIA as of 2021.

Immunosuppressant, hepatic toxicity,
dyslipidemia, cytopenias, GI upset,
infusion reaction

Immunosuppressant, GI perforation,
thrombosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1482 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
receptor antagonist, have demonstrated efficacy in and are approved
for treatment of polyarticular JIA (see Table 196.8).
TNF inhibition is not as effective for the systemic symptoms found in
sJIA. When systemic symptoms dominate, systemic corticosteroids are
started, followed by the initiation of IL-­1 or IL-­6 antagonist therapy, which
often induces a dramatic and rapid response. Patients with severe disease
activity may go directly to anakinra. Canakinumab, an IL-­1β inhibitor,
and tocilizumab are Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved
treatments for sJIA in children older than 2 years (see Table 196.8). Standardized consensus guiding therapy for sJIA provide four treatment plans
based on glucocorticoids, methotrexate, anakinra, or tocilizumab, with
optional glucocorticoid use in the latter three plans as clinically indicated.
With the use of DMARDs, the use of systemic corticosteroids can
often be avoided or minimized. Systemic corticosteroids are recommended only for management of severe systemic illness, for bridge
therapy during the wait for therapeutic response to a DMARD, and for
control of uveitis. Steroids impose risks of severe toxicities, including
Cushing syndrome, growth retardation, and osteopenia, and they do
not prevent joint destruction.
Small molecule drugs, including Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors, are
an alternative to csDMARDs and bDMARDs. Oral JAK inhibitors
(tofacitinib, ruxolitinib) inhibit JAK signaling pathways involved in
immune activation and inflammation. Tofacitinib is FDA approved for
children older than 2 years with polyarticular JIA.
Management of JIA must include periodic slit-­lamp ophthalmologic
examinations to monitor for asymptomatic uveitis (Figs. 196.16 and
196.17; see Table 196.4). Optimal treatment of uveitis requires collaboration between the ophthalmologist and rheumatologist; initial management may include mydriatics and corticosteroids used topically,
systemically, or through periocular injection. DMARDs allow for a
decrease in exposure to steroids, and methotrexate and TNF-­α inhibitors (adalimumab and infliximab) are effective in treating severe uveitis.
Dietary evaluation and counseling to ensure appropriate calcium,
vitamin D, protein, and caloric intake are important for children with
JIA. Physical therapy and occupational therapy are invaluable adjuncts
to any treatment program. A social worker and nurse clinician can be
important resources for families to recognize stresses imposed by a
chronic illness, to identify appropriate community resources, and to
aid compliance with the treatment protocol.

Fig. 196.16 Chronic anterior uveitis demonstrating posterior synechi-

ae and absence of significant scleral inflammation. (From Firestein GS,
Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al., eds. Kelley & Firestein’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 107-­5, p. 1838.)

PROGNOSIS

Although the course of JIA in an individual child is unpredictable, some
prognostic generalizations can be made on the basis of disease type and
course. Studies analyzing management of JIA in the pre–TNF-­α era
indicate that up to 50% of JIA patients had active disease persisting
into early adulthood, often with severe limitations of physical function.
Children with persistent oligoarticular disease fare well, with a majority
achieving disease remission. Those with extended oligoarticular disease have
a poorer prognosis. Children with oligoarthritis, particularly females who are
ANA positive and with onset of arthritis before 6 years of age, are at greatest
risk for development of chronic uveitis. There is no association between the
activity or severity of arthritis and uveitis. Persistent, uncontrolled anterior
uveitis (see Fig. 196.16) can cause posterior synechiae, cataracts, glaucoma,
and band keratopathy, with resultant blindness. Morbidity can be averted
with early diagnosis and implementation of systemic therapy.
The child with polyarticular JIA often has a more prolonged course
of active joint inflammation and requires early and aggressive therapy.
Predictors of severe and persistent disease include young age at onset,
RF seropositivity or rheumatoid nodules, presence of anti–cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies, and many affected joints. Disease involving
the hip and hand/wrist is also associated with a poorer prognosis and
may lead to significant functional impairment.
sJIA is often the most difficult to control in terms of both articular inflammation and systemic manifestations. Poorer prognosis is related to polyarticular distribution of arthritis, fever lasting >3 months, and increased
inflammatory markers, such as platelet count and ESR, for >6 months. IL-­1
and IL-­6 inhibitors have changed the management and improved the outcomes for children with severe and prolonged systemic disease.
Orthopedic complications include leg-­length discrepancy and flexion
contractures, particularly of the knees, hips, and wrists. Discrepancies

Fig. 196.17 Slit-­lamp examination shows “flare” in the fluid of the
anterior chamber (caused by increased protein content) and keratic
precipitates on the posterior surface of the cornea, representing small
collections of inflammatory cells. (Courtesy Dr. H.J. Kaplan. From Petty
RE, Rosenbaum JT. Uveitis in juvenile idiopathic arthritis. In Cassidy JT,
Petty RE, Laxer RM, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011: Fig. 20-­3, p. 309.)

in leg length can be managed with a shoe lift on the shorter side to prevent secondary scoliosis. Joint contractures require aggressive medical
control of arthritis, often in conjunction with intraarticular corticosteroid injections, appropriate splinting, and stretching of the affected
tendons. Popliteal cysts may require no treatment if they are small or
respond to intraarticular corticosteroids in the anterior knee.
Psychosocial adaptation may be affected by JIA. Studies indicate
that, compared with controls, a significant number of children with JIA
have problems with lifetime adjustment and employment. Disability
not directly associated with arthritis may continue into young adulthood in as many as 20% of patients, together with continuing chronic
pain syndromes at a similar frequency. Psychological complications,
including problems with school attendance and socialization, may
respond to counseling by mental health professionals.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 197 u Ankylosing Spondylitis and Other Spondyloarthritides

1483

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Chapter 197

Spondyloarthritides are complex diseases in which susceptibility is
largely genetically determined. Only 30% of heritability has been
defined, with HLA-­B27 responsible for two thirds of the total, and
>100 additional genetic loci accounting for only one third. Genes that
influence interleukin (IL)-­23 responses (e.g., CARD9, IL23R, JAK2,
TYK2, STAT3) and the function of HLA-­B27 (ERAP1) are particularly
important. Unusual properties of HLA-­B27, such as its tendency to
misfold and form abnormal cell surface structures, may have a role.
Infection with certain GI or GU pathogens can trigger reactive arthritis (see Table 197.2 and Chapter 198). Altered gut microbiota and an
abnormal immune response to normal microbiota may also play a role
in pathogenesis. Inflamed joints and entheses in spondyloarthritis contain T and B cells, macrophages, osteoclasts, proliferating fibroblasts,
and osteoblasts, with activation of the IL-­23/IL-­17 pathway. Bone loss
and osteoproliferation in and around vertebral bodies and facet joints
in long-­standing AS contribute to significant morbidity.

Ankylosing Spondylitis and
Other Spondyloarthritides
Pamela F. Weiss

The diseases collectively referred to as spondyloarthritides include
ankylosing spondylitis (AS), arthritis associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) or psoriasis, and reactive arthritis after
gastrointestinal (GI) or genitourinary (GU) infections (Table 197.1
and Table 197.2). Spondyloarthritis is more common in adults,
but all forms can present during childhood with varying symptoms
and signs. Many children with spondyloarthritis are classified in
the juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) categories of enthesitis-­
related arthritis (ERA) or psoriatic arthritis. Children and adolescents with spondyloarthritis who may not meet JIA criteria include
arthritis associated with IBD, juvenile ankylosing spondylitis (JAS),
and reactive arthritis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Clinical manifestations that help distinguish spondyloarthritis
from other forms of juvenile arthritis include arthritis of the axial
skeleton (sacroiliac joints or spine) and hips, enthesitis (inflammation at the site of a tendon, ligament, or joint capsule attachment to
bone), symptomatic eye inflammation (acute anterior uveitis), and
GI inflammation (even in the absence of IBD) (Table 197.3, but see
also Table 197.1).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

JIA is diagnosed in 90 per 100,000 U.S. children every year (see
Chapter 196). ERA accounts for 10–20% of JIA and has a mean age
at onset of 12 years. In India, ERA is the most common category
of JIA, accounting for 35% of cases. Unlike other JIA categories,
males are affected more often than females, accounting for 60% of
ERA cases. AS occurs in 0.2–0.5% of adults, with approximately
15% of cases beginning in childhood. These disorders can be familial, largely as a result of the influence of human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-­B27, which is found in 90% of JAS and 50% of ERA patients
compared to 7% of healthy individuals. Approximately 20% of children with ERA have a family history of HLA-­B27–associated disease, such as reactive arthritis, AS, or IBD with sacroiliitis.

Enthesitis-­Related Arthritis

Children fulfill classification criteria for ERA if they have either
arthritis and enthesitis or arthritis or enthesitis with at least two
of the following characteristics: (1) sacroiliac joint tenderness or
inflammatory lumbosacral pain, (2) presence of HLA-­B27, (3) onset
of arthritis in a male older than 6 years, (4) acute anterior uveitis,
and (5) a family history of an HLA-­B27–associated disease (ERA,
sacroiliitis with IBD, reactive arthritis, or acute anterior uveitis)
in a first-­degree relative. Patients with psoriasis (or a family history of psoriasis in a first-­degree relative), a positive–rheumatoid
factor (RF) test result, or systemic arthritis are excluded from this
group. During the first 6 months of disease the arthritis is typically

Table 197.1  Overlapping Characteristics of the Spondyloarthritides*
JUVENILE ANKYLOSING
SPONDYLITIS

JUVENILE PSORIATIC
ARTHRITIS

INFLAMMATORY
BOWEL DISEASE

REACTIVE ARTHRITIS

Enthesitis

+++

+

+

++

Axial arthritis

+++

++

++

+

CHARACTERISTIC

Peripheral arthritis

+++

+++

+++

+++

HLA-­B27 positive

+++

+

++

+++

Antinuclear antibody
positive

−

++

−

−

Rheumatoid factor positive

−

−

−

−

SYSTEMIC DISEASE
Eyes

+

+

+

+

Skin

−

+++

+

+

Mucous membranes

−

−

+

+

Gastrointestinal tract

−

−

++++

+++

*Frequency of characteristics: −, absent; +, <25%; ++, 25–50%; +++, 50–75%; ++++, ≥75%.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1484 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 197.2  Etiologic Microorganisms of Reactive Arthritis
POSSIBLE
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycoplasma fermentans
Mycoplasma genitalium
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Escherichia coli
Cryptosporidium
Entamoeba histolytica
Giardia lamblia
Brucella abortus
Clostridium difficile
Streptococcus pyogenes
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Chlamydia psittaci

PROBABLE
Chlamydia trachomatis
Shigella species
Salmonella enteritidis
Salmonella typhimurium
Yersinia enterocolitica
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
Campylobacter jejuni and coli

From Kim PS, Klausmeier TL, Orr DP. Reactive arthritis: a review. J Adolesc Health. 2009;44:309–315, Table 2, p. 311.

Table 197.3  Assessment in SpondyloArthritis International Society (ASAS) Classification Criteria for Spondyloarthritis (SpA)
AXIAL SpA

PERIPHERAL SpA

In patients with ≥3 months back pain and age at onset <45 years

In patients with peripheral symptoms ONLY

Sacroiliitis on imaging* plus one
or more SpA feature(s)

Arthritis or enthesitis or dactylitis plus

or HLA-­B27 plus two or more other
SpA features

SpA features
• Inflammatory back pain (IBP)
• Arthritis
• Enthesitis (heel)
• Uveitis
• Dactylitis
• Psoriasis
• Crohn disease/ulcerative colitis
• Good response to NSAIDs
• Family history for SpA
• HLA-­B27
• Elevated CRP

One or more SpA feature(s):
• Uveitis
• Psoriasis
• Crohn disease/ulcerative colitis
• Preceding infection
• HLA-­B27
• Sacroiliitis on imaging*
or
Two or more other SpA features:
• Arthritis
• Enthesitis
• Dactylitis
• IBP ever
• Family history for SpA

*Active (acute) inflammation on MRI highly suggestive of sacroiliitis associated with SpA. Definite radiographic sacroiliitis according to modified NY criteria.
CRP, C-­reactive protein; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
Adapted from Rudwaleit M, van der Heijde D, Landewé R, et al. The development of Assessment of Spondyloarthritis International Society classification criteria for axial
spondyloarthritis. Part II. Validation and final selection. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009;68(6):777–783; and The Assessment of Spondyloarthritis International Society classification criteria for
peripheral spondyloarthritis and for spondyloarthritis in general. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011;70(1):25–31.

Table 197.4  Symptoms Characteristic of Inflammatory
Back Pain
Pain at night with morning stiffness (and improvement on arising)
No improvement with rest
Improvement with exercise
Insidious onset
Good response to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs

asymmetric and involves fewer than four joints, most frequently the
knees, ankles, and hips. Inflammation of the small joints of the foot,
or tarsitis, is highly suggestive of ERA. Enthesitis is typically symmetric and affects the lower limbs. Up to 40% of children develop
clinical or radiographic evidence of sacroiliac joint arthritis as part
of their disease; approximately 20% have evidence of sacroiliac joint
arthritis at diagnosis. When the sacroiliac or other axial joints are
involved, children may experience inflammatory back pain (Table
197.4), hip pain, and alternating buttock pain. Patients may also

experience pain with palpation of the lower back or with pelvic
compression. The risk of sacroiliac joint arthritis is highest in children who are HLA-­B27 positive and have an elevated C-­reactive
protein (CRP). Untreated sacroiliitis may, but does not always,
evolve into AS; additional risk factors for progression are unclear.

Psoriatic Arthritis

Psoriatic arthritis accounts for approximately 5% of JIA. Common
clinical features of psoriatic arthritis are nail pitting (Fig. 197.1), onycholysis, and dactylitis (sausage-­like swelling of fingers or toes).
Children fulfill classification criteria for psoriatic arthritis if they
have arthritis and psoriasis or arthritis and at least two of the following: (1) dactylitis, (2) nail pitting or onycholysis, and (3) psoriasis in
a first-­degree relative. The presence of psoriasis aids in diagnosis but
is not required. Disease onset peaks during the preschool and early
adolescent years. Children with onset during the preschool years are
more often female, antinuclear antibody (ANA) positive, and at risk
for asymptomatic ocular inflammation. Disease onset during adolescence is equally common among males and females. In the majority

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 197 u Ankylosing Spondylitis and Other Spondyloarthritides

1485

Table 197.5  Entheseal Sites Studied in Historical JSpA
Cohorts
ENTHESEAL SITES

Fig. 197.1 Nail pitting in a 9-­year-­old with JPsA. (From Srinivasalu

H, Sikora KA, Colbert RA. Recent updates in juvenile spondyloarthritis.
Rheum Dis Clin N Am. 2021;47:565–583, Fig. 2, p. 569.)

of children, the arthritis is asymmetric and affects four or fewer joints
at presentation. Large (knees and ankles) and small (fingers and toes)
joints may be involved. Although distal interphalangeal joint involvement is uncommon, it is highly suggestive of the diagnosis. Enthesitis
is detectable in ∼20–75% of patients and seems to be more frequent
in those who present at an older age (Table 197.5, Fig. 197.2). Axial
(sacroiliac) and root (hip) joints may be affected in up to 30% of children; the risk of axial arthritis is highest in those who are HLA-­B27
positive.

Juvenile Ankylosing Spondylitis

JAS frequently begins with oligoarthritis and enthesitis. The arthritis occurs predominantly in the lower extremities and often involves
the hips. In comparison to adult-­
onset AS, axial disease and
inflammatory back pain are less frequent at disease onset, whereas
enthesitis and peripheral arthritis are more common. AS is diagnosed according to the modified New York (NY) criteria if there is
sufficient radiographic evidence of sacroiliitis (sacroiliitis of grade
2 or greater bilaterally or at least grade 3 unilaterally) and if the
patient meets at least one clinical criterion involving inflammatory
back pain, limitation of motion in the lumbar spine (Fig. 197.3), or
limitation of chest expansion. JAS is present if the patient is <16
years old. Juvenile-­onset AS is frequently used to describe adult AS
when the symptoms began before 16 years of age but full criteria
were not met until later.
To fulfill the modified NY criteria for AS, patients must have
radiographic changes in the sacroiliac joints and clinical sequelae
of axial disease. Because radiographic sacroiliitis can take many
years to develop in adults and even longer in children, and clinical sequelae may lag further behind, criteria to identify preradiographic axial spondyloarthritis were developed by the Assessment
of SpondyloArthritis International Society. To meet criteria for
axial spondyloarthritis (SpA), patients must have at least 3 months
of back pain and sacroiliitis on imaging (acute inflammation on
MRI or definite radiographic sacroiliitis by NY criteria) plus one
feature of SpA (inflammatory back pain, arthritis, enthesitis [heel],
uveitis, dactylitis, psoriasis, Crohn disease/ulcerative colitis, good
response to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], family
history for SpA, HLA-­B27, or elevated CRP). Alternatively, patients
can fulfill axial SpA criteria if they are HLA-­B27 positive and have
at least two SpA features. These criteria have low sensitivity and
specificity in the pediatric population but, in the absence of alternative pediatric criteria, may be useful as a guide to evaluating preradiographic axial SpA.

Arthritis with Inflammatory Bowel Disease

The presence of erythema nodosum, pyoderma gangrenosum, oral
ulcers, abdominal pain, diarrhea, fever, weight loss, or anorexia in a

PERCENTAGE

Insertion of infrapatellar tendon
on patella

27-­44

Achilles tendon

21-­74

Interosseous ligaments of the
sacroiliac joint

30.3

Plantar fascia insertion to
calcaneus

12-­39

Tibial tuberosity

23-­30

Quadriceps insertion to upper
poles of patella

22-­46

Second MTP

21

Third MTP

16

First MTP

14

Greater trochanter

14

Iliac crest

14

JSpA, Juvenile spondyloarthritis; MTP, metatarsophalangeal.
From Srinivasalu H, Sikora KA, Colbert RA. Recent updates in juvenile spondyloarthritis.
Rheum Dis Clin N Am. 2021;47:565–583, Table 1, p. 567.

child with chronic arthritis should raise suspicion of IBD. Two patterns
of arthritis complicate IBD. Polyarthritis affecting large and small
joints is most common and often reflects the activity of the intestinal
inflammation. Less frequently, arthritis of the axial skeleton, including the sacroiliac joints, occurs. As with psoriatic arthritis, the presence
of HLA-­B27 is a risk factor for the development of axial disease. The
severity of axial involvement is independent of the activity of the GI
inflammation.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory evidence of systemic inflammation with elevation of
the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and/or CRP value is variable in most spondyloarthritides and may or may not be present
at the onset of disease. RF and ANAs are absent, except in children with psoriatic arthritis, as many as 50% of whom are ANA
positive. HLA-­B27 is present in approximately 90% of children with
JAS, compared with 7% of healthy individuals, but is less frequent
in ERA and other SpA types.

Imaging

Conventional radiographs detect chronic bony changes and damage
but not active inflammation and are unreliable in the assessment
of pediatric disease. Early radiographic changes in the sacroiliac
joints include indistinct margins and erosions. Sclerosis typically
starts on the iliac side of the joint (Fig. 197.4). Peripheral joints may
exhibit periarticular osteoporosis, with loss of sharp cortical margins in areas of enthesitis, which may eventually show erosions or
bony spurs (enthesophytes). Squaring of the corners of the vertebral
bodies and syndesmophyte formation resulting in the classic “bamboo spine” characteristic of advanced AS are rare in early disease,
particularly in childhood. CT, like radiographs, can detect chronic
bony changes but not active inflammation and has the disadvantage
of more radiation exposure. The gold standard for early visualization of sacroiliitis is evidence of bone marrow edema adjacent to
the joint on MRI with fluid-­sensitive sequences such as short-­T1
inversion recovery (STIR) (Figs. 197.5 and 197.6). Gadolinium does
not add value to the study of the sacroiliac joints if STIR is used.
MRI will reveal abnormalities before the plain radiograph. Whole

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1486 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Anatomic
region

Enthesitis exam

Foot and
ankle

Achilles tendon insertion to calcaneus
Plantar fascia insertion to calcaneus
Plantar fascia insertion to metatarsal heads
Plantar fascia insertion to base of fifth
metatarsal

Knee

Quadriceps tendon insertion to patella (2 and
10 o’clock)
Infrapatellar ligament insertion to patella (6
o’clock) and tibial tuberosity

Pelvis

Hip extensor insertion at greater trochanter of
femur
Sartorius insertion at anterior superior iliac
spine
Posterior superior iliac spine
Abdominal muscle insertions to iliac crest
Gracilis and adduction insertion to pubis
symphysis
Hamstrings insertion to ischial tuberosity
5th lumbar spinous process
Common flexor insertion at medial
epicondyle of humerus

Spine

Fig. 197.2 Anatomic sites for as-

sessment of enthesitis in ERA and
JAS. (From Petty RE, Laxer RM,
Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook
of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig.
20.1, p. 254.)

Upper
extremity

Common extensor insertion at lateral
epicondyle of humerus
Supraspinatus insertion into greater
tuberosity of humerus
Chest

Costosternal junctions (1st and 7th)

Fig. 197.4 Well-­developed sacroiliitis in a boy with ankylosing spon-

dylitis. Both sacroiliac joints show extensive sclerosis, erosion of joint
margins, and apparent widening of the joint space.

Fig. 197.3 Loss of lumbodorsal spine mobility in a boy with anky-

losing spondylitis. The lower spine remains straight when the patient
bends forward.

body MRI may also be used to evaluate the axial skeleton in adults
with early disease because it can detect vertebral lesions in addition
to sacroiliac changes.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The onset of arthritis after a recent history of diarrhea or symptoms
of urethritis or conjunctivitis may suggest reactive arthritis (see
Chapter 198). Lower back pain can be caused by strain, infectious

arthritis of the sacroiliac joint, osteomyelitis of the pelvis or spine,
chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis (CNO) of the pelvis or spine,
osteoid osteoma of the posterior elements of the spine, pelvic muscle
pyomyositis, or malignancies. In addition, mechanical conditions
such as spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis, and Scheuermann disease
should be considered. Back pain secondary to fibromyalgia usually
affects the soft tissues of the upper back in a symmetric pattern
and is associated with well-­localized tender points and sleep disturbance (see Chapter 211.3). Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease (avascular
necrosis of the femoral head), slipped capital femoral epiphysis, and
chondrolysis may also manifest as pain over the inguinal ligament
and loss of internal rotation of the hip joint, but without other SpA
features, such as involvement of other entheses and/or joints. Radiography and MRI are critical for distinguishing these conditions.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 197 u Ankylosing Spondylitis and Other Spondyloarthritides

1487

Fig. 197.5 Coronal MRI (STIR) of the pelvis in a 14-­year-­old boy with

ERA (HLA-­B27 positive). Fluid and pathology appear bright, spinal fluid
also appears bright. Increased signal abnormality is observed around
bilateral triradiate cartilages and greater trochanteric apophyses (arrowheads), common areas of involvement for ERA. Also, signal abnormality
appears on the iliac side of the sacroiliac joints bilaterally around more
curvilinear, dark, sclerotic subchondral areas representing erosions and
sacroiliitis (arrows). (From Tse SM, Laxer RM. New advances in juvenile
spondyloarthritis. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2012;10;8:269–279.)

TREATMENT

The goals of therapy are to control inflammation, minimize pain,
preserve function, and prevent ankylosis (fusion of adjacent bones)
using a combination of antiinflammatory medications, physical
therapy, and education. Treatment regimens for SpA include monotherapy or combination therapy with NSAIDs, disease-­modifying
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), or biologic agents. NSAIDs, such
as naproxen (15-­20 mg/kg/day), are frequently used to help relieve
symptoms and may slow the progression of structural damage
(syndesmophyte formation and growth) if used continually. With
relatively mild monoarticular disease, intraarticular corticosteroids
(e.g., triamcinolone acetonide/hexacetonide) may also help to control peripheral joint inflammation. DMARDs such as sulfasalazine
(up to 50 mg/kg/day; maximum 3 g/day) or methotrexate (10 mg/
m2) may be beneficial for peripheral arthritis, but these medications
have not been shown to improve axial disease in adults. For axial
arthritis, it is typically necessary to add a biologic therapy. Tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors (e.g., etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab) have been efficacious in reducing symptoms and improving function in adults with AS. It remains unclear whether TNF
inhibitors have an impact on structural damage in established AS,
underscoring the need for earlier recognition and better therapies.
Drugs that target IL-­17 (secukinumab/ixekizumab), IL-­23/IL-­12

Fig. 197.6 Short T1 inversion recovery image from whole body MRI

of a 15-­yr-­old boy with HLA-­B27–negative JSpA. The MRI shows active corner inflammatory lesions of vertebral end plates at multiple
levels (straight arrows) and more chronic-­appearing discovertebral unit
changes (curved arrow). (From Srinivasalu H, Sikora KA, Colbert RA.
Recent updates in juvenile spondyloarthritis. Rheum Dis Clin N Am.
2021;47:565–583, Fig. 7, p. 574.)

(ustekinumab), and the JAK/STAT pathway (tofacitinib/upadacitinib) reduce clinical disease activity in adults with AS.
Physical therapy and low-­impact exercise should be included in the
treatment program for all children with spondyloarthritis. Exercise
to maintain range of motion in the back, thorax, and affected joints
should be instituted early in the disease course. Custom-­fitted insoles
and heel cups are particularly useful in the management of painful
entheses around the feet, and the use of pillows to position the lower
extremities while the child is in bed can be helpful.

PROGNOSIS

Observational studies suggest that ongoing disease activity for >5
years in juvenile spondyloarthritis predicts disability. Disease remission occurs in <20% of children with spondyloarthritis 5 years after
diagnosis. Factors associated with disease progression include tarsitis,
HLA-­B27 positivity, hip arthritis within the first 6 months, and disease onset after age 8. Important questions, such as which patients with
ERA will go on to have JAS/AS, have yet to be addressed. Outcomes
for JAS compared with adult-­onset AS suggest that hip disease requiring replacement is more common in children but axial disease is more
severe in adults.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1488 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 198

Reactive and Postinfectious
Arthritis
Pamela F. Weiss
In addition to causing arthritis by means of direct microbial infection (i.e., septic arthritis; see Chapter 726), microbes activate innate
and adaptive immune responses, which can lead to the generation
and deposition of immune complexes and antibody or T-­cell–mediated cross-­reactivity with self. Furthermore, microbes may influence
the immune system in ways that promote immune-­mediated inflammatory diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), and
spondyloarthritis. Reactive arthritis and postinfectious arthritis are
defined as joint inflammation caused by a sterile inflammatory reaction after a recent infection. The term reactive arthritis is used to refer
to arthritis that occurs after enteropathic or urogenital infections and
postinfectious arthritis to describe arthritis that occurs after infectious
illnesses not classically considered in the reactive arthritis group, such
as infection with group A streptococcus or viruses. In some patients,
nonviable components of the initiating organism have been demonstrated in affected joints, and the presence of viable, yet nonculturable,
bacteria within the joint remains an area of investigation.
The course of reactive arthritis is variable and may remit or progress
to a chronic spondyloarthritis, including ankylosing spondylitis (see
Chapter 197). In postinfectious arthritis, the pain or joint swelling is
usually transient, lasting <6 weeks, and does not necessarily share the
typical spondyloarthritis pattern of joint involvement. The distinction
between postinfectious arthritis and reactive arthritis is not always
clear, either clinically or pathophysiologically.

is relatively uncommon in children. The arthritis is typically asymmetric and oligoarticular, with a predilection for the lower extremities.
Dactylitis may occur, and enthesitis is common, affecting as many as
90% of patients (Fig. 198.1). Cutaneous manifestations can occur and
may include circinate balanitis, ulcerative vulvitis, erythematous oral
macules or plaques or erosions, erythema nodosum, paronychia, painful erosions or pustules on fingertips, and keratoderma blennorrhagica, which is similar in appearance to pustular psoriasis (Fig. 198.2).
Systemic symptoms may include fever, malaise, and fatigue. Less common features may include conjunctivitis, optic neuritis, aortic valve
involvement, sterile pyuria, and polyneuropathy. Early in the disease
course, markers of inflammation—erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR), C-­reactive protein, and platelets—may be greatly elevated. The
clinical manifestations may last for weeks to months.
Familiarity with other causes of postinfectious arthritis is vital when
a diagnosis of reactive arthritis is being considered. Numerous viruses
are associated with postinfectious arthritis and may result in particular patterns of joint involvement (Table 198.1). Rubella and hepatitis
B virus typically affect the small joints, whereas mumps and varicella
often involve large joints, especially the knees. Hepatitis B arthritis–
dermatitis syndrome is characterized by urticarial rash and a symmetric migratory polyarthritis resembling that of serum sickness.
Rubella-­associated arthropathy may follow natural rubella infection
and, infrequently, rubella immunization. It typically occurs in young
women, with an increased frequency with advancing age, and is
uncommon in preadolescent children and in males. Arthralgia of the
knees and hands usually begins within 7 days of onset of the rash or 10-­
28 days after immunization. Parvovirus B19, which is responsible for
erythema infectiosum (fifth disease), can cause arthralgia, symmetric

PATHOGENESIS

Reactive arthritis typically follows enteric infection with Salmonella
species, Shigella flexneri, Yersinia enterocolitica, Campylobacter jejuni,
or genitourinary (GU) tract infection with Chlamydia trachomatis. Escherichia coli and Clostridium difficile are also causative enteric
agents, although less common (see Table 197.2). Acute rheumatic
fever caused by group A streptococcus (see Chapters 229 and 229.1),
arthritis associated with infective endocarditis (see Chapter 486), and
the tenosynovitis associated with Neisseria gonorrhoeae are similar in
some respects to reactive arthritis.
Approximately 75% of patients with reactive arthritis are HLA-­B27
positive. Incomplete elimination of bacteria and bacterial products, such
as DNA, has been proposed as a factor in reactive arthritis. A relationship with clinical characteristics of specific infectious disorders is not
present. In postinfectious arthritis, several viruses (rubella, varicella-­
zoster, herpes simplex, cytomegalovirus) have been isolated from the
joints of patients. Antigens from other viruses (e.g., hepatitis B, adenovirus) have been identified in immune complexes from joint tissue.
Patients with reactive arthritis who are HLA-­B27 positive have
an increased frequency of acute and symptomatic uveitis and other
extraarticular features. In addition, HLA-­B27 is a risk factor for persistent gastrointestinal (GI) inflammation after enteric infections, even
after resolution of the initial infection, and significantly increases the
risk that the individual will develop chronic spondyloarthritis. Nevertheless, reactive arthritis also occurs in HLA-­B27–negative patients,
emphasizing the importance of other genes in disease susceptibility.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS

Symptoms of reactive arthritis begin approximately 3 days to 6 weeks
after infection. The classic triad of arthritis, urethritis, and conjunctivitis

Fig. 198.1 Enthesitis—swelling of the posterior aspect of the left heel

and lateral aspect of the ankle. (Courtesy Dr. Nora Singer, Case Western
Reserve University and Rainbow Babies’ Hospital.)

Fig. 198.2 Keratoderma blennorrhagica. (Courtesy Dr. MF Rein and
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Public Health Image
Library, 1976. Image #6950.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 198 u Reactive and Postinfectious Arthritis
Table 198.1  Viruses Associated with Arthritis
TOGAVIRUSES
RUBIVIRUS
Rubella
ALPHAVIRUSES
Ross River
Chikungunya
O’nyong-­nyong
Mayaro
Sindbis
Ockelbo
Pogosta
ORTHOPOXVIRUSES
Variola virus (smallpox)
Vaccinia virus
Parvoviruses
ADENOVIRUSES
Adenovirus 7

HERPESVIRUSES
Epstein-­Barr
Cytomegalovirus
Varicella-­zoster
Herpes simplex
PARAMYXOVIRUSES
Mumps
FLAVIVIRUS
Zika virus
HEPADNAVIRUS
Hepatitis B
ENTEROVIRUSES
Echovirus
Coxsackievirus B
CORONAVIRUSES
SARS-­CoV-­2

Adapted from Infectious arthritis and osteomyelitis. In: Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB,
et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

joint swelling, and morning stiffness, particularly in adult women and
less frequently in children. Arthritis occurs occasionally during cytomegalovirus infection and may occur during varicella infections but
is rare after Epstein-­Barr virus infection. Varicella may also be complicated by suppurative arthritis, usually secondary to group A streptococcus infection. HIV is associated with an arthritis that resembles
psoriatic arthritis more than JIA (see Chapter 196).
Poststreptococcal arthritis may follow infection with either group
A or group G streptococcus. It is typically oligoarticular, affecting
lower-­extremity joints, and mild symptoms can persist for months.
Poststreptococcal arthritis differs from rheumatic fever, which typically manifests with painful migratory polyarthritis of brief duration.
Because valvular lesions have occasionally been documented by echocardiography after the acute illness, some clinicians consider poststreptococcal arthritis to be an incomplete form of acute rheumatic
fever (see Chapter 229.1). Certain HLA-­DRB1 types may predispose
children to development of either poststreptococcal arthritis (HLA-­
DRB1*01) or acute rheumatic fever (HLA-­DRB1*16).
Transient synovitis (toxic synovitis), another form of postinfectious arthritis, typically affects the hip, often after an upper respiratory
tract infection (see Chapter 719.2). Males 3-­10 years of age are most
often affected and have acute onset of severe pain in the hip (groin),
with referred pain to the thigh or knee, lasting approximately 1 week.
ESR and white blood cell count are usually normal. Radiologic or ultrasound examination may confirm widening of the joint space secondary
to an effusion. Aspiration of joint fluid is often necessary to exclude
septic arthritis and typically results in dramatic clinical improvement.
The trigger is presumed to be viral, although responsible microbes have
not been identified.
Nonsuppurative arthritis has been reported in children, usually
adolescent males, in association with severe truncal acne. Patients
often have fever and persistent infection of the pustular lesions. Pyogenic (sterile) arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne (cystic)
syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder caused by a pathogenic
variant in the PSTPIP1 gene, is a difficult-­to-­treat but rare autoinflammatory disorder that has responded to anakinra or anti–tumor
necrosis factor antibody therapy in a few patients (see Chapter 710).
Recurrent episodes of erosive arthritis begin in childhood; cystic acne
and the painful ulcerating lesions of pyoderma gangrenosum begin
during adolescence. Recurrent episodes may also be associated with a
sterile myopathy and may last for several months.
Infective endocarditis can be associated with arthralgia, arthritis,
or signs suggestive of vasculitis, such as Osler nodes, Janeway lesions,

1489

and Roth spots. Postinfectious arthritis, perhaps because of immune
complexes, also occurs in children with N. gonorrhoeae, Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae type b, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae
infections.

DIAGNOSIS

A recent GU or GI infection may suggest the diagnosis of reactive
arthritis, but there is no diagnostic test. A complete blood count,
acute-­phase reactants, complete metabolic panel, and urinalysis may
be helpful to exclude other etiologies. Although stool or urogenital
tract cultures can be performed in an attempt to isolate it, the triggering organism is not typically found at the time arthritis presents.
Imaging findings are nonspecific or normal. Documenting previous
streptococcal infection with antibody testing (anti-­streptolysin O and
anti-­DNAse B) may help to diagnose postinfectious arthritis. Serum
sickness associated with the antibiotic treatment of preceding infection
must be excluded.
Because the preceding infection can be remote or mild and often
not recalled by the patient, it is also important to rule out other causes
of arthritis. Acute and painful arthritis affecting a single joint suggests
septic arthritis, mandating joint aspiration. Osteomyelitis may cause
pain and an effusion in an adjacent joint but is more often associated
with focal bone pain and tenderness at the site of infection. Arthritis
affecting a single joint, particularly the knee, may also be secondary to
Lyme disease in endemic areas. The diagnosis of postinfectious arthritis is often established by exclusion and after the arthritis has resolved.
Arthritis associated with GI symptoms or abnormal liver function
test results may be triggered by infectious or autoimmune hepatitis.
Arthritis or spondyloarthritis may occur in children with IBD, such
as Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis (see Chapters 382.1 and 382.2).
Parvovirus infection, macrophage activation (hemophagocytic) syndrome, and leukemia should be strongly considered when two or
more blood cell lines are low or progressively decrease in a child with
arthritis. Persistent arthritis (>6 weeks) suggests the possibility of a
chronic rheumatic disease, including JIA (see Chapter 196) and SLE
(see Chapter 199).

TREATMENT

Specific treatment is unnecessary for most cases of reactive or postinfectious arthritis. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
are often needed for management of pain and functional limitation.
Unless ongoing Chlamydia infection is suspected, attempts to treat
the offending organism are not warranted. If swelling or arthralgia
recurs, further evaluation may be necessary to exclude active infection
or evolving rheumatic disease. Intraarticular corticosteroid injections
may be given for refractory or severely involved joints once acute infection has been ruled out. Systemic corticosteroids or disease-­modifying
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) are rarely indicated but may be considered for chronic disease. Participation in physical activity should
be encouraged, and physical therapy may be needed to maintain normal function and prevent muscle atrophy. For postinfectious arthritis caused by streptococcal disease, current recommendations include
penicillin prophylaxis for at least 1 year. Long-­term prophylaxis is often
recommended, but the duration is controversial and may need to be
individualized.

COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

Postinfectious arthritis after viral infections usually resolves without
complications unless it is associated with involvement of other organs,
such as encephalomyelitis. Children with reactive arthritis after
enteric infections occasionally experience IBD months to years after
onset. Both uveitis and carditis have been reported in children diagnosed with reactive arthritis. Reactive arthritis, especially after bacterial enteric infection or GU tract infection with C. trachomatis, has the
potential for evolving to chronic arthritis, particularly spondyloarthritis (see Chapter 197). The presence of HLA-­B27 or significant systemic
features increases the risk of chronic disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1490 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 199

Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus
Rebecca E. Sadun and Stacy P. Ardoin
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune
disease characterized by multisystem inflammation and the presence of circulating autoantibodies directed against self-­antigens.
SLE occurs in both children and adults, disproportionately affecting females of reproductive age. Although nearly every organ may
be affected, most commonly involved are the skin, joints, kidneys,
blood-­forming cells, blood vessels, and the central nervous system.
Systemic signs of inflammation such as fever and lymphadenopathy
can also be seen. Compared with adults, children and adolescents
with SLE have more severe disease and more widespread organ
involvement.

ETIOLOGY

The pathogenesis of SLE remains largely unknown, but several factors
likely influence risk and severity of disease, including genetics, hormonal milieu, and environmental exposures.
A genetic predisposition to SLE is suggested by the association with
specific genetic variants, including congenital deficiencies of C1q, C2,
and C4, as well as several polymorphisms (e.g., interferon regulatory
factor 5 and protein tyrosine phosphatase N22) and familial clustering
of SLE or other autoimmune disease (Table 199.1). In addition, certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA) types (including HLA-­B8, HLA­DR2, and HLA-­DR3) occur with increased frequency in patients with
SLE. Although SLE clearly has a genetic component, its occurrence is
sporadic in families and its concordance is incomplete (estimated at
2–5% among dizygotic twins and 25–60% among monozygotic twins),
suggesting nonmendelian genetics and involvement of epigenetic and
environmental factors. Patients with SLE often have family members—
especially mothers and sisters—with SLE or various other autoimmune
diseases.
Because SLE preferentially affects females, especially during their
reproductive years, it is suspected that hormonal factors are important in pathogenesis. Of individuals with SLE, 90% are female, making
female sex the strongest risk factor for SLE. Estrogens are likely to play
a role in SLE, and both in vitro and animal model studies suggest that
estrogen exposure promotes B-­cell autoreactivity. Estrogen-­containing
oral contraceptives do not appear to induce flares in quiescent SLE,
though the risk of flares may be increased in postmenopausal women
receiving hormone replacement.
Environmental exposures that may trigger the development of
SLE remain largely unknown; certain viral infections (including
Epstein-­Barr virus) may play a role in susceptible individuals, and
ultraviolet light exposure is known to trigger SLE disease activity.
Environmental influences also may induce epigenetic modifications to DNA, increasing the risk of SLE and drug-­induced lupus;
in mouse models, drugs such as procainamide and hydralazine
can promote lymphocyte hypomethylation, causing a lupus-­like
syndrome.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The reported prevalence of SLE in children and adolescents (1-­
6/100,000) is lower than that in adults (20-­70/100,000). Prevalence
of SLE is highest among patients of African, Asian, Hispanic, Native
American, and Pacific Island ancestry for both adult and pediatric
populations. SLE predominantly affects females, with a reported
2-­5:1 ratio before puberty, 9:1 ratio during reproductive years, and

return to near-­prepubertal ratios in the postmenopausal period.
Childhood SLE is rare before 5 years of age and is usually diagnosed
in adolescence, with a median age at diagnosis of 11-­12 years. Up to
20% of all individuals with SLE are diagnosed before age 16 years.
Pediatric-­onset SLE (pSLE) is defined as onset of symptoms before
age 16 or 18 years.

PATHOLOGY

Histologic features most suggestive of SLE include findings in the
kidney and skin. Renal manifestations of SLE are classified histologically according to the criteria of the International Society of
Nephrology (see Chapter 560.2). The finding of diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis (class IV) significantly increases the risk
for renal morbidity. Renal biopsies are helpful to establish the diagnosis of SLE and to stage disease. Immune complexes are commonly
found with “full house” deposition of immunoglobulin and complement. The characteristic discoid rash depicted in Figure 199.1D is
characterized on biopsy by hyperkeratosis, follicular plugging, and
infiltration of mononuclear cells into the dermal-­epidermal junction. The histopathology of photosensitive rashes can be nonspecific, but immunofluorescence examination of both affected and
nonaffected skin may reveal deposition of immune complexes
within the dermal-­epidermal junction. This finding is called the
lupus band test, which is specific for SLE.

PATHOGENESIS

A hallmark of SLE is the generation of autoantibodies directed
against self-­antigens, particularly nucleic acids. These intracellular
antigens are ubiquitously expressed but are usually inaccessible and
cloistered within the cell. During cell necrosis or apoptosis, the antigens are released. SLE skin cells are highly susceptible to damage
from ultraviolet light, and the resulting cell death leads to release
of cell contents, including nucleic antigens. Individuals with SLE
may have impaired apoptosis or impaired ability to clear cell debris,
causing prolonged exposure to nucleic antigens in the bloodstream
and increased opportunity for recognition by immune cells, leading to B-­cell stimulation and autoantibody production. Circulating
autoantibodies form immune complexes and deposit in tissues, leading to local complement activation, initiation of a proinflammatory
cascade, and, ultimately, tissue damage. Antibodies to double-­
stranded DNA (dsDNA) can form immune complexes, deposit in
glomeruli, and initiate inflammation leading to glomerulonephritis.
However, many individuals with SLE have circulating antibodies to
dsDNA yet do not have nephritis, suggesting that autoantibodies
are not the only pathway leading to end-­organ damage in SLE.
Both the innate and adaptive arms of the immune system have been
implicated in the dysregulation of the immune system seen in SLE.
High levels of interferon-­α production by plasmacytoid dendritic
cells promote expression of other proinflammatory cytokines and
chemokines, maturation of monocytes into myeloid dendritic cells,
promotion of autoreactive B and T cells, and loss of self-­tolerance.
Nearly 85% of patients with SLE exhibit this cytokine profile, known
as the type I interferon signature. Other cytokines with increased
expression in SLE include interleukin (IL)-­1, IL-­2, IL-­6, IL-­10, IL-­
12, IL-­17, and IL-­21; anti–tumor necrosis factor-­α; interferon-­γ; and
B-­lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS), also known as B-­cell–activating factor (BAFF). Both B and T cells demonstrate functional impairments
in SLE. In active SLE, B-­cell populations have impaired tolerance and
increased autoreactivity, enhancing B cells’ ability to produce autoantibodies after exposure to self-­antigen. In addition, cytokines such
as BLyS/BAFF may promote abnormal B-­cell number and function.
T-­cell abnormalities in SLE include increased numbers of memory T
cells and decreased number and function of T-­regulatory cells. SLE
T cells display aberrant signaling and increased autoreactivity. As a
result, they are resistant to attrition by normal apoptosis pathways. In
addition, a neutrophil signature can be identified in 65% of adult SLE
patients and has recently been recognized as a potential biomarker
for active lupus nephritis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 199 u Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 1491
Table 199.1  Reviewed Proteins and Genes Associated with Monogenic Forms of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus and
Lupus-­Like Phenotypes

INHERITANCE

MECHANISM

FEMALE-­TO-­
MALE PATIENT
RATIO

PROTEIN

GENE

ASSOCIATED SYMPTOMS

C1q

C1QA, C1QB,
C1QC

Autosomal recessive

Complement
deficiency

1:1

SLE (cutaneous, renal, CNS,
arthritis, ANA), young age
onset, recurrent bacterial
infections

C1r/s

C1R, C1S

Autosomal recessive

Complement
deficiency

1:1

SLE (fever, cutaneous,
arthritis, renal, ANA, ENA),
recurrent infections,
encapsulated bacteria,
Hashimoto thyroiditis

C2

C2

Autosomal recessive

Complement
deficiency

7:1

SLE (cutaneous, arthritis),
young age onset, type 1
diabetes

C3

C3

Autosomal recessive

Complement
deficiency

1:1

Recurrent sinopulmonary
infections, lupus-­like
syndrome,
glomerulonephritis

C4

C4A, C4B

Autosomal recessive

Complement
deficiency

1:1

SLE (severe photosensitive
rash, renal, ANA, Ro), young
age onset

TREX1/DNASE III

TREX1

Autosomal dominant
(FCL), autosomal
recessive and
dominant (AGS)

Abnormal DNA
clearance leading to
IFN activation

Likely 1:1

FCL, AGS, SLE

MDA5

IFIH1

Autosomal dominant

Activation of IFN
production

Likely 1:1

AGS, SLE, FCL, IgA
deficiency

SAMHD1

SAMHD1

Autosomal recessive
and dominant

Abnormal DNA or RNA
clearance leading to
IFN production

Likely 1:1

AGS, SLE, FCL,
photosensitivity

RNaseH2

RNASH2

Autosomal dominant
and recessive

Abnormal RNA
clearance leading to
IFN production

Likely 1:1

AGS, SLE

ADAR1

ADAR1

Mainly autosomal
dominant

Abnormal RNA
clearance leading to
IFN production

Likely 1:1

AGS, SLE

STING

TMEM173

Autosomal dominant

Activation of IFN
production

1:1

SAVI, FCL, SLE

DNase I

DNASE1

Autosomal dominant

Abnormal DNA
clearance-­break
intolerance

Likely 1:1

SLE (dsDNA), adolescent
onset, Sjögren syndrome

DNase 1-­like-­3

DNASE1L3

Autosomal recessive

Abnormal DNA
clearance-­break
intolerance

1:2

SLE (hypocomplementemia,
dsDNA, cANCA, renal),
HUVS

DNASE2

DNASE2

Possible autosomal
recessive

Abnormal DNA
clearance

1:1

Neonatal-­onset cytopenias,
hepatosplenomegaly,
arthritis, nephritis

Protein kinase
C-­delta

PRKCD

Autosomal recessive;
dominant

Disrupts B-­cell
proliferation and
apoptosis, NK-­cell
activity

1:1

Early onset SLE nephritis,
lymphoproliferation
autoimmunity

Ras/MAPK Pathway

KRAS GoF

Somatic mutation

Altered cell proliferation,
differentiation,
apoptosis

Likely 1:1

Pancytopenia, autoantibodies,
arthritis, hepatosplenomegaly,
pericarditis

Noonan syndrome

NRAS GoF

Somatic mutation

Altered cell proliferation,
differentiation apoptosis

Likely 1:1

Chilblain lupus, pancytopenia,
autoantibodies

AGS, Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome; ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; CNS, central nervous system; dsDNA, double-­stranded DNA; ENA,
extractable nuclear antigen antibody; FCL, familial chilblain lupus; GOF, gain of function; HUVS, hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis syndrome; IFN, interferon; IgA,
immunoglobulin A; SAVI, STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Modified from Hiraki LT, Silverman ED. Genomics of systemic lupus erythematosus: insights gained by studying monogenic young-­onset systemic lupus erythematosus. Rheum Dis
Clin N Am. 2017;43:415–434, Table 1, p. 417.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1492 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

A

B

C

D

Fig. 199.1 Mucocutaneous manifestations of SLE. A, Malar rash. B, Vasculitic rash on toes. C, Oral mucosal ulcers. D, Discoid rash in malar distribution.
Table 199.2  Potential Clinical Manifestations of Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus
TARGET ORGAN

POTENTIAL CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS

Constitutional

Fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, fever,
lymphadenopathy

Musculoskeletal

Arthritis, myositis, tendonitis, arthralgias,
myalgias, avascular necrosis, osteoporosis

Skin

Malar rash, discoid (annular) rash,
photosensitive rash, cutaneous vasculitis
(petechiae, palpable purpura, digit ulcers,
gangrene, urticaria), livedo reticularis,
periungual capillary abnormalities, Raynaud
phenomenon, alopecia, oral and nasal
ulcers, panniculitis, chilblains, alopecia

Renal

Hypertension, proteinuria, hematuria,
edema, nephrotic syndrome, renal failure

Cardiovascular

Pericarditis, myocarditis, conduction system
abnormalities, Libman-­Sacks endocarditis

Neurologic

Seizures, psychosis, cerebritis, stroke,
transverse myelitis, depression, cognitive
impairment, headaches, migraines,
pseudotumor, peripheral neuropathy
(mononeuritis multiplex), chorea, optic
neuritis, cranial nerve palsies, acute
confusional states, dural and cerebral
venous sinus thrombosis

Pulmonary

Pleuritis, interstitial lung disease, pulmonary
hemorrhage, pulmonary hypertension,
pulmonary embolism

Hematologic

Immune-­mediated cytopenias (hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia or leukopenia),
anemia of chronic inflammation,
hypercoagulability, thrombocytopenic
thrombotic microangiopathy, macrophage
activation syndrome

Gastroenterology

Hepatosplenomegaly, pancreatitis,
vasculitis affecting bowel, protein-­losing
enteropathy, peritonitis

Ocular

Retinal vasculitis, scleritis, episcleritis,
papilledema, dry eyes, optic neuritis

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Any organ system can be involved in SLE, so the potential clinical manifestations are myriad (Table 199.2). The presentation of SLE in childhood
or adolescence differs somewhat from that seen in adults. The most common presenting complaints of children with SLE include fever, fatigue,

PSYCHOSIS

COGNITIVE
DYSFUNCTION

MOOD
DISORDER

CEREBROVASCULAR
DISEASE

SEIZURES
CHOREA

HEADACHE

Fig. 199.2 Overlapping neuropsychiatric symptoms in pediatric SLE.

Patients with pediatric SLE most commonly have more than one neuropsychiatric symptom—in particular for seizures. (From Silverman E,
Eddy A. Systemic lupus erythematosus. In Cassidy JT, Petty RE, Laxer
RM, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011: Fig. 21-­17, p. 329.)

hematologic abnormalities, arthralgia, and arthritis. Arthritis is usually
present in the first year of diagnosis; arthritis may be painful or painless
swelling, often with stiffness in the morning, and is usually a symmetric
polyarthritis affecting large and small joints. Tenosynovitis is often present, but joint erosions or other radiographic changes are rare.
Renal disease in SLE is often asymptomatic, underscoring the need
for careful monitoring of blood pressure and urinalyses; in adolescents,
SLE can present with nephrotic syndrome and/or renal failure, with the
predominant symptoms being edema, fatigue, changes in urine color, and
nausea/vomiting. Because SLE symptoms and findings may develop serially over several years and not all be present simultaneously, the diagnosis
may require longitudinal follow-­up. SLE is often characterized by periods
of flare and disease quiescence but may follow a more smoldering disease
course. The neuropsychiatric complications of SLE may occur with or
without apparently active SLE, posing a particularly difficult diagnostic
challenge in adolescents, who are already at high risk for mood disorders
(Fig. 199.2). Long-­term complications of SLE and its therapy, including
accelerated atherosclerosis and osteoporosis, become clinically evident in
early to middle adulthood. SLE is a disease that evolves over time in each
affected individual, and new manifestations arise even many years after
diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 199 u Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 1493
Table 199.3  Comparison of 1997 American College of Rheumatology and 2012 Systemic Lupus International Collaborating
Clinics (SLICC) Classification Criteria for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus*
1997 ACR CRITERIA*

2012 SLICC CRITERIA*

CLINICAL CRITERIA
Acute cutaneous lupus

• Malar rash†

• Malar rash, bullous lupus, toxic epidermal
necrolysis variant of SLE, maculopapular
lupus rash, photosensitive lupus rash, or
subacute cutaneous lupus†

Chronic cutaneous lupus

• Discoid rash

• Classic discoid rash, hypertrophic
(verrucous) lupus, lupus panniculitis
(profundus), mucosal lupus, lupus
erythematous tumidus, chilblains lupus, or
discoid lupus/lichen planus overlap

Mucosal ulcers

• Oral or nasal ulcers

• Oral (palate, buccal, tongue) or nasal ulcers

Other cutaneous

• Photosensitivity

• Nonscarring alopecia

Arthritis

• Nonerosive arthritis in ≥ two peripheral
joints

• Synovitis in ≥ two peripheral joints

Serositis

• Pleuritis or pericarditis

• Pleurisy or pericardial pain ≥1 day, pleural
effusion or rub, pericardial effusion or rub,
or ECG evidence of pericarditis

Renal

• Persistent proteinuria representing > 500
mg/24 hr or cellular casts

• Urine protein/creatinine ratio representing
>500 mg protein/24 hr or red blood cell
casts

Neurologic

• Seizure or psychosis

• Seizures, psychosis, mononeuritis multiplex,
myelitis, peripheral or cranial neuropathy, or
acute confusional state

Hematologic

• Hemolytic anemia, leukopenia (<4,000/
mm3, lymphopenia (<1,500/mm3), or
thrombocytopenia (<100,000/mm3)

• Hemolytic anemia
• Leukopenia (<4,000/mm3) or lymphopenia
(<1,000/mm3)
• Thrombocytopenia (<100,000/mm3)

• Positive anti-­double-­stranded antibody or
positive anti-­Smith antibody
• Positive antiphospholipid antibody (false-­
positive rapid plasma reagin test, positive
lupus anticoagulant test result, or elevated
anticardiolipin antibody level [IgG or IgM])
• Positive ANA

• Positive anti-­double-­stranded DNA
antibody
• Positive anti-­Smith antibody
• Positive antiphospholipid antibody (false-­
positive rapid plasma regain test, positive
lupus anticoagulant test, medium to high
titer anticardiolipin antibody level [IgA,
IgG, IgM], or positive anti-­B2-­glycoprotein I
antibody [IgA, IgG, IgM])
• Low C3, C4, or Ch50 level
• Positive direct Coombs test (in the absence
of hemolytic anemia)
• Positive ANA

IMMUNOLOGIC

*For the 1997 ACR Criteria, the presence of 4 of 11 cumulative criteria establishes the classification of SLE. For the 2012 SLICC criteria, the presence of 4 cumulative criteria also
establishes the classification of SLE; however, at least 1 clinical criterion and at least 1 immunologic criterion are required. In addition, the presence of biopsy-­proven lupus nephritis
with positive ANA or anti–double-­stranded DNA satisfies the 2012 SLICC criteria. For both sets of classification criteria, all items must be attributable to lupus and not an alternate
cause (e.g., medication side effect).
†Each bullet point counts as a single criterion whether 1 or more definitions are satisfied.
Adapted from Hochberg MC: Updating the American College of Rheumatology revised criteria for the classification of systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum 1997;40:1725;
and from Petri M, et al: Derivation and validation of the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics classification criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum
2012;64:2677-­2686.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of SLE requires a comprehensive clinical and laboratory
assessment revealing characteristic multisystem disease and excluding
other etiologies, including infection and malignancy. Classification criteria

for SLE were developed to identify appropriate subjects for clinical trials
but are often used as guideposts for SLE diagnosis. Over the past several
decades, SLE classification criteria have undergone serial updates. Both the
American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 1997 Revised Classification

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1494 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Entry criterion
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) at a titer of ≥1:80 on HEp-2 cells or an equivalent positive test (ever)

If absent, do not classify as SLE
If present, apply additive criteria

.Do not count a criterion if there is a more likely explanation than SLE.
.Occurrence of a criterion on at least one occasion is sufficient.
.SLE classification requires at least one clinical criterion and ≥10 points.
.Criteria need not occur simultaneously.
.Within each domain, only the highest weighted criterion is counted toward the total score.*
Additive criteria

Clinical domains and criteria

Weight

Immunology domains and criteria

Weight

Antiphospholipid antibodies

Constitutional
Fever

2

Anti-cardiolipin antibodies OR
Anti-β2GP1 antibodies OR
Lupus anticoagulant

Hematologic
Leukopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Autoimmune hemolysis

3
4
4

Complement proteins
Low C3 OR low C4
Low C3 AND low C4

Neuropsychiatric
Delirium
Psychosis
Seizure

2
3
5

2

3
4

SLE-specific antibodies
Anti-dsDNA antibody† OR
Anti-Smith antibody

6

Mucocutaneous
Non-scarring alopecia
Oral ulcers
Subacute cutaneous OR discoid lupus
Acute cutaneous lupus

2
2
4
6

Serosal
Pleural or pericardial effusion
Acute pericarditis

5
6

Musculoskeletal
6

Joint involvement
Renal
Proteinuria >0.5 g/24hr
Renal biopsy class II or V lupus nephritis
Renal biopsy class Ill or IV lupus nephritis

4
8
10
Total score:

Classify as systemic lupus erythematosus with a score of 10 or more if entry criterion fulfilled.

Fig. 199.3 Classification criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). *Additional criteria items within the same domain will not be counted. †In

an assay with ≥90% specificity against relevant disease controls. (From Aringer M, Costenbader K, Daikh D, et al. 2019 European League Against
Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 2019;71[9]:1400–1412.)

Criteria for SLE and the 2012 Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC) Classification Criteria (Table 199.3) are validated in
childhood onset SLE populations, with the SLICC Criteria achieving higher
sensitivity and the 1997 ACR Criteria achieving better specificity. In both
the 1997 ACR and 2012 SLICC Criteria, a positive antinuclear antibody
(ANA) test result is not required for the diagnosis of SLE; however, ANAnegative lupus is extremely rare. The ANA test is very sensitive for SLE
(95-99%) but is not very specific (∼50%). The ANA may become positive
many years before a diagnosis of SLE is established; however, most asymptomatic ANA-positive patients will never develop SLE. More recently, the
2019 European League Against Rheumatism/American College of

Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR) SLE Classification Criteria (Fig. 199.3)
provided a different approach by requiring a positive antinuclear antibody
(ANA) test result at a titer ≥1:80. Allthough the 2019 EULAR/ACR criteria
have excellent sensitivity and specificity in the adult SLE population, they
are still being validated in pediatric populations.
Anti-­dsDNA and anti-­Smith antibodies are specific for SLE (∼98%) but
not as sensitive (40–65%) as the ANA. Hypocomplementemia was not
included in earlier classification criteria, but has been added to the two most
recent classification criteria. The 2012 SLICC Criteria also added as criteria
nonscarring alopecia, additional cutaneous and neurologic manifestations,
and a positive direct Coombs test in the absence of hemolytic anemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 199 u Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 1495
Table 199.4  Main Differential Diagnoses of SLE
(SLE Mimickers)

Table 199.5  Medications Associated with Drug-­Induced
Lupus

OTHER CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASES
Sjögren (SSA+), dermatomyositis (rash), mixed connective tissue
disease

DEFINITE ASSOCIATION
Minocycline, procainamide, hydralazine, isoniazid, penicillamine,
diltiazem, interferon-­α, methyldopa, chlorpromazine, etanercept,
infliximab, adalimumab

INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Endocarditis; hepatitis A, B, C, E; parvovirus B19; HIV; EBV; CMV;
Lyme; disseminated gonococcal arthritis; toxoplasmosis;
histoplasmosis; mycobacterial diseases; tinea faciei; visceral
leishmaniasis; Whipple disease
HEMATOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES
Hodgkin lymphoma, myelodysplastic syndromes,
angioimmunoblastic T-­cell lymphoma
SOLID TUMORS AND PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
Thymoma, carcinoma of the lung, breast, and ovary with
paraneoplastic syndromes
OTHER DISEASES
Meigs and Pseudo-­Meigs syndrome
Multiple sclerosis
Castleman disease
Interferonopathies (monogenic SLE)
Still disease (and other autoinflammatory diseases)
Evans syndrome (with primary immune deficiency)
Complement deficiency
Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
Schizophrenia and other psychoses
Kikuchi disease
IgG4-­related disease
Chilblains (cold-­induced)
Ackerman syndrome and erythema elevatum diutinum with
polyarthritis
Drug-­induced lupus and drug-­induced polyarthritis
Graft-­versus-­host disease
Systemic manifestations of atrial myxoma
Prolidase deficiency
From Chasset F, Richez C, Martin T, et al. Rare diseases that mimic systemic lupus
erythematosus (lupus mimickers). Joint Bone Spine. 2019;86:165–171, Table 1, p. 166
Copyright Elsevier Masson SAS.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Multiorgan disease is the hallmark of SLE, and given its wide array of
potential clinical manifestations, SLE is in the differential diagnosis
of many clinical scenarios, including unexplained fevers, joint pain
or arthritis, rash, cytopenias, nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, pleural
or pericardial effusions or other cardiopulmonary abnormalities, and
new-­onset psychosis or seizures. For patients ultimately diagnosed with
pediatric SLE, the initial differential diagnosis often includes infections
(sepsis, Epstein-­Barr virus, parvovirus B19, endocarditis), malignancies (leukemia and lymphoma), poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis,
other rheumatologic conditions (juvenile idiopathic arthritis, vasculitides), and drug-­induced lupus (Table 199.4).
Drug-­induced lupus refers to the presence of SLE manifestations
triggered by exposure to specific medications, including hydralazine, minocycline, many anticonvulsants, sulfonamides, antiarrhythmic agents, and other drugs (Table 199.5). In individuals prone
to SLE, these agents may act as a trigger for true SLE, but more
commonly these agents provoke a reversible lupus-­like syndrome.
Unlike SLE, drug-­induced lupus affects males and females equally.
A genetic predisposition toward slow drug acetylation may increase
the risk of drug-­induced lupus. Circulating antihistone antibodies
are often present in drug-­induced SLE; these antibodies are only
detected in up to 20% of individuals with SLE. Hepatitis, which is
rare in SLE, is more common in drug-­induced lupus. Individuals
with drug-­induced lupus are less likely to demonstrate antibodies
to dsDNA, hypocomplementemia, and significant renal or neurologic disease. In contrast to SLE, manifestations of drug-­induced

PROBABLE ASSOCIATION
Phenytoin, ethosuximide, carbamazepine, sulfasalazine, amiodarone,
quinidine, rifampin, nitrofurantoin, β blockers, lithium, captopril,
interferon-­γ, hydrochlorothiazide, glyburide, docetaxel, penicillin,
tetracycline, statins, gold, valproate, griseofulvin, gemfibrozil,
propylthiouracil

Table 199.6  Autoantibodies Commonly Associated with
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE)
ANTIBODY

CLINICAL ASSOCIATION

Anti–double-­stranded DNA
(anti-­dsDNA)

Correlates with disease activity,
especially nephritis, in some with SLE

Anti-­Smith antibody
(anti-­Sm)

Specific for the diagnosis of SLE

Anti-­ribonucleoprotein
antibody (anti-­RNP)

Increased risk for Raynaud
phenomenon, interstitial lung disease,
and pulmonary hypertension

Anti-­Ro antibody (anti-­SSA)
Anti-­La antibody (anti-­SSB)

Associated with sicca syndrome
May suggest diagnosis of Sjögren
syndrome
Increased risk of neonatal lupus in
offspring (congenital heart block)
May be associated with cutaneous
and pulmonary manifestations of
SLE
May be associated with isolated
discoid lupus

Antiphospholipid antibodies
(including lupus
anticoagulant and anti-­
cardiolipin or anti-­beta-­2
glycoprotein antibodies)

Increased risk for venous and arterial
thrombotic events

Antihistone antibodies

Present in a majority of patients with
drug-­induced lupus
May be present in SLE

lupus typically resolve after withdrawal of the offending medication; however, complete recovery may take several months to years,
requiring treatment, often with hydroxychloroquine, NSAIDs, and/
or corticosteroids.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

A positive ANA test is present in 95–99% of individuals with SLE.
The ANA has poor specificity for SLE, as up to 20% of healthy individuals also have a positive ANA test result, making the ANA a poor
screen for SLE when used in isolation. After diagnosis, ANA titers
are not reflective of disease activity; therefore repeat ANA testing in
SLE patients is not helpful. Antibodies to dsDNA are specific for SLE,
and in many individuals, anti-­dsDNA levels correlate with disease
activity, particularly in those with significant nephritis. Anti-­Smith
antibody, although found specifically in patients with SLE, does not
correlate with disease activity. Serum levels of total hemolytic complement (CH50), C3, and C4 are typically decreased in active disease
and often improve with treatment. Table 199.6 lists autoantibodies

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1496 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
found in SLE along with their clinical associations. Hypergammaglobulinemia is a common but nonspecific finding. Inflammatory
markers, particularly the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, are often
elevated in active disease. C-­reactive protein (CRP) correlates less
well with disease activity; significantly elevated CRP values often
reflect infection, whereas chronic mild elevation of CRP may indicate
increased cardiovascular risk.
Antiphospholipid antibodies, which increase clotting risk, can be
found in up to 66% of children and adolescents with SLE. The primary
antiphospholipid antibodies are lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin,
and anti–beta-­2 glycoprotein antibodies. When an arterial or venous
clotting event occurs in the presence of an antiphospholipid antibody,
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is diagnosed. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome can occur in the context of SLE (secondary)
or independent of SLE (primary) (see Chapter 528). Rarely, antiphospholipid antibodies can result in catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome, a condition in which clots affect three or more organs/tissues
simultaneously; this condition has a very high mortality rate.

TREATMENT

Treatment of SLE is tailored to the individual and is based on specific
disease manifestations and medication tolerability. For all patients,
sunscreen and avoidance of prolonged direct sun exposure and other
ultraviolet light may help control disease and should be reinforced at
every visit with the patient. Hydroxychloroquine is recommended for
all individuals with SLE when tolerated. In addition to treating mild
SLE manifestations such as rash and mild arthritis, hydroxychloroquine
prevents SLE flares, improves lipid profiles, and may have a beneficial
impact on mortality and renal outcomes. Potential toxicities include
retinal pigmentation that leads to vision impairment; therefore annual
ophthalmology exams are recommended for patients taking hydroxychloroquine, including automated visual field testing and spectral-­domain
optical coherence tomography (SD-­OCT). Given that risk factors for
ocular toxicity include duration of use and dose, hydroxychloroquine
in SLE should not be prescribed at doses greater than 5 mg/kg to a
maximum of 400 mg daily.
Corticosteroids are a treatment mainstay for significant manifestations of SLE and work quickly to improve acute deterioration; side
effects often limit patient adherence, especially in adolescence, and
potential toxicities are worrisome. It is important to limit the dose
and length of exposure to corticosteroids whenever possible. Potential
consequences of corticosteroid therapy include growth disturbance,
weight gain, striae, acne, hyperglycemia, hypertension, cataracts, avascular necrosis, and osteoporosis. The optimal dosing of corticosteroids
in children and adolescents with SLE remains unknown; severe disease is often treated with high doses of intravenous methylprednisolone (e.g., 30 mg/kg/day to a maximum of 1,000 mg for each of 3
days, sometimes followed by a period of weekly pulses) and/or high
doses of oral prednisone (often starting at 1 mg/kg/day). As disease
manifestations improve, corticosteroid dosages are gradually tapered
over months. For most patients it is necessary to introduce a steroid-­
sparing immunosuppressive medication in order to limit cumulative
steroid exposure.
Steroid-­sparing immunosuppressive agents for the treatment of
pediatric SLE include methotrexate, leflunomide, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, tacrolimus, cyclophosphamide, rituximab, and belimumab. Methotrexate, leflunomide, and azathioprine are often used to
treat persistent moderate disease, including arthritis, significant cutaneous or hematologic involvement, and pleural disease. Cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, and azathioprine are appropriate for
the treatment of lupus nephritis, whereas mycophenolate mofetil and
rituximab are often used for the treatment of significant hematologic
manifestations, including severe leukopenia, hemolytic anemia, or
thrombocytopenia.
Cyclophosphamide, usually administered intravenously, is reserved
for the most severe, potentially life-­threatening SLE manifestations,
such as renal, neurologic, and cardiopulmonary disease. Although

cyclophosphamide is highly effective in controlling disease, the potential toxicities are significant, including cytopenias, infection, hemorrhagic cystitis, premature gonadal failure, and increased risk of future
malignancy. Attention to adequate hydration can attenuate the risk of
hemorrhagic cystitis. Fortunately, young females are at much lower
risk of gonadal failure than older women, and the use of gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone agonists, such as leuprolide acetate, may help prevent gonadal failure.
The Childhood Arthritis Rheumatology Research Alliance
(CARRA) has developed a consensus treatment plan for induction
therapy of newly diagnosed proliferative lupus nephritis (class III
and IV) that is specific to the pSLE population; the treatment plan
is considered necessary for class III and IV lupus nephritis but also
appropriate for certain patients with other classes of lupus nephritis.
The CARRA treatment plan advises 6 months of induction therapy
with either cyclophosphamide (given per the National Institutes of
Health [NIH] protocol as 500-­1,000 mg/m2 IV monthly) or mycophenolate mofetil (dosed as 600 mg/m2 bid up to 1,500 mg bid), used
in combination with one of three standardized glucocorticoid regimens. For patients who fail to achieve a partial response in 6 months,
it is appropriate to switch agents. For adult-­weight adolescents, the
cyclophosphamide dosing regimen used in the Euro-­Lupus Nephritis
Trial can be considered in lieu of the previous 6-­month therapy in an
effort to reduce toxicity from cyclophosphamide exposure. Per this
protocol, a fixed dose of 500 mg is given every 2 weeks for 3 months;
in adults, this regimen is althought to reduce adverse effects while
maintaining comparable efficacy for lupus nephritis, though this regimen has not been studied specifically in pediatric lupus. It should be
noted that oral medication adherence is very poor in pSLE, and this
must be taken into consideration when weighing the benefits of an IV
infusion versus a twice daily oral medication such as mycophenolate
mofetil. After the 6-­month induction therapy, maintenance therapy
for lupus nephritis consists of quarterly IV cyclophosphamide (dosed
500-­1,000 mg/m2 once every 3 months), mycophenolate, or azathioprine, with mycophenolate generally being the preferred agent. Maintenance therapy is typically continued for a minimum of 30 months
after the completion of induction therapy, but in many circumstances,
it is continued longer.
Calcineurin inhibitors such as tacrolimus are often adjunct therapy
in the treatment of refractory lupus nephritis. Voclosporin, Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)–approved for adults with lupus nephritis, awaits pediatric study. Clinical trial data on the use of rituximab
in SLE with treatment-­resistant glomerulonephritis has been largely
disappointing, but post hoc analysis from the LUNAR study suggests
there may be benefit for subpopulations of SLE patients. The FDA has
approved the use of belimumab, a monoclonal antibody against BLyS/
BAFF, for the treatment of lupus in adults and children; when added to
standard SLE therapy, belimumab improves markers of disease activity
in renal and nonrenal lupus. Belimumab has been shown to improve
renal outcomes in adults, and while it is not used as monotherapy to
treat lupus nephritis, it can be used in addition to standard therapy
to help achieve renal remission without substantial increase in risk of
infectious complications. Anifrolumab (a monoclonal antibody to the
interferon-­α receptor), achieved 2021 FDA approval for treatment of
adult nonrenal SLE, and studies in lupus nephritis and pediatric lupus
are forthcoming. Several novel therapies are in the pipeline for the
treatment of SLE and lupus nephritis, including Janus kinase inhibitors.
Given the lifelong nature of SLE, optimal care of children and adolescents with this disease also involves preventive practices. Owing to the
enhanced risk of atherosclerosis in SLE, attention to cholesterol levels,
smoking status, body mass index, blood pressure, and other traditional
cardiovascular risk factors is warranted. Even though the Atherosclerosis Prevention in Pediatric Lupus Erythematosus (APPLE) study
failed to support placing all children with SLE on a statin, post hoc
analyses suggest that statins can be considered for primary prevention
of atherosclerotic disease in certain clinical circumstances, particularly
pubertal patients with an elevated CRP.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 199 u Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 1497
Table 199.7  Morbidity in Childhood Lupus
Renal

Hypertension, dialysis, transplantation

Central nervous system

Organic brain syndrome, seizures,
psychosis, neurocognitive dysfunction

Cardiovascular

Atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction,
cardiomyopathy, valvular disease

Immune

Recurrent or severe infection, functional
asplenia, malignancy

Musculoskeletal

Table 199.8  A Summary of Signs and Symptoms Indicative
of Lupus Emergencies
SIGNS/SYMPTOMS

DIFFERENTIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Fever

Evaluate for infection
Consider disease flare
Consider macrophage activation
syndrome

Thrombosis/hemoptysis

Osteopenia, compression fractures,
avascular necrosis

May be arterial or venous
Evaluate for antiphospholipid
syndrome

Chest pain

Ocular

Cataracts, glaucoma, retinal detachment,
blindness

Pleurisy, pericarditis, pulmonary
infarction/embolus

Dyspnea

Endocrine

Diabetes, obesity, growth failure,
infertility, fetal wastage

Pneumonitis, alveolar hemorrhage,
pleural effusions, congestive heart
failure

Headache

Vascular headaches, meningitis,
thrombus, cerebrovascular accident,
hypertensive crisis

Altered mental status

Cerebritis, hypertensive crisis, macrophage activation syndrome, stroke,
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura,
and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome

Rash

Vasculitis lesions, palpable purpura,
infarction

Icterus

Autoimmune hemolysis
Autoimmune hepatitis

Petechiae

Thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura

Seizure

Cerebritis, infection, metabolic causes,
hypertensive crisis

From Cassidy JT, Petty RE, Laxer RM, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011.

SLE patients with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (antiphospholipid antibodies and a history of arterial or venous clot or pregnancy morbidity) are treated with long-­term anticoagulation to prevent
thrombotic events; for SLE patients who are antiphospholipid antibody
positive without a history of clots, many pediatric rheumatologists prescribe aspirin 81 mg daily.
For all SLE patients, adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D is necessary to prevent future osteoporosis, particularly as vitamin D levels are
lower in pSLE patients compared with age-­matched healthy controls. It
is worth noting recent studies suggest a link between hypovitaminosis
D and SLE susceptibility and also offer an emerging role for vitamin D
in immunomodulation.
Infections, particularly pneumococcal disease, commonly complicate SLE, so routine immunization is recommended, including
the annual influenza vaccination, SARS-­C oV-­2 vaccination, and
vaccination against human papilloma virus (HPV). In addition,
pSLE patients age 6 or older should receive a dose of PPSV23 at
least 8 weeks after completing all recommended pneumococcal vaccine series with PCV13 or PCV15. Many of the immunosuppressant
medications used in SLE contraindicate administration of live vaccines. Prompt attention to febrile episodes should include an evaluation for serious infections. Because pSLE patients are at high risk
for developing anxiety and depression, screening for depression is
important. Peer support and cognitive-­behavioral therapy interventions reduce pain and enhance resilience in pSLE.
Pregnancy can worsen SLE, and obstetric complications are common. In addition, many medications used to treat SLE are teratogenic. As a consequence, it is important to counsel adolescent girls
about these risks and facilitate access to appropriate contraceptive
options. Hydroxychloroquine is recommended throughout pregnancy for all SLE patients, whereas other medications may need to
be adjusted.

COMPLICATIONS

Within the first several years of diagnosis, the most common
causes of death in individuals with SLE include infection and
complications of glomerulonephritis and neuropsychiatric disease
(Table 199.7). Over the long term, the most common causes of
mortality are atherosclerosis and malignancy. The increased risk
of premature atherosclerosis in SLE is not explained by traditional
risk factors and is partly a result of the chronic immune dysregulation and inflammation associated with SLE. Increased malignancy
rates may be caused by immune dysregulation and exposure to

From Harry O, Yasin S, Brunner H. Childhood-­onset systemic lupus erythematosus: a
review and update. J Pediatr. 2018;196:22–30, Table IV.

medications with carcinogenic potential. Potential lupus emergencies are noted in Table 199.8.

PROGNOSIS

SLE disease severity is higher in childhood-­onset SLE compared with
adult-­onset SLE. Fortunately, advances in the diagnosis and treatment of SLE have led to dramatically improved survival over the past
50 years. The 5-­year and 10-­year survival rates for pSLE are 99% and
97%, respectively, in high-­income countries, although these survival
rates are 85% and 79%, respectively, in low-­and middle-­income countries. Infection contributes significantly to mortality in pediatric lupus.
In addition, early in the disease course, lupus nephritis, lupus cerebritis, and complications such as macrophage activation syndrome are
primary causes of mortality, whereas later in the disease course, atherosclerosis and malignancy become larger contributors to mortality.
Given their long burden of disease, children and adolescents with SLE
face high risks of future morbidity and mortality from the disease and
its complications, as well as medication side effects. Because pSLE is a
complex, chronic disease with a high risk for morbidity and mortality,
optimal care for children and adolescents with SLE includes treatment
by pediatric rheumatologists in a multidisciplinary clinic with access
to a full complement of pediatric subspecialists. Furthermore, because
SLE is a lifelong disease, it is critically important to ensure an appropriate transition to an adult model of care, which helps avoid interruptions in rheumatology care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1498 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

199.1 Neonatal Lupus
Deborah M. Friedman, Jill P. Buyon,
Rebecca E. Sadun, and Stacy P. Ardoin
Neonatal lupus erythematosus (NLE), an entity distinct from SLE, is one
of the few rheumatic disorders manifesting in the neonate. NLE is not
an autoimmune disease of the fetus, but instead results from passively
acquired autoimmunity, when maternal immunoglobulin G autoantibodies cross the placenta and enter the fetal circulation. In contrast to
SLE, neonatal lupus is not characterized by ongoing immune dysregulation, although infants with neonatal lupus may be at some increased risk
for development of future autoimmune disease. The vast majority of NLE
cases are associated with maternal anti-­Ro (also known as SSA), anti-­La
antibodies (also known as SSB), or anti-­RNP autoantibodies.
Despite the clear association with maternal autoantibodies, their
presence alone is not sufficient to cause disease, as only ∼2% of offspring
born to mothers with anti-­Ro and anti-­La antibodies develop neonatal lupus. Increasing evidence supports the observation that generally
high maternal anti-­Ro titers are necessary for fetal clinical disease.
In the prospective evaluation of fetuses with autoimmune-­associated
congenital heart block followed in the PR Interval and Dexamethasone
Evaluation (PRIDE) study, the median anti-­Ro titer for pregnancies
resulting in heart block was 5 times as high as the median anti-­Ro titer
in unaffected pregnancies. Another group identified heart block in 8%
of cases with very high anti-­Ro antibody titers, with no cases among
women with low or moderate titers.
Siblings of infants with NLE have a 15–20% chance of developing NLE. Neonatal lupus seems to be independent of the maternal
health because many mothers are asymptomatic and only identified to
have anti-­Ro/anti-­La antibodies subsequent to the diagnosis of NLE.
Roughly half of the infants with NLE are born to the mothers with a
defined rheumatic disease such as Sjogren syndrome or SLE.
Clinical manifestations of neonatal lupus include a characteristic
annular or macular rash typically affecting the face (especially the
periorbital area), trunk, and scalp (Fig. 199.4). The rash can be present at birth but more often appears within the first 6-­8 weeks of life,
after exposure to ultraviolet light, and typically lasts 3-­4 months.
Infants may also have cytopenias and hepatitis, each occurring in
∼25% of cases, but the most concerning complication is congenital
heart block.
Conduction system abnormalities range from prolongation of the
PR interval to complete heart block, with development of progressive
cardiomyopathy in the most severe cases. The noncardiac manifestations of neonatal lupus are usually reversible, whereas third-­degree
congenital heart block is permanent. Conduction system abnormalities
can be detected in utero by fetal echocardiogram beginning at 16 weeks
of gestational age. Neonatal lupus cardiac disease has a mortality rate
of ∼20%. Cardiac NLE can manifest as heart block, cardiomyopathy,
valvular dysfunction, and endocardial fibroelastosis. Fetal bradycardia
from heart block can lead to hydrops fetalis.
In vitro studies suggest that during cardiac development via apoptosis, Ro and La antigens may be exposed on the surface of cardiac
cells in the proximity of the atrioventricular node, making the antigens
accessible to maternal autoantibodies. Binding incites a local immune
response, resulting in fibrosis within the conduction system and more
extensive disease in fatal cases. In the skin, exposure to ultraviolet light
results in cell damage and the subsequent exposure of Ro and La antigens, inducing a similar local inflammatory response that produces the
characteristic rash.
Although the scant clinical trial data have been mixed, fluorinated corticosteroids (dexamethasone or betamethasone), intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) at 1-­
2 g/kg maternal weight,
plasmapheresis, hydroxychloroquine, and terbutaline (combined
with steroids) have been used in pregnant women with anti-­Ro or
anti-­L a antibodies to prevent occurrence or progression of fetal cardiac abnormalities.

Fig. 199.4 Neonatal lupus syndrome. Typical rash, often photosensitive with a malar distribution, appearing as annular plaques with erythema and scaling. (From Pain C, Beresford MW. Neonatal lupus syndrome. Paediatr Child Health. 2007;17:223–227.)

Most encouraging are retrospective cohort studies suggesting maternal treatment with hydroxychloroquine may reduce the frequency and
recurrence of congenital heart block. In a multicenter, single-­arm,
open-­label clinical trial assessing the efficacy of hydroxychloroquine
to prevent recurrent autoantibody-­associated congenital heart block,
hydroxychloroquine treatment reduced the risk of recurrent heart
block compared to historical controls by over 50%, from 17.5% to less
than 8% of pregnancies.
Significant conduction system abnormalities after birth are treated
with cardiac pacing and occasionally IVIG and steroids, whereas severe
cardiomyopathy may require cardiac transplantation. If the conduction
defect is not addressed, affected children are at risk for exercise intolerance, arrhythmias, and death. With cardiac pacing, however, children
with conduction system disease in the absence of cardiomyopathy have
an excellent prognosis. In a long-­term follow-­up study of 239 subjects
enrolled in the Research Registry for Neonatal Lupus, 22% of subjects
had cardiac dysfunction in the first year of life. Cardiac dysfunction
often regressed; nevertheless, some dysfunction did appear later in
childhood. Risk factors for cardiac dysfunction were being male or
of low socioeconomic status and having low fetal heart rates, a longer
period of pacing, or extranodal cardiac disease. In a Swedish cohort of
119 children with congenital heart block, 16.8% developed cardiomyopathy ± congestive heart failure. Congenital heart block increased the
risk of cerebral infarctions and infections. Pacemaker treatment was
associated with decreased risk of developing cerebral infarction but
increased risk of infection and cardiomyopathy.
Noncardiac manifestations are typically transient and are conservatively managed, often with supportive care alone. Topical steroids can be used to treat moderate to severe NLE rash. Cytopenias
may improve over time but severe cases occasionally require IVIG.
Supportive care is usually appropriate for hepatic and neurologic
manifestation. When the neonate clears maternal autoantibodies
over the first 6 months of life, these inflammatory manifestations
gradually resolve.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 199 u Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 1499
One Approach to the Management of Anti-Ro ± Anti-La Pregnancy
Counseling by rheumatologist and cardiologist for high-titer antibodies;
consider maternal hydroxychloroquine (especially if prior AV block)
Home fetal Doppler monitor + fetal
echocardiography weekly/biweekly from
pregnancy week 17 – week 26

Normal fetal
echocardiograms

Postnatal EKG and echocardiogram:
1st month of life (all) and
1 year of age (optional)

PR interval ≥140 msec (2SD),
and/or moderate tricuspid
regurgitation

In 24–48 hr, repeat fetal
echocardiogram

PR interval >150 msec
(3SD)

Consider dexamethasone
4–8 mg daily for 1 week

2° or alternating 2°/3° AV block
AV block with signs of EFE,
myocarditis, CHF, and/or hydrops
3° (complete) AV block,
no hydrops fetalis
3° (complete) AV block,
severe hydrops fetalis

Dexamethasone
4–8 mg daily plus
IVIG

Dexamethasone 4–8 mg
daily plus IVIG;
? apheresis;
consider termination

Because maternal autoantibodies begin to gain access to the fetus
through the placenta via FcRn at about 12 weeks gestation, all pregnant women with circulating anti-­Ro and/or anti-­La antibodies, or
those with a history of offspring with neonatal lupus or congenital
heart block, are generally advised to be monitored by a pediatric cardiologist, with screening fetal echocardiography performed weekly
or biweekly from 17-­26 weeks of gestation. The period of greatest
vulnerability is usually 18-­24 weeks. If fetal bradycardia is found during routine in utero monitoring in a mother never evaluated for the
putative antibodies and if fetal echocardiography confirms a conduction defect, screening for maternal anti-­Ro and anti-­La antibodies is
warranted. In pregnancies at risk for congenital heart block, maternal
home monitoring of fetal heart rate using a handheld fetal heart rate
monitor 2-­3 times daily allows for accurate and early detection of
heart rate abnormalities.
A proposed management algorithm is presented in Figure 199.5.
A multicenter retrospective study concluded that maternal treatment with dexamethasone and/or intravenous gamma globulin should
be initiated in all cases of anti-SSA/Ro antibody cardiac manifestations,
including significant first-degree or any higher atrioventricular block,
isolated endocardial fibroelastosis, or sinus bradycardia. However,
other studies suggest that treatment should be individualized to fetuses
at high risk and not universally instituted for isolated complete thirddegree block, which is generally considered immutable.
The negative predictive value of antibody titers to identify pregnancies at low risk of fetal atrioventricular block has also been studied.

Fig. 199.5 Suggested algorithm
for the management of anti-­Ro ±
anti-­
La pregnancy. All such pregnancies should include counseling
and serial fetal echocardiograms.

Excluding women with previously affected children, leveraging samples obtained from anti-SSA/Ro exposed pregnancies with and without
fetal atrioventricular block, no case of heart block developed among
subjects with anti-Ro52 and anti-Ro60 titers of <110 arbitrary units
per milliliter using the multiplex bead assay of the Associated Regional
and University Pathologists Laboratories (n=141). Applying these
100% negative predictive value thresholds, approximately 50% of the
anti-Ro/SSA antibody pregnancies that ultimately had no fetal atrioventricular block could be excluded from surveillance.
Emerging data suggest that not all mothers with anti-SSA/Ro antibodies require surveillance. Based on review of the literature, the
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine published guidelines that recommended “…that serial fetal echocardiograms for assessment of the
PR interval not be routinely performed in patients with anti-SSA/SSB
antibodies outside of a clinical trial setting” but rather that, “Doppler
assessment of fetal heart rate during routine prenatal visits can be used
to screen for fetal complete heart block. Once complete heart block
develops, management is expectant, with weekly ultrasound examinations recommended to assess for hydrops.”
Guidelines in this domain continue to evolve as new data advances
our approach to risk stratification
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1500 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 200

Juvenile Dermatomyositis
Jeffrey A. Dvergsten and Ann M. Reed
Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM) is the most common of the juvenile
idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (JIIMs), representing up to 85% of
all patients with these rare vasculopathic diseases. It is characterized
by proximal muscle weakness and distinctive rashes of the face and
extensor joint surfaces.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of JDM is approximately 3 cases/1 million children/yr,
with an incidence similar in White and Black non-­Hispanics and an
apparent lower incidence in Hispanics. The peak age of onset is 7 years
with a second peak of onset in late adulthood (45-­64 years); however,
adult-­onset dermatomyositis appears to be a distinctly separate entity,
both in prognosis and etiology. In the United States the ratio of females
to males with JDM is 2:1. Multiple cases of myositis in a single family
are rare, but familial autoimmune disease may be increased in families
with children who have JDM when compared to families of children
without autoimmune disease. Reports of seasonal association have not
been confirmed, although clusters of cases may occur.

ETIOLOGY

A precise understanding of the etiology and pathogenesis of JDM
remains elusive; many factors that affect elements of innate and adaptive immunity have been identified as contributing to onset and perpetuation of disease. Evidence suggests that the etiology of JDM is
multifaceted, with a genetic predisposition influenced by an environmental factor triggering events leading to disease pathogenesis.
Genetic factors that are associated with increased susceptibility to
JDM include human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles DRB1*0301,
DQA1*0501, and DQA1*0301. Additionally, HLA-­
DQA1*0501 is
found on maternal cells present in blood and tissue samples of children with JDM, an example of maternal microchimerism, which has
been proposed to play an etiologic role in JDM by creating an immune
response comparable to graft-­
versus-­
host disease (GVHD). Other
polymorphisms implicated in JDM include those affecting cytokine
genes such as the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α promoter and the
variable-­number tandem repeats of the interleukin (IL)-­1 receptor
antagonist A1 gene. An increase in TNF-­α may be associated with
persistent immune activation leading to a longer disease course. The
IL-­1 receptor antagonist A1 allele is associated with the development
of JIIM in White but not in Black persons, in whom the A3 allele,
instead, is a possible risk factor. Environmental factors may also play
a contributing role, with geographic and seasonal clustering reported.
Short-­term increases in ultraviolet (UV) index before the onset of
disease have been reported; however, no clear theory of etiology has
emerged. A history of infection in the 3 months before disease onset
is usually reported; multiple studies have failed to produce a causative
organism. Constitutional signs and upper respiratory symptoms predominate, but one third of patients report preceding gastrointestinal
(GI) symptoms. Group A streptococcus, upper respiratory infections,
GI infections, coxsackievirus B, toxoplasma, enteroviruses, parvovirus
B19, and multiple other organisms have been postulated as possible
pathogens in the etiology of JDM. Despite these concerns, results of
serum antibody testing and polymerase chain reaction amplification
of the blood and muscle tissue for multiple infectious diseases have not
been revealing.

PATHOGENESIS

JDM and related immune myositis syndromes are believed to be an
autoimmune vasculopathic inflammatory disease affecting capillaries
of multiple organs, but most notably, the skin, muscles, and GI tract

(Table 200.1). Pathogenic mechanisms are both immune and nonimmune with cellular and soluble constituents of the innate and adaptive immune systems and pathways of cellular injury involved. Type
I interferons (IFNs), principally α and β, are cytokines of the innate
immune system that play a significant role in the pathogenesis of
JDM by modulating several immune mechanisms, including upregulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules
on muscle cells; induction of proinflammatory cytokine, chemokine,
and adhesion molecule production; and supporting cytotoxic effects of
innate and adaptive immune cells. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs)
play an important role in JDM and are principal producers of type I
IFN upon activation of Toll-­like receptor (TLR) 9 on their surface by
viruses. Cells involved in the inflammatory cascade include monocytes/macrophages (CD14), T-­cell subsets (CD4, CD8, Th17), natural
killer (NK) cells (CD56), and dendritic cells (DCs). MHC class I upregulation induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which results in the
degradation of contractile proteins; additional downstream effects of
type I IFN include autoantibody production and B-­cell proliferation.
Galectin-­9 and CXCL10 (IP-­10) are two IFN-­related proteins that have
been validated as sensitive and specific peripheral biomarkers of disease activity in JDM.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Children with JDM present with either rash, insidious onset of weakness, or both. Fevers, dysphagia or dysphonia, arthritis, muscle tenderness, and fatigue are also commonly reported at diagnosis (Tables
200.2 and 200.3). Certain myositis-­specific antibodies are associated
with different phenotypic patterns of disease (Fig. 200.1).
Rash develops as the first symptom in 50% of patients and appears
concomitant with weakness only 25% of the time. Children often
exhibit extreme photosensitivity to UV light exposure with generalized erythema in sun-­exposed areas. If seen over the chest and neck,
this erythema is known as the shawl sign. Erythema is also commonly
seen over the knees and elbows. The characteristic heliotrope rash is
a blue-­violet discoloration of the eyelids that may be associated with
periorbital edema (Fig. 200.2). Facial erythema crossing the nasolabial
folds is also common, in contrast to the malar rash without nasolabial
involvement typical of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Classic
Gottron papules are bright-­pink or pale, shiny, thickened, or atrophic
plaques over the metacarpal phalangeal joints, proximal interphalangeal joints, and distal interphalangeal joints and occasionally on the
knees, elbows, small joints of the toes, and ankle malleoli (Fig. 200.3).
The rash of JDM is sometimes mistaken for eczema or psoriasis. Rarely,
a thickened erythematous and scaly rash develops in children over the
palms (known as mechanic’s hands) and soles along the flexor tendons, which is associated with anti–Jo-­1 antibodies.
Evidence of small vessel inflammation is often visible in the nail
folds and gums as individual capillaries display changes including
loops, thickening, tortuosity, or loss (Fig. 200.4C). Telangiectasias may
be visible to the naked eye but are more easily visualized under capillaroscopy or with another magnifier (e.g., ophthalmoscope). Severe
vascular inflammation causes cutaneous ulcers on toes, fingers, axillae,
or epicanthal folds.
Early in disease, weakness associated with JDM is often insidious
and difficult to differentiate from fatigue. It is typically symmetric,
affecting proximal muscles such as the neck flexors, shoulder girdle,
and hip flexors. Parents may report difficulty climbing stairs, combing
hair, and getting out of bed. Examination reveals inability to perform a
sit-­up, head lag in a child after infancy, and Gower sign (use of hands
climbing on thighs to help stand from a sitting position). Patients with
JDM may roll to the side rather than sit straight up from lying to compensate for truncal weakness. Approximately half of children exhibit
muscle tenderness because of muscle inflammation.
Esophageal and respiratory muscles are also affected, resulting in
aspiration or respiratory failure. It is essential to assess for dysphonia or
nasal speech, palatal elevation with gag, dysphagia, and gastroesophageal reflux by means of history and physical examination. If any of these
are abnormal, a swallow study should be pursued. Respiratory muscle
weakness can be a medical emergency and lead to respiratory failure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 200 u Juvenile Dermatomyositis

1501

Table 200.1  Clinical Associations: Myositis-­Specific Antibodies (MSA) and Myositis-­Associated Antibodies (MAA) in
Juvenile-­Onset Myositis (JOM)
AUTOANTIBODY

TARGET AUTOANTIGEN

PREVALENCE (%)
IN PATIENTS WITH
JOM

CLINICAL ASSOCIATIONS

Common myositis-­specific autoantibodies are found in 45–55% of patients with juvenile-­onset myositis
Anti-­Mi2

Nucleosome remodeling
deacetylase complex (NuRD)

3–4

• “Classic” dermatomyositis
• Responds well to standard therapies
• Favorable prognosis

Anti-­TIF1g (p155/140,
TRIM33)

Transcriptional intermediary
factor 1 gamma (TIF1-­γ)

18–35

• Severe cutaneous disease
• Rashes in photoexposed pattern
• Chronic disease course
• Lipodystrophy

Anti-­NXP2 (p140, MJ)

Nuclear matrix protein 2 (NXP2)

15–22

• Calcinosis
• More severe muscle disease
• Gastrointestinal bleeding, ulcers, and dysphagia
• Worse disease outcome and functional status

Anti-­MDA5 (CADM-­140)

Melanoma differentiation–
associated gene 5 (MDA5)

6

• More common in East Asia, where associated with
clinically amyopathic myositis, rapidly progressive
interstitial lung disease, and a high mortality rate
• In White populations associated with mild muscle disease,
interstitial lung disease, arthritis, and ulceration

Rare but clinically important myositis-­specific autoantibodies are found in 5–8% of patients with juvenile-­onset myositis antisynthetases
(Jo-­1, PL12, PL7, OJ, EJ, KS, Zo, and Ha)
ANTISYNTHETASES

• Antisynthetase syndrome: myositis, interstitial
lung disease, fever, mechanic’s hands, Raynaud
phenomenon, and arthritis
• Occurs in older children
• Increased mortality

-­ Jo-­1

-­ Histidyl

2–3

-­ PL12

-­ Alanyl

2–3

-­ PL7

-­ Threonyl

2–3

-­ OJ

-­ Isoleucyl

2–3

-­ EJ

-­ Glycyl

2–3

-­ KS

-­ Asparaginyl

2–3

-­ Zo

-­ Phenylalanyl

2–3

-­ Ha

-­ Tyrosyl

2–3

Anti-­SRP

Signal recognition particle (SRP)

2

• Necrotizing autoimmune myositis
• Severe weakness, muscle necrosis, high CK
• Cardiac involvement
• Occurs in older children
• No rash
• May be refractory to standard treatment

Anti-­HMGCR

HMGCR

1

• Necrotizing autoimmune myositis, muscle necrosis,
high CK, dysphagia, no statin exposure

Anti-­SAE

Small ubiquitin-­like modifier–
activating enzyme (SAE)

1

• Initially amyopathic disease with muscle involvement
occurring later

Myositis-­associated autoantibodies are found in 16–20% of patients with juvenile-­onset myositis. Some may occur in conjunction with a
myositis-­specific autoantibody.
Anti-­PmScl

Exosome-­associated PM-­ Scl-­75;
PM-­Scl-­100; C1D

5

• Overlap syndromes

Anti-­U1RNP

U1RNP

2

• Overlap syndromes

Anti-­Ro52

Ro52

5

• Overlap syndromes
• May be found in conjunction with other MSA,
particularly antisynthetases

Common MSAs are present in 45–55% of the U.S. pediatric population with juvenile-­onset myositis. Rare MSAs are present in 5–8%. Myositis-­associated autoantibodies (MAAs) are
found in 16–20% of juvenile-­onset myositis, with or without an accompanying MSA.
CK, Creatine kinase; HMGCR, 3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl-­coenzyme reductase; MDA, melanoma differentiation-­associated; NuRD, nucleosome remodeling deacetylase; SAE, small
ubiquitin-­like modifier–activating enzyme; SRP, signal recognition particle; TIF, transcriptional intermediary factor.
Modified from Pachman LM, Khojah AM. Advances in juvenile dermatomyositis: myositis specific antibodies aid in understanding disease heterogeneity. J Pediatr. 2018;195:16–27.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1502 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Children with respiratory muscle weakness do not manifest typical
symptoms of impending respiratory failure with increased work of
breathing, instead demonstrating hypercarbia rather than hypoxemia.
Evaluation of respiratory muscle function by negative inspiratory force
(NIF) measurement can be performed in the clinic or at the bedside.

Table 200.2  Diagnostic Criteria for Juvenile
Dermatomyositis
Classic rash

Heliotrope rash of the eyelids
Gottron papules

Plus three of the following:

DIAGNOSIS

Weakness

Symmetric
Proximal

Muscle enzyme
elevation (≥1)

Creatine kinase
Aspartate transaminase
Lactate dehydrogenase
Aldolase

Electromyographic
changes

Short, small polyphasic motor unit
potentials
Fibrillations
Positive sharp waves
Insertional irritability
Bizarre, high-­frequency repetitive
discharges

Muscle biopsy

Necrosis
Inflammation

Data from Bohan A, Peter JB. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis (second of two parts).
N Engl J Med. 1975;292:403–407.

Table 200.3  Clinical Features of Juvenile Dermatomyositis
During Disease Course
FEATURE

%

Muscle weakness

90-­100

Dysphagia or dysphonia

13-­40

Muscle atrophy

10

Muscle pain and tenderness

30-­75

Skin lesions

85-­100

Heliotrope rash of eyelids

66-­95

Gottron papules

57-­95

Erythematous rash of malar/facial area

42-­100

Periungual (nail fold) capillary changes

80-­90

Photosensitive rash

5-­42

Ulcerations

22-­30

Calcinosis

12-­30

Lipodystrophy

11-­14

Raynaud phenomenon

2-­15

Arthritis and arthralgia

22-­58

Joint contractures

26-­27

Fever

16-­65

Gastrointestinal signs and symptoms

8-­37

Restrictive pulmonary disease

4-­32

Interstitial lung disease

1-­7

Cardiac involvement

0-­3

From Rider LG, Lindsley CB, Cassidy JT. Juvenile dermatomyositis. In: Cassidy JT, Petty
RE, Laxer RM, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2011: Table 24.20, p. 410.

Diagnosis of dermatomyositis requires the presence of a characteristic rash and at least three signs of muscle inflammation and weakness
(see Table 200.2). Diagnostic criteria developed in 1975 predate the
use of MRI and have not been validated in children. Diagnosis is often
delayed because of the insidious nature of disease onset.
Electromyography (EMG) shows signs of myopathy (increased
insertional activity, fibrillations, sharp waves) and muscle fiber necrosis (decreased action potential amplitude and duration). Nerve conduction studies are typically normal unless severe muscle necrosis and
atrophy are present. It is important that EMG be performed in a center with experience in pediatric EMG and its interpretation. Muscle
biopsy is typically indicated when the diagnosis is in doubt or for grading disease severity (see Fig. 200.4A). Biopsy of involved muscle reveals
focal necrosis and phagocytosis of muscle fibers, fiber regeneration,
endomysial proliferation, inflammatory cell infiltrates and vasculitis,
and tubuloreticular inclusion bodies within endothelial cells. Findings
of lymphoid structures and vasculopathy may portend more severe
disease.
Some children present with classic rash but no apparent muscle
weakness or inflammation; this variation is called amyopathic JDM
or dermatomyositis sine myositis. It is unclear whether these children
have isolated skin disease or mild undetected muscle inflammation,
risking progression to more severe muscle involvement with long-­term
sequelae such as calcinosis and lipodystrophy if untreated.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis depends on the presenting symptoms. If
the presenting complaint is solely weakness without rash or atypical disease, other causes of myositis or myopathy should be considered, including polymyositis, infection-­related myositis (influenza
A and B, coxsackievirus B, and other viral illnesses), muscular dystrophies (e.g., Duchenne, Becker), myasthenia gravis, Guillain-­Barré
syndrome, endocrinopathies (hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism,
Cushing syndrome, Addison disease, parathyroid disorders), mitochondrial myopathies, TNF receptor–associated periodic syndrome
(TRAPS), and metabolic disorders (glycogen and lipid storage diseases). Infections associated with prominent muscular symptoms
include trichinosis, Bartonella infection, toxoplasmosis, staphylococcal pyomyositis, and SARS-­CoV-­2. Blunt trauma and crush injuries
may lead to transient rhabdomyolysis with myoglobinuria. Myositis
in children may also be associated with vaccinations, drugs, growth
hormone, and GVHD. The rash of JDM may be confused with dyshidrotic eczema, psoriasis, erythema nodosa, malar rash from SLE,
capillary telangiectasias from Raynaud phenomenon, and other rheumatic diseases. Muscle inflammation is also seen in children with
SLE, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, mixed connective tissue disease,
inflammatory bowel disease, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody–positive vasculitides. Necrotizing immune-­mediated myopathies are characterized by muscle necrosis without lymphocytic
infiltration. Antibodies to signal recognition particle (SRP) or 3-­hydr
oxy-­3-­methylglutaryl-­coenzyme A (HMG-­CoA) distinguish the two
types from each other and from JDM. Table 200.4 compares other
juvenile idiopathic inflammatory myositis disorders: JDM, juvenile
polymyositis, and juvenile connective tissue myositis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Elevated serum levels of muscle-­derived enzymes (creatine kinase
[CK], aldolase, aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase [ALT],
lactate dehydrogenase) reflect muscle inflammation. Not all enzyme
levels rise with inflammation in a specific individual; ALT is usually
elevated on initial presentation, whereas CK level may be normal.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 200 u Juvenile Dermatomyositis
Anti-p155/140

Anti-MJ-(NXP-2)

1503

Anti-MDA-5

severe cutaneous
involvement

rash

interstitial lung
disease

calcinosis

proximal
myopathy

rash

myopathy

generalized
lipodystrophy

GI bleed, ulcers,
dysphagia
ulceration
arthritis

ulceration

photosensitive
rash

A

B

C

Fig. 200.1 Phenotypes associated with the three most common myositis specific antibodies in children with myositis: anti-­p155/140, anti-­MJ, and

antiMDA-­5. A, Anti-­p155/140, present in 18–30% of idiopathic juvenile inflammatory myopathies, displays an extensive photosensitive rash that
ulcerates, a chronic disease course, and generalized lipodystrophy. B, Fifteen to twenty-­three percent of children positive for anti-­MJ (nuclear matrix
protein 2 in the United Kingdom) may have disease onset at a younger age and have dysphonia, muscle cramps, atrophy, and contractures, with
increased weakness, and they are more likely to develop calcifications and gastrointestinal symptoms; their rash often spares the truncal area. C,
Anti–MDA-­5 is increased in the Japanese population (33%) vs the United Kingdom (6%) and is associated with inflammatory lung disease, oral and
cutaneous ulcers, arthritis, and a milder form of muscle involvement. GI, gastrointestinal. (Modified from Rider LG, Nistala K. The juvenile idiopathic
inflammatory myopathies: Pathogenesis, clinical and autoantibody phenotypes, and outcomes. J Intern Med. 2016;280:24–38, Fig 3.)

Fig. 200.3 The rash of juvenile dermatomyositis. The skin over the

metacarpal and proximal interphalangeal joints may be hypertrophic
and pale red (Gottron papules).

Fig. 200.2 The facial rash of juvenile dermatomyositis. There is ery-

thema over the bridge of the nose and malar areas with violaceous
(heliotropic) discolorations of the upper eyelids.

The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is often normal, and the
rheumatoid factor (RF) test result is typically negative. There may
be anemia consistent with chronic disease. Antinuclear antibody
(ANA) is present in >80% of children with JDM. Serologic testing
results are divided into two groups: myositis-­associated antibodies

(MAAs) and myositis-­specific antibodies (MSAs) (see Table 200.1).
MAAs are associated with JDM but are not specific and can be seen
in both overlap conditions and other rheumatic diseases. The presence of MAAs such as SSA, SSB, Sm, ribonucleoprotein (RNP), and
double-­stranded (ds) DNA may increase the likelihood of overlap
disease or connective tissue myositis. Antibodies to Pm/Scl identify
a small, distinct subgroup of myopathies with a protracted disease
course, often complicated by pulmonary interstitial fibrosis and cardiac involvement. MSAs are specific for myositis and are identified in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1504 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 200.4 Features of juvenile dermatomyositis. A, Perivascular and perifascicular inflammatory infiltrates with necrotic fibers, perifascicular atro-

phy, and regeneration in a muscle biopsy. B, MRI is a sensitive indicator of myositis. Inflamed areas appear bright on short-­tau inversion recovery–
weighted images (arrows). C, Capillaries are most often abnormal when viewed at the nail fold. Typical changes of dilation with adjacent dropout
(arrow) are seen. D, About 30% of juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM) patients have dystrophic calcinosis. E, Cutaneous ulceration with central necrosis,
crust, and surrounding erythema at the elbow of 10-­year-­old boy with severe JDM. F, Lipoatrophy of the forearm (arrow) in a boy with JDM. (From
Feldman BM, Rider LG, Reed AM, Pachman LM. Juvenile dermatomyositis and other idiopathic inflammatory myopathies of childhood. Lancet.
2008;371:2201–2212, Fig. 3, p. 2205.)

approximately 40–60% of children with JIM. These antibodies suggest a diagnosis of myositis, and their presence may define distinct
clinical subsets and may predict prognosis. Anti-­TIF-­1-­γ antibodies are reported in 23–30% of children with JDM and are associated
with photosensitive rashes, ulceration, and lipodystrophy. Unlike in
adults, this antibody is not associated with malignancy in children
with JDM. Anti-­NXP2 antibodies are reported in 12–23% of children
with JDM and are associated with cramps, muscle atrophy, contractures, and dysphonia. Anti-­MDA5 antibodies are found in approximately 7% of children with JDM and may predict the development
of interstitial lung disease (ILD). Because certain MSAs have defined
clinical phenotypes in JDM and IFN-­related biomarkers that may
correlate with disease activity, there is interest in assessing IFN signature by MSA type.
Radiographic studies aid both diagnosis and medical management.
MRI using T2-­weighted images and fat suppression (see Fig. 200.4B)
identifies active sites of disease, reducing sampling error and increasing the sensitivity of muscle biopsy and EMG, results of which are
nondiagnostic in 20% of cases if the procedures are not directed by
MRI. Extensive rash and abnormal MRI findings may be found despite
normal serum levels of muscle-­derived enzymes. Muscle biopsy often
demonstrates evidence of disease activity and chronicity that is not suspected from the levels of the serum enzymes alone.
A contrast swallow study may document palatal dysfunction and risk
of aspiration. Pulmonary function testing detects a restrictive defect
consistent with respiratory weakness and reduced diffusion capacity
of carbon monoxide from alveolar fibrosis associated with other connective tissue diseases. Serial measurement of vital capacity or negative
inspiratory force can document changes in respiratory weakness, especially in an inpatient setting. Calcinosis is seen easily on radiographs,
along the fascial planes, and within muscles (see Figs. 200.4D and E
and Fig. 200.5).

TREATMENT

The aid of an experienced pediatric rheumatologist is invaluable in
outlining an appropriate course of treatment for a child with JDM.
Before the advent of corticosteroids, one third of patients spontaneously improved; a third had a chronic, lingering course; and a third
died from the disease. Corticosteroids have altered the course of the

disease, lowering morbidity and mortality. Methotrexate decreases the
length of treatment with corticosteroids, thereby reducing morbidity
from steroid toxicity. Intravenous (IV) gamma globulin is frequently
used as an adjunct for the treatment of severe disease and can be given
at 2 g/kg (maximum 70 g) every 2 weeks for three doses, then every 4
weeks as needed. The efficacy and safety have been reported in open-­
label studies. In the 2010 Childhood Arthritis and Rheumatology
Research Alliance (CARRA) treatment utilization report, IVIG was
used most frequently for initial treatment of severe disease and treatment of refractory disease. It is also a steroid-­sparing agent. Consensus
treatment plans for guiding treatment of children with JDM are available from CARRA online through PubMed and Figure 200.6.
Corticosteroids remain the mainstay of treatment. In a clinically
stable child without debilitating weakness, oral prednisone at 2 mg/
kg/day (maximum 60 mg daily) is recommended. Children with GI
involvement may have decreased absorption of oral corticosteroids
and require IV administration. In more severe cases with respiratory
or oropharyngeal weakness, high-­dose pulse methylprednisolone is
used (30 mg/kg/day for 3 days, maximum dose 1 g/day) with ongoing
weekly or monthly IV dosing along with daily oral corticosteroids as
needed. Corticosteroid dosage is slowly tapered over 12 months, after
indicators of inflammation (muscle enzymes) normalize and strength
improves.
Weekly oral, IV, or subcutaneous methotrexate (the lesser of 1 mg/kg
or 15 mg/m2) is often used as a steroid-­sparing agent in JDM. The concomitant use of methotrexate halves the cumulative dosage of steroids
needed for disease control. Risks of methotrexate include immunosuppression, blood count dyscrasias, chemical hepatitis, pulmonary toxicity, nausea/vomiting, and teratogenicity. Folic acid is typically given
with methotrexate starting at a dose of 1 mg daily to reduce toxicity and
side effects of folate inhibition (oral ulcers, nausea, anemia). Children
who are taking immunosuppressive medications such as methotrexate should avoid live-­virus vaccination, although inactivated influenza
vaccination is recommended yearly. An international trial found the
combination of methotrexate plus corticosteroids to perform better
than corticosteroids alone and with fewer side effects than corticosteroids plus cyclosporine A.
Hydroxychloroquine has little toxicity risk and is used as a secondary disease-­modifying agent to reduce rash and maintain remission.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 200 u Juvenile Dermatomyositis

1505

Table 200.4  Frequency of Manifestations of Juvenile Dermatomyositis (JDM), Juvenile Polymyositis (JPM), and Overlap
Myositis
FREQUENCY AT ONSET (%)
MANIFESTATION

JDM

JPM

OVERLAP MYOSITIS

Progressive proximal muscle weakness

82-­100

100

100

Easy fatigue

80-­100

85

84

Gottron papules

57-­91

0

74-­80

Heliotrope rash

66-­87

0

40-­59

Erythematous rash of malar/facial area

42-­100

0-­6

20-­51

Periungual nailfold capillary changes

35-­91

33

67-­80

Muscle pain or tenderness

25-­83

61-­66

55

Weight loss

33-­36

52

53

Falling episodes

40

59

29

Arthritis

10-­65

0-­45

69-­80

Fever

16-­65

0-­41

0-­49

Lymphadenopathy

8-­75

0-­12

20-­22

Dysphagia or dysphonia

15-­44

39

40

Joint contractures

9-­55

17-­42

57-­60

V-­or shawl-­sign rashes

19-­29

3-­6

8-­14

Dyspnea on exertion

5-­43

17-­42

40

Gastrointestinal symptoms

5-­37

9-­33

6-­53

Photosensitive rashes

5-­51

0-­6

22-­40

Raynaud phenomenon

9-­28

0-­24

41-­60

Edema

11-­34

15

20

Gingivitis

6-­30

9

0-­37

Cutaneous ulceration

5-­30

3

20-­22

Calcinosis

3-­34

6

24

Cardiac involvement

2-­13

36

19

Interstitial lung disease

5

15

26

Lipodystrophy

4-­14

3

0-­6

Gastrointestinal bleeding or ulceration

3-­4

3

4-­10

From Rider LG, Lindsley CB, Miller FW. Juvenile Dermatomyositis. In: Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, Wedderburn L, eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 7th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2016: Table 26.4.

Typically, it is administered at doses of 4-­6 mg/kg/day orally in either
tablet or liquid form. Ophthalmologic follow-­up one time per year to
monitor for rare retinal toxicity is recommended. Other side effects
include hemolysis in patients with glucose-­6-­phosphate deficiency, GI
intolerance, and skin/hair discoloration.
The use of rituximab in a trial of steroid-­dependent patients with
resistant inflammatory myopathies, including JDM, did not meet the
primary study end-­point showing a difference in time to improvement
between individuals given rituximab at baseline or at 8 weeks, but overall, 83% of all patients met the definition of improvement in the trial.
Additionally, rituximab was noted to have a significant steroid-­sparing
effect.
Other medications used to treat severe refractory disease include
mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine, and cyclophosphamide. Given
the strong type I IFN signal in JDM and that these cytokines activate
intracellular signaling through the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) pathway, consideration of
JAK inhibitors, including tofacitinib, baricitinib, and ruxolitinib, as
potential therapeutic candidates has been bolstered by case reports and

case series that report generally promising results with these drugs in
off-­label treatment of JDM.
Children with pharyngeal weakness may need nasogastric or gastrostomy feedings to avoid aspiration, whereas those with GI vasculitis
require full bowel rest. Rarely, children with severe respiratory weakness require ventilator therapy and even tracheostomy until the respiratory weakness improves.
Physical therapy and occupational therapy are integral parts of the
treatment program, initially for passive stretching early in the disease
course and then for direct reconditioning of muscles to regain strength
and range of motion. Therapy may improve muscle strength measures
and cardiovascular fitness. Bed rest is not indicated, because weight
bearing improves bone density and prevents contractures. Social work
and psychology services may facilitate adjustment to the frustration
of physical impairment in a previously active child and aid with sleep
disturbances associated with rheumatic disease.
All children with JDM should avoid sun exposure and apply high–
sun protection factor (SPF) sunscreen daily, even in winter and on
cloudy days. Vitamin D and calcium supplements are indicated for all

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1506 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

A

B

Fig. 200.5 Calcifications in dermatomyositis. A, Skin effects of calcification. B, Radiographic evidence of calcification.

MODERATE JDM
Plan 1
Methotrexatea 15 mg/m2 or 1 mg/kg weekly
AND
Prednisoneb 2 mg/kg/d for 4 wk then decrease by 20%
Plan 2
Plan 1 AND
IV methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg for 3 d, then weeklyc
Plan 3
Plan 2 AND
IVIG 2 g/kgd q2wk × 3 doses then monthIy
SKIN PREDOMINANT JDM
Plan 1
Hydroxychloroquine 5 mg/kg/de
Plan 2
Plan 1 AND
Methotrexatea 15 mg/m2 or 1 mg/kg weekly
Plan 3
Plan 2 AND
Prednisoneb 2 mg/kg/d for 4 wk then decrease by 20%
SKIN RESISTANT JDM
Plan 1
IVIG 2 g/kgd q2wks × 3 doses then monthly
Plan 2
Plan 1 AND
Mycophenolate mofetilf BID 10 mg/kg/dose OR 600 mg/m2
Plan 3
Cyclosporine 3 mg/kgg

Fig. 200.6 Recommended consensus treatment plans from CARRA

for JDM patients with moderate, skin-­predominant, and skin-­resistant
disease. IV, intravenous; IG, immunoglobulin. aLesser of 15 mg/m2 or
1 mg/kg (max 40 mg), bmax 60 mg, coptional, dmax 70 g, emax 400
mg, fmax 1,500 mg bid, ghigher doses based on toxicity, efficacy. (From
Kim H, Huber AM, Kim S. Updates on juvenile dermatomyositis from
the last decade: classification to outcomes. Rheum Dis Clin N Am.
2021;47:669–690, Fig. 1, p. 679.)

children undergoing long-­term corticosteroid therapy to reduce drug-­
induced osteopenia and osteoporosis.

COMPLICATIONS

Most complications from JDM are related to prolonged and severe
weakness from muscle atrophy to cutaneous calcifications and scarring

or atrophy to lipodystrophy. Secondary complications from medical
treatments are also common. Children with acute and severe weakness are at risk for aspiration pneumonia and respiratory failure and
occasionally require nasogastric feeding and mechanical ventilation
until weakness improves. Rarely, vasculitis of the GI tract develops
in children with severe JDM. Crampy abdominal pain and occult GI
bleeding may indicate bowel wall vasculitis and lead to ischemia, GI
bleeding, and perforation if not treated with complete bowel rest and
aggressive treatment for the underlying inflammation. Surgery should
be avoided, if possible, because the GI vasculitis is diffuse and not easily
amenable to surgical intervention. Contrast-­enhanced CT may show
dilation or thickening of the bowel wall, intraluminal air, or evidence
of bowel necrosis.
Involvement of the cardiac muscle with pericarditis, myocarditis, and
conduction defects with arrhythmias has been reported, as has reduced
diastolic and systolic function related to ongoing disease activity.
Lipodystrophy and calcinosis are thought to be associated with
long-­standing or undertreated disease (see Fig. 200.4D-­F). Dystrophic
deposition of calcium phosphate, hydroxyapatite, or fluoroapatite crystals occurs in subcutaneous plaques or nodules, resulting in painful
ulceration of the skin with extrusion of crystals or calcific liquid. Calcification is found in up to 40% of large cohorts of children with JDM.
Pathologic calcifications may be related to severity of disease and prolonged delay to treatment and potentially to genetic polymorphisms of
TNF-­α-­308. Calcium deposits tend to form in subcutaneous tissue and
along muscle. Some ulcerate through the skin and drain a soft calcific
liquid, and others manifest as hard nodules along extensor surfaces or
embedded along muscle. Draining lesions serve as a nidus for cellulitis or osteomyelitis. Nodules cause skin inflammation that may mimic
cellulitis. Spontaneous regression of calcium deposits may occur, but
there is no evidence-­based recommendation for treatment of calcinosis. Some experts recommend aggressive treatment of underlying myositis. Others have recommended bisphosphonates, TNF inhibitors, and
sodium thiosulfate, but no evidence-­based trials have been conducted
for this condition.
Lipodystrophy manifests in 10–40% of patients with JDM and can
be difficult to recognize. Lipodystrophy results in progressive loss of
subcutaneous and visceral fat, typically over the face and upper body,
and may be associated with a metabolic syndrome similar to polycystic ovarian syndrome with insulin resistance, hirsutism, acanthosis,
hypertriglyceridemia, and abnormal glucose tolerance. Lipodystrophy
may be generalized or localized.
Children receiving prolonged corticosteroid therapy are prone to
complications such as cessation of linear growth, weight gain, hirsutism, adrenal suppression, immunosuppression, striae, cushingoid fat
deposition, mood changes, osteoporosis, cataracts, avascular necrosis,
and steroid myopathy. Families should be counseled on the effects of
corticosteroids and advised to use medical alert identification and to
consult a nutritionist regarding a low-­salt, low-­fat diet with adequate
vitamin D and calcium supplementation.
An association with malignancy at disease onset is observed in
adults with dermatomyositis but very rarely in children.

PROGNOSIS

The mortality rate in JDM has decreased since the advent of corticosteroids, from 33% to currently approximately 1%; little is known
about the long-­term consequences of persistent vascular inflammation. The period of active symptoms has decreased from about 3.5
years to <1.5 years with more aggressive immunosuppressive therapy; the vascular, skin, and muscle symptoms of children with JDM
generally respond well to therapy. At 7 years of follow-­up, 75% of
patients have little to no residual disability, but 25% continue to have
chronic weakness and 40% have chronic rash. Up to one-­third may
need long-­term medications to control their disease. Children with
JDM appear able to repair inflammatory damage to vasculature and
muscle, but there is some emerging concern about long-­term effects
on cardiovascular risk.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 201 u Scleroderma and Raynaud Phenomenon

Chapter 201

Scleroderma and Raynaud
Phenomenon
Heather A. Van Mater and
C. Egla Rabinovich
Juvenile scleroderma encompasses a range of conditions unified by
the presence of fibrosis of the skin. Juvenile scleroderma is divided
into two major categories, juvenile localized scleroderma (JLS,
also known as morphea), which is largely limited to the skin, and
juvenile systemic sclerosis (JSSc), with multisystem organ involvement. Localized disease is the predominant type seen in pediatric
populations (>95%), but systemic sclerosis is associated with mortality and severe multiorgan morbidity.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of scleroderma is unknown, but the mechanism of disease appears to be a combination of a vasculopathy, autoimmunity,
immune activation, and fibrosis. Triggers, including trauma, infection, and, possibly, subclinical graft versus host reaction from persistent maternal cells (microchimerism), injure vascular endothelial
cells, resulting in increased expression of adhesion molecules. These
molecules entrap platelets and inflammatory cells, resulting in vascular changes with manifestations such as Raynaud phenomenon and
pulmonary hypertension. Inflammatory cells infiltrate the area of initial vascular damage, causing further vascular damage and resulting
in thickened artery walls and reduction in capillary numbers. Macrophages and other inflammatory cells then migrate into affected tissues and secrete cytokines that induce fibroblasts to reproduce and

1507

synthesize excessive amounts of collagen, resulting in fibrosis and
subsequent lipoatrophy and dermal fibrosis, with loss of sweat glands
and hair follicles. In late stages the entire dermis may be replaced by
compact collagen fibers.
Autoimmunity is believed to be a key process in the pathogenesis of
both localized and systemic scleroderma, given the high percentage of
affected children with autoantibodies (Table 201.1). Children with localized disease often have a positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) test result
(42%), and 47% of this subgroup have antihistone antibodies. Children
with JSSc have higher rates of ANA positivity (80.7%) and may have anti–
Scl-­70 antibody (34%, antitopoisomerase I). The relationship between
specific autoantibodies and the various forms of scleroderma is not well
understood, and all antibody test results may be negative, especially in JLS.

CLASSIFICATION

Localized scleroderma is distinct from systemic scleroderma and rarely
progresses to systemic disease. The category of JLS includes several
subtypes differentiated by both the distribution of the lesions and the
depth of involvement (Tables 201.2 and 201.3). Up to 15% of children
have a combination of two or more subtypes.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Juvenile scleroderma is rare, with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 100,000
children. Localized scleroderma (LS) is much more common than systemic sclerosis (SSc) in children, by a 10:1 ratio, with linear scleroderma
being the most common subtype. LS is predominantly a pediatric condition, with 65% of patients diagnosed before age 18 years. After age 8
years the female/male ratio for both LS and SSc is approximately 3:1,
whereas in patients younger than 8 years, the prevalence is equal.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Localized Scleroderma

The onset of scleroderma is generally insidious, and manifestations
vary according to disease subtype. The initial skin manifestations of
localized disease usually include erythema or a bluish hue seen around
an area of waxy induration; subtle erythema may be the only presenting

Table 201.1  Clinical Subtypes of Systemic Sclerosis: Associated Organ Manifestations and Autoantibody Association
SUBTYPE

ORGAN SYSTEM

ORGAN SYSTEM FEATURES

Diffuse cutaneous (dc)

Skin

Thickness proximal to elbows and knees
Rapid progressive thickening

Cardiac

Congestive heart failure
Conduction abnormalities

Renal

Scleroderma renal crisis

Pulmonary

Interstitial lung disease

Skin

Thickness limited to distal extremities (and face)
Restricted and nonprogressive thickening

Gastrointestinal

Esophageal dysmotility
GI strictures
Malabsorption

Pulmonary

Pulmonary arterial hypertension

Skin

Either dcSSc or lcSSc pattern
Skin manifestations of other CTD, such as Gottron papules
(DM) and malar rash (SLE)

Musculoskeletal

Arthritis

Limited cutaneous (lc)

Overlap syndrome

ANTIBODY ASSOCIATION
Topoisomerase (Scl-­70)
RNA Polymerase III
U3-RNP (fibrillarin)

Centromere
Th/To

PM-­Scl
U1-­RNP
Ku

Myositis
Cardiac
Renal

Can have any of the dcSSc or lcSSc manifestations
Additional organ involvement in association with other CTD
feature, such as lupus nephritis

Pulmonary
Gastrointestinal
CTD, Connective tissue disease; DM, dermatomyositis; PM-­Scl, polymyositis-­scleroderma antibody; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; U1-­RNP, U1 ribonucleoprotein antibody.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Table 27.3, p. 382.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1508 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 201.2  Classification of Pediatric Scleroderma
(Morphea)

Table 201.3  Provisional Criteria for Classification of
Juvenile Systemic Sclerosis (JSSc)

LOCALIZED SCLERODERMA

MAJOR CRITERION (REQUIRED)*

Plaque morphea

Proximal skin sclerosis/induration of the skin proximal to
metacarpophalangeal or metatarsophalangeal joints

Confined to dermis, occasionally superficial panniculus
Well-­circumscribed circular area of induration, often a central waxy,
ivory-­colored area surrounded by a violaceous halo; unilateral
Generalized morphea
Involves dermis primarily, occasionally panniculus
Defined as confluence of individual morphea plaques or lesions in
three or more anatomic sites; more likely to be bilateral

MINOR CRITERIA (AT LEAST TWO REQUIRED)
Cutaneous: Sclerodactyly
Peripheral vascular: Raynaud phenomenon, nail fold capillary
abnormalities (telangiectasias), digital tip ulcers
Gastrointestinal: Dysphagia, gastroesophageal reflux
Cardiac: Arrhythmias, heart failure

Bullous morphea

Renal: Renal crisis, new-­onset arterial hypertension

Bullous lesions that can occur with any of the subtypes of morphea

Respiratory: Pulmonary fibrosis (high-­resolution CT/radiography),
decreased diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide, pulmonary
arterial hypertension

Linear scleroderma
Linear lesions can extend through the dermis, subcutaneous tissue,
and muscle to underlying bone; more likely unilateral
Limbs/trunk:
One or more linear streaks of the extremities or trunk
Flexion contracture occurs when lesion extends over a joint; limb-­
length discrepancies
En coup de sabre:
Involves the scalp and/or face; lesions can extend into the central
nervous system, resulting in neurologic sequelae, most
commonly seizures and headaches
Parry-­Romberg syndrome:
Hemifacial atrophy without a clearly definable en coup de sabre
lesion; can also have neurologic involvement
Deep Morphea
Involves deeper layers, including panniculus, fascia, and muscle;
more likely to be bilateral
Subcutaneous morphea:
Primarily involves the panniculus or subcutaneous tissue
Plaques are hyperpigmented and symmetric
Eosinophilic fasciitis:
Fasciitis with marked blood eosinophilia
Fascia is the primary site of involvement; typically involves
extremities
Classic description is “peau d’orange,” or orange peel texture, but
early disease manifests as edema (see Fig. 201.2)
Morphea profunda:
Deep lesion extending to fascia and sometimes muscle, but may
be limited to a single plaque, often on the trunk
Disabling pansclerotic morphea of childhood:
Generalized full-­thickness involvement of skin on the trunk, face,
and extremities, sparing fingertips and toes
SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS
Diffuse
Most common type in childhood
Symmetric thickening and hardening of the skin (sclerosis) with
fibrous and degenerative changes of viscera
Limited
Rare in childhood
Previously known as CREST (calcinosis cutis, Raynaud phenomenon,
esophageal dysfunction, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia) syndrome

Neurologic: Neuropathy, carpal tunnel syndrome
Musculoskeletal: Tendon friction rubs, arthritis, myositis
Serologic: Antinuclear antibodies—SSc-­selective autoantibodies
(anticentromere, antitopoisomerase I [Scl-­70], antifibrillarin,
anti-­PM/Scl, antifibrillin, or anti-­RNA polymerase I or III)
*Diagnosis requires at least one major and at least two minor criteria.
From Zulian F, Woo P, Athreya BH, et al. The Pediatric Rheumatology European Society/
American College of Rheumatology/European League against Rheumatism provisional
classification criteria for juvenile systemic sclerosis. Arthritis Rheum. 2007;57:203–212.

sign (Fig. 201.1). Edema and erythema are followed by indurated,
hypopigmented or hyperpigmented atrophic lesions (Fig. 201.2). LS
varies in size from a few centimeters to the entire length of the extremity, with varying depth. Patients may present with arthralgias, synovitis, or flexion contractures (Fig. 201.3). Children also experience
limb-­length discrepancies as a result of growth impairment caused by
involvement of muscle and bone. Children with en coup de sabre may
have symptoms unique to central nervous system (CNS) involvement,
such as seizures, hemifacial atrophy, ipsilateral uveitis, and learning/
behavioral changes (Fig. 201.4). Up to 25% of children with LS have
extracutaneous manifestations, most frequently arthritis (47%) in linear disease and neurologic symptoms (17%) associated with en coup
de sabre.

Systemic Scleroderma

SSc is a severe disease in children, starting with an insidious onset followed by a prolonged course characterized by periods of remission and
exacerbation, commonly resulting in chronic disability and death, with
a 5-­year mortality rate of 7.5%.
The skin manifestations of SSc include an early phase of edema
that spreads proximally from the dorsum of the hands and fingers and
includes the face. An eventual decrease in edema is followed by induration and fibrosis of skin, ultimately resulting in loss of subcutaneous fat,
sweat glands, and hair follicles. Later, atrophic skin becomes shiny and
waxy in appearance. As lesions spread proximally, flexion contractures
develop at the elbows, hips, and knees associated with secondary muscle weakness and atrophy. In the face, this process results in a small oral
stoma with decreased mouth aperture. Skin ulceration over pressure
points, such as the elbows, may be associated with subcutaneous calcifications. Severe Raynaud phenomenon (RP; Fig. 201.5) causes ulceration of the fingertips with subsequent loss of tissue pulp and tapered
fingers (sclerodactyly) (Fig. 201.6). Resorption of the distal tufts of the
distal phalanges may occur (acroosteolysis). Hyperpigmented postinflammatory changes surrounded by atrophic depigmentation give a
salt-­and-­pepper appearance to skin. Over years, remodeling of lesions
sometimes results in focal improvement in skin thickening.
Pulmonary disease is the most common visceral manifestation of SSc
and includes both arterial and interstitial involvement (alveolitis). Symptoms range from asymptomatic disease to exercise intolerance, dyspnea at

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 201 u Scleroderma and Raynaud Phenomenon

1509

Fig. 201.1 Child with generalized morphea. Note the active circular
lesion (arrowheads) with a surrounding rim of erythema. The largest lesion has areas of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and depression
with an area of erythema on the right. The small lesion (arrow) demonstrates depression caused by lipoatrophy.

Fig. 201.4 Child with en coup de sabre lesion on scalp extending

down to forehead. Before treatment, the skin on the scalp was bound
down with chronic skin breakdown. Note the area of hypopigmentation
extending down the forehead (arrows).

Fig. 201.2 Inactive linear scleroderma demonstrating hyperpigmented lesion with areas of normal skin (skip lesions).

Fig. 201.5 Active Raynaud phenomenon with well-­demarcated pallor
Fig. 201.3 Child with untreated linear scleroderma resulting in knee

contracture, immobility of ankle, chronic skin breakdown of scar on the
lateral knee, and areas of hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation.
The affected leg is 1 cm shorter.

rest, and right-­sided heart failure. Pulmonary arterial hypertension is a
poor prognostic sign, developing because of lung disease or independently
as part of the vasculopathy. Clinical manifestations of pulmonary arterial
hypertension in children appear late in the course, are subtle, and include
cough and dyspnea on exertion. Pulmonary evaluation should include
pulmonary function tests (PFTs) such as diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide (DLco), bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), and high-­resolution chest
computed tomography (HRCT). PFTs reveal decreased vital capacity and
decreased DLco, whereas neutrophilia or eosinophilia on BAL suggests
active alveolitis. Chest CT is much more sensitive than chest radiographs,
which are often normal, showing typical basilar ground-­glass abnormalities, reticular linear opacities, nodules, honeycombing, and mediastinal
adenopathy.
Gastrointestinal tract disease is seen in 25% of children with SSc.
Common manifestations include esophageal and intestinal dysmotility
resulting in dysphagia, reflux, dyspepsia, gastroparesis, bacterial overgrowth, dilated bowel loops and pseudoobstruction, and dental caries,
as well as malabsorption and failure to thrive. Renal arterial disease can
cause chronic or severe episodic hypertension; unlike adult disease, renal

at the fingertips in a patient with scleroderma. (From Firestein GS, Budd
RC, Gabriels SE, et al., eds. Firestein & Kelley’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig. 89.2, p. 1507.)

Fig. 201.6 Sclerodactyly and finger ulcerations in a patient with systemic sclerosis who is poorly compliant with treatment.

crisis is rare. Cardiac fibrosis is associated with arrhythmias, ventricular
hypertrophy, and decreased cardiac function. Mortality from JSSc is usually a result of cardiopulmonary disease. A scoring system helps identify
the severity of the multiorgan involvement (Table 201.4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1510 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 201.4  Medsger Systemic Sclerosis Severity Scale*
ORGAN SYSTEM
General

0 (NORMAL)

1 (MILD)

2 (MODERATE)

3 (SEVERE)

4 (END STAGE)

Wt loss <5%

Wt loss 5–10%

Wt loss 10–15%

Wt loss 15–20%

Wt loss 20%+

Hct 37%+

Hct 33–37%

Hct 29–33%

Hct 25–29%

Hct 25%

Hb 12.3+ g/dL

Hb 11.0-­12.2 g/dL

Hb 9.7-­10.9 g/dL

Hb 8.3-­9.6 g/dL

Hb <8.3 g/dL

Peripheral
vascular

No RP; RP not requiring
vasodilators

RP requiring vasodilators

Digital pitting
scars

Digital tip ulcerations

Digital gangrene

Skin

TSS 0

TSS 1-­14

TSS 15-­29

TSS 30-­39

TSS 40+

Joint/tendon

FTP 0-­0.9 cm

FTP 1.0-­1.9 cm

FTP 2.0-­3.9 cm

FTP 4.0-­4.9 cm

FTP 5.0+ cm

Muscle

Normal proximal muscle
strength

Proximal weakness, mild

Proximal weakness,
moderate

Proximal weakness,
severe

Ambulation aids
required

Gastrointestinal
tract

Normal esophagogram;
normal small bowel
series

Distal esophageal
hypoperistalsis; small
bowel series abnormal

Antibiotics
required for
bacterial
overgrowth

Malabsorption
syndrome; episodes
of pseudoobstruction

Hyperalimentation
required

Lung

DLco 80%+
FVC 80%+
No fibrosis on radiograph
sPAP <35 mm Hg

DLco 70–79%
FVC 70–79%
Basilar rales; fibrosis on
radiograph sPAP 35-­49
mm Hg

DLco 50–69%
FVC 50–69% sPAP
50-­64 mm Hg

DLco <50%
FVC <50% sPAP 65+
mm Hg

Oxygen required

Heart

ECG normal

ECG conduction defect

ECG arrhythmia

ECG arrhythmia
requiring therapy

CHF

LVEF 50%+

LVEF 45–49%

LVEF 40–44%

LVEF 30–40%

LVEF <30%

No history of SRC with
serum creatinine
<1.3 mg/dL

History of SRC with serum
creatinine <1.5 mg/dL

History of SRC
with serum
creatinine 1.5-­
2.4 mg/dL

History of SRC with
serum creatinine
2.5-­5.0 mg/dL

History of SRC with
serum creatinine
>5.0 mg/dL or
dialysis required

Kidney

*If two items are included for a severity grade, only one is required for the patient to be scored as having disease of that severity level.
CHF, Congestive heart failure; DLco, diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide, % predicted; ECG, electrocardiogram; FTP, fingertip-­to-­palm distance in flexion; FVC, forced vital
capacity, % predicted; Hb, hemoglobin; Hct, hematocrit; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; RP, Raynaud phenomenon; sPAP, estimated pulmonary artery pressure by Doppler
echo; SRC, scleroderma renal crisis; TSS, total skin score; Wt, weight.
Modified from Medsger TA Jr, Bombardieri S, Czirjak L, et al. Assessment of disease severity and prognosis, Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2003;21(3 Suppl 29):S51, Table 1, p. S-­43.

Raynaud Phenomenon

Raynaud phenomenon is the most frequent initial symptom in pediatric
SSc, present in 70% of affected children months to years before other
manifestations and seen in nearly all over the course of the disease. RP
refers to the classic triphasic sequence of blanching, cyanosis, and erythema of the digits induced by cold exposure and/or emotional stress
(see Fig. 201.5). RP is typically independent of an underlying rheumatic
disease (Raynaud disease) but can result from rheumatic diseases such
as scleroderma, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and mixed connective tissue disease (Fig. 201.7). The color changes are brought about
by (1) initial arterial vasoconstriction, resulting in hypoperfusion and
pallor (blanching), (2) venous stasis (cyanosis), and (3) reflex vasodilation caused by the factors released from the ischemic phase (erythema).
The color change is classically reproduced by immersing the hands in
iced water and reversed by warming. During the blanching phase, there
is inadequate tissue perfusion in the affected area, associated with pain
and paresthesias and resulting in ischemic damage only when associated
with a rheumatic disease. The blanching usually affects the distal fingers
but may also involve thumbs, toes, ears, and tip of the nose. The affected
area is usually well demarcated and uniformly white. Digital ulcers associated with RP are indicative of underlying rheumatic disease.
Raynaud disease often begins in adolescence and is characterized by symmetric occurrence, the absence of digital ulcers, tissue
necrosis and gangrene, and the lack of manifestations of an underlying rheumatic disease. Children have normal nail fold capillaries
(absence of periungual telangiectasias). RP should be distinguished
from acrocyanosis and chilblains. Acrocyanosis is a vasospastic disorder resulting in cool, painless, bluish discoloration in the hands
and feet despite normal tissue perfusion. It may be exacerbated by
stimulant medications used to treat attention-­deficit disorder. Chilblains is a condition with episodic color changes and the development of nodules related to severe cold exposure and spasm-­induced

vessel and tissue damage; it has been associated with SLE and is also
referred to as lupus pernio, but the majority of children with chilblains do not have lupus.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of JLS is based on the distribution and depth of characteristic lesions. Biopsy is helpful to confirm the diagnosis. The diagnosis of JSSc requires proximal sclerosis/induration of the skin and the
presence of 2 of 20 minor criteria (see Table 201.3).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The most important condition to differentiate from JLS is JSSc. Contractures and synovitis from juvenile arthritis can be differentiated from those
caused by LS by the absence of skin changes. Other conditions to consider
include chemically induced scleroderma-­
like disease, diabetic cheiroarthropathy, pseudoscleroderma, and scleredema. Pseudoscleroderma
comprises a group of unrelated diseases characterized by patchy or diffuse
cutaneous fibrosis without the other manifestations of scleroderma. These
include phenylketonuria, syndromes of premature aging, and localized
idiopathic fibrosis. Scleredema is a transient, self-­limited disease of both
children and adults that has sudden onset after a febrile illness (especially
streptococcal infections) and is characterized by patchy sclerodermatous
lesions on the neck and shoulders and extending to the face, trunk, and
arms.

Laboratory Findings

No laboratory studies are diagnostic of either localized or systemic
scleroderma. Although the results of complete blood counts, serum
chemistry analyses, and urinalysis are normal, children may have
elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, eosinophilia, or hypergammaglobulinemia, all of which normalize with treatment. Elevations
of muscle enzymes, particularly aldolase, can be seen with muscle

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 201 u Scleroderma and Raynaud Phenomenon

The diagnosis of Raynaud
phenomenon is confirmed by a
positive response to all three
questions

Exclude potential causative or
aggravating factors:
• Occupational and environmental
factors
Polyvinyl chloride, frostbite,
hand-arm vibration, and
hypothenar hammer syndrome
• Drugs
Chemotherapeutic agents,
interferon, estrogen, nicotine,
narcotics, sympathomimetic
agents, ergotamines, β-blockers
(nonselective), clonidine
• Neuropathy
Carpal tunnel syndrome

Normal medical history and physical
examination (no digital lesions or
gangrene, normal nail-fold
capillaries): Patients do not need to
undergo specialized studies and can
be considered to have primary
Raynaud phenomenon

Ask the following screening
questions:
• Are your fingers unusually sensitive
to cold?
• Do your fingers change color when
they are exposed to cold
temperatures?
• Do they turn white, blue, or both?

History of single digit - asymmetric
attacks, absent peripheral pulses,
asymmetry of blood pressure, or
evidence of critical ischemia: Patients
should undergo arterial Doppler
ultrasonography, MRI/MRA, or
angiography

1511

The diagnosis of Raynaud
phenomenon is excluded if responses
to second and third questions are
negative

Abnormal findings indicate presence
of obstructive vascular disease:
• Atherosclerosis
• Thromboangiitis obliterans
• Embolic disease
• Thoracic outlet syndrome

Symptoms or signs suggestive of
systemic disease (myalgias,
arthralgias, fever, weakness,
weight loss, rash, arthritis, sicca
syndrome, or symptoms of heart or
lung disease) with or without
abnormal nail-fold capillaries:
Patients should undergo the
following studies:
• Complete blood cell count
• General blood chemical analyses
• Urinalysis
• Test for anti-nuclear antibodies
• Test for rheumatoid factor
• Test for disease-specific
autoantibodies
• C3 and C4 complement levels

Patients with positive results have
rheumatic disease:
• Scleroderma
• Systemic lupus erythematosus
• Mixed connective-tissue disease
• Dermatomyositis
• Polymyositis
• Sjögren syndrome
• Vasculitis
• Anti-phospholipid syndrome
• Undifferentiated CTD

Patients with negative results should
have the following studies:
• Thyroid-function test
• Serum protein electrophoresis
• Test for cryoglobulins and
cryofibrinogen

Patients with positive results have
other systemic diseases:
• Hypothyroidism
• Cancer
• Cold agglutinin syndrome
• POEMS syndrome
• Cryoglobulinemia
• Cryofibrinogenemia
• Hyperviscosity syndrome

Fig. 201.7 Diagnostic algorithm for Raynaud phenomenon. CTD, Connective tissue disease; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; POEMS,
polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, and skin changes. (From Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al., eds.
Kelley & Firestein’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig 84-­3.)

involvement. Patients with JSSc may have anemia, leukocytosis, and
eosinophilia and autoantibodies (ANA, anti–Scl-­70). Imaging studies
delineate the affected area and can be used to follow disease progression. MRI is useful in en coup de sabre and Parry-­Romberg syndrome
(facial hemiatrophy) for determination of CNS or orbital involvement.
Infrared thermography uses the temperature variation between areas
of active and inactive cutaneous disease to help differentiate active disease from damage. The role of ultrasound to examine lesion activity is
evolving. HRCT, PFTs, echocardiography, and manometry are useful
tools for diagnosing and monitoring visceral involvement in JSSc.

TREATMENT

Treatment for scleroderma varies according to the subtype and severity. Superficial morphea may benefit from topical corticosteroids

or ultraviolet therapy. For lesions involving deeper structures, systemic therapy is recommended. A combination of methotrexate and
corticosteroids is effective in treating JLS by preventing lesion extension and resulting in significant skin softening and improved range
of motion of affected joints. The Childhood Arthritis and Rheumatology Research Alliance (CARRA) consensus treatment plans for
JLS include (1) weekly subcutaneous (SC) methotrexate at 1 mg/kg
(maximum dose 25 mg); (2) weekly SC methotrexate (1 mg/kg; max
25 mg) plus either 3 months of high-­dose intravenous (IV) corticosteroids (30 mg/kg; max 1,000 mg) for 3 consecutive days a month
or weekly corticosteroids at the same dose for 3 months; or (3) high-­
dose daily oral corticosteroids (2 mg/kg/day, max 60 mg) with a slow
taper over 48 weeks (Fig. 201.8). Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and
abatacept have shown promise as second-­line agents for recalcitrant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Clinical diagnosis of localized scleroderma

Active disease?

Cutaneous activity
- Disease extension or existent lesion(s) with active signs
- Erythema
- Violaceous color
- Skin thickening
- White or yellow waxy appearance
- Tactile warmth
- Biopsy showing active disease

AND/OR

Extracutaneous activity
- Progressive deep tissue involvement (by exam or imaging)
- New onset or persistent inflammatory arthritis
- New onset seizures, severe headaches, or CNS vasculitis
- Uveitis or visual disturbance
- Progressive joint contractures
- Progressive growth defects

Yes, active

Not active
No, low risk

Moderate to high
risk for severe
disease?

No

Cosmetic or
functional
issues?

Yes, moderate or high risk
- Subtype
- All except circumscribed superficial morphea
- Rapidly progressive or extensive disease
- Presence of extracutaneous involvement
- Craniofacial involvement

Systemic therapy

Reassess and
observe

- Subtype
- Circumscribed superficial morphea
(excludes craniofacial involvement)
- No extracutaneous involvement

Yes

- Methotrexate
CARRA dosing: 1 mg/kg/wk SC, max 25 mg
PReS dosing: 15 mg/m2/wk PO or SC, max 25 mg
OR
- Mycophenolate mofetil PO
<1.25 m2 = 600 mg/m2 twice a day
40–50 kg or 1.25–1.5 m2 = 750 mg twice a day
>50 kg or 1.5 m2 = 1,000 mg twice a day
WITH OR WITHOUT
- Corticosteroids IV or PO
CARRA dosing
Methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg/dose IV (max 1 gm)
3 consecutive daily doses/month × 3 mo (9 doses) or,
1 dose/week × 12 wk (12 doses)
Prednisone 2 mg/kg/d PO, max 60 mg
Gradual taper over 48 wk
PReS dosing
Prednisone 1–2 mg/Kg/d PO for 2–3 mo
Methylprednisolone 30 mg/Kg/dose IV for 3 mo

Yes

Topical therapy
- Topical corticosteroids
- Vitamin D derivatives
- Tacrolimus
- Imiquimod
- Phototherapy

- Physical/occupational therapy
- Mental health support
- Consider corrective or cosmetic
surgery

New
extracutaneous
disease?

- Long-term monitoring
- Relapse occurs in
14%–45% of patients
- Mean time to relapse:
1–2 y but may occur
several years later

No

Not better by 3
mo or worse
by 6 mo?

Improving

Continue regimen for min
12 mo from time of
disease quiescence

No improvement/worsening
Add or adjust therapy
Adjunctive therapy
Topical therapy, physical/occupational therapy, mental health support

Fig. 201.8 LS treatment recommendations. This algorithm outlines factors to consider when deciding upon treatment and CARRA-­and PReS-­
recommended treatments. Careful and long-­term monitoring for both cutaneous and extracutaneous activity is important. The algorithm is based
upon the authors’ experiences and not intended to serve as prescriptive instructions. CARRA, Childhood Arthritis and Rheumatology Research Alliance; IV, intravenous; max, maximum; min, minimum; PO, by mouth; PReS, Pediatric Rheumatology European Society; SC, subcutaneous. (From
Vasquez-­Canizares N, Li SC. Juvenile localized scleroderma – updates and differences from adult-­onset disease. Rheum Dis Clin N Am. 2021;47:737–
755, Fig. 5, p. 749.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 201 u Scleroderma and Raynaud Phenomenon
disease. Physical and occupational therapy are important adjuncts to
pharmacologic treatment. Eosinophilic fasciitis often responds well
to corticosteroids and methotrexate. Close follow-­up is necessary in
JLS given high rates of relapse—up to 40%.
Treatments for JSSc target specific disease manifestations (Tables
201.5 and 201.6). RP is treated with cold avoidance, and pharmacologic interventions are reserved for severe disease. Calcium channel
blockers (nifedipine 30-­60 mg sustained-­release form daily; amlodipine 2.5-­10 mg daily) are the most common pharmacologic interventions. Additional potential therapies for RP include losartan,
prazosin, bosentan, and sildenafil. Angiotensin-­converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors (captopril, enalapril) are recommended for hypertension associated with renal disease. Methotrexate or MMF may
be beneficial for skin manifestations. Cyclophosphamide and MMF
are used to treat pulmonary alveolitis and prevent fibrosis. Corticosteroids should be used cautiously in SSc because of an association with renal crisis. Adults with SSc have been successfully treated
with high-­dose cyclophosphamide, antithymocyte globulin, and
autologous stem cell transplantation. Systemic sclerosis–associated
interstitial lung disease has been managed with nintedanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, which has antiinflammatory and antifibrotic
effects. Nintedanib combination therapy with MMF is also effective
as an initiation therapy or when escalation of therapy is needed.
The treatment of RP begins with avoiding cold stimuli, using
hand and foot warmers, and avoiding carrying bags by their handles
(impairs circulation). Nifedipine (10-­20 mg three times daily—adult

1513

dose) reduces, but does not eliminate, the number and severity of
episodes. Side effects include headache, flushing, and hypotension.
Topical nitrates may result in digital vasodilation and may reduce the
severity of an episode.

PROGNOSIS

JLS is ultimately generally self-­limited, with the initial inflammatory
stage followed by a period of stabilization and then softening, for an
average disease duration of 3-­5 years, although there are reports
of active disease lasting up to 20 years. Prolonged disease activity
is associated primarily with linear and deep disease subtypes. JLS,
especially linear and deep subtypes, can result in significant morbidity, disfigurement, and disability as a result of joint contractures,
muscle atrophy, limb shortening, facial asymmetry, and hyperpigmentation and hypopigmentation. Death from an en coup de sabre
lesion with progressive neurologic decline has been reported.
JSSc has a more variable prognosis. Although many children have
a slow, insidious course, others demonstrate a rapidly progressive
form with early organ failure and death. Skin manifestations reportedly soften years after disease onset. Overall, the prognosis of JSSc
is better than that of the adult form, with 5-­, 10-­, and 15-­year survival rates, respectively, in children of 89%, 80–87%, and 74–87%.
The most common cause of death is heart failure caused by myocardial and pulmonary fibrosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 201.5  Organ-­Specific Treatment of Systemic Sclerosis
MANIFESTATION

FIRST-­LINE

SECOND-­LINE

VERY SEVERE

Raynaud phenomenon

Calcium channel blockers*

PDE-­5 inhibitors†
Fluoxetine
Angiotensin II receptor antagonists‡
Topical nitrates§

Prostacyclins (iloprost)¶
Sympathectomy
Botulism toxin
Fat grafting

Digital ulcers

PDE-­5 inhibitors†

Endothelin receptor antagonists#

Prostacyclins (iloprost)

Pulmonary hypertension

PDE-­5 inhibitors†
Endothelin receptor
antagonists

Prostacyclins (epoprostenol)¶
Riociguat

Interstitial lung disease

Cyclophosphamide
Mycophenolate mofetil
Corticosteroids

Rituximab

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation

Skin

Methotrexate
Mycophenolate mofetil
Corticosteroids (low dose)

Abatacept
Immune globulin

Cyclophosphamide
Rituximab

Renal crisis

ACE inhibitors**

Musculoskeletal

NSAIDs
Hydroxychloroquine
Methotrexate
Corticosteroids (low dose)

Rituximab
Abatacept
Tocilizumab

*Calcium channel blockers (nifedipine, amlodipine).
†PDE-­5 inhibitors (sildenafil, tadalafil).
‡Angiotensin receptor antagonists (losartan).
§Topical nitrates (glyceryl trinitrate).
¶Prostacyclins (iloprost, epoprostenol).
#Endothelin receptor antagonist (bosentan, ambrisentan, macitentan).

**ACE inhibitors (captopril, enalapril).
ACE, Angiotensin converting enzyme; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; PDE-­5, phosphodiesterase-­5.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Table 27.8, p. 395.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1514 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 201.6  Treatment of Gastrointestinal Manifestations of Juvenile SSc
ORGAN

MANIFESTATION

TREATMENT

Oral

Buccal, lingual fibrosis
Tooth decay
Mandibular resorption
Gingival recession
Dysphagia

Dental hygiene
Fluoride treatments every 3 months
Dental sealant
Soft foods, small portions, adequate fluids
Gingival mucosa grafting
Dietary restriction (low sugar, soft foods)

Esophageal

Dysmotility
Reflux
Constriction

Metoclopramide, erythromycin
Weight loss; small, frequent meals; avoid eating 3 hr before bed; raise head of
bed 6 inches
Avoid tight clothes, heavy lifting, bending
Proton pump inhibitors, H2 blockers
Dilatation

Stomach

GAVE (watermelon stomach)
Fructose intolerance

Metoclopramide
Erythromycin*
Octreotide

Small intestines

Bacterial overgrowth
Bezoars
Malabsorption leading to malnutrition
Pseudoobstruction

FODMAP diet
Vitamin supplementation
Low-­residue, elemental diet
Metoclopramide
Antibiotics
Octreotide

Colon

Fibrosis of lymphatics
Ischemia

Erythromycin
Metamucil
High-­fiber diet

Anorectal

Internal anal sphincter atrophy

Biofeedback
Pelvic floor exercises
Sacral nerve stimulation

*Side effects of erythromycin can be avoided by using low doses (rather than antibiotic-­level doses).
FODMAP, Fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyol; GAVE, gastric antrum vascular ectasia; SSc, systemic sclerosis.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Table 27.9, p. 398.

Chapter 202

Behçet Disease

Mediterranean countries; boys and girls are equally affected. A family history of BD is present in approximately 20% of the cases. Onset
in children is usually 8-­12 years of age. Newborns of affected mothers have demonstrated symptoms of BD.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Seza Ozen
Behçet disease (BD) is classified as a primary multisystem variable vessel vasculitis because of the involvement of any size and type (arterial,
venous) of blood vessel. BD is probably underdiagnosed in children
as a result of the heterogeneity in clinical features, the large spectrum
of differential diseases, and lack of specific tests. Originally described
with recurrent oral ulcerations, uveitis, and skin abnormalities, the BD
spectrum is much broader.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

BD has a high prevalence in countries along the Silk Road, extending from Japan to the Eastern Mediterranean. It is increasingly
recognized among people of European ancestry as well. BD has a
prevalence of 5-­7 per 100,000 adults. The increased disease recognition might have had a role in the rising prevalence of BD as
well as the migrations of the 20th century. Prevalence in children
is probably not more than 10% of the adult counterparts in Eastern

The etiology of BD is unknown. It is a polygenic disorder with autoinflammatory features. The autoinflammatory nature of BD is suggested by its episodic nature, the prominent innate immune system
activation, the absence of identifiable autoantibodies, and the co-­
association with the MEFV gene. However, there is evidence supporting the role of the adaptive immune system as well. BD has also been
considered to be an MHC-­I-­opathy because of the strong association
with HLA-­B51. Genetic contribution to BD is evident through this
well-­known association with HLA-­B5101, the familial cases, the sibling and twin recurrence rate, the specific frequency of the disease
among people along the Silk Road, evidence for genetic anticipation,
and genome-­wide analysis. Genome-­wide analysis studies among
Turkish and Japanese BD patients confirm the marked association
with HLA-­B5101. Other significant associations include interleukin
(IL)-­10 and IL-­23R/IL-­12Rβ2 genes. Other possible susceptibility
loci demonstrate associations with STAT4 (a transcription factor in
a signaling pathway related to cytokines such as IL-­12, type I interferons, and IL-­23) and ERAP1 (an endoplasmic reticulum–expressed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 202 u Behçet Disease
aminopeptidase that functions in the processing of peptides onto
major histocompatibility complex class I).
An infectious agent may be responsible for inducing the aberrant
innate immune system attacks in the genetically predisposed host. A
number of infectious agents have been implicated and include streptococci and herpes simplex virus type 1. A microbiome study in BD
proposed a distinct salivary signature.
BD has some genetic and immune similarities to periodic fever,
aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, cervical adenitis (PFAPA) syndrome
and recurrent aphthous stomatitis, suggesting a spectrum of these
disorders.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

The course of BD is characterized by exacerbations and remissions.
There is marked heterogeneity in disease manifestations.
The mean age of the first symptom is between 8 and 12 years. The
most frequent initial symptom is a painful oral ulcer (Fig. 202.1).
The oral ulcers are often recurrent, may be single or multiple, range
from 2 to 10 mm, and may be in any location in the oral cavity.
They are often very painful. The oral ulcers last 3-­10 days and heal
without scarring. In contrast, the genital ulcers heal with scars.
Genital scars are noted in 60–85% of the patient, usually occur after
puberty, and are seen on the labia, scrotum, penis, or anal area.
Another key feature of BD that has significant morbidity is the
bilateral eye involvement seen in 30–60% of pediatric patients. The
main symptoms of anterior uveitis are blurred vision, redness,
periorbital or global pain, and photophobia. Although it is often
in the form of panuveitis, anterior uveitis may be seen in females.
Uveitis in general is more common in males. Vitritis and retinal
vasculitis are the most prominent features of posterior involvement.
Complications of uveitis include blindness (unusual with treatment), glaucoma, and cataracts. Retinal vasculitis, retinal detachment, and retrobulbar neuritis (optic neuritis) are less common eye
manifestations of BD.
The skin lesions are the third most common symptom of BD.
They range from erythema nodosum (seen in approximately 50%
of patients) to papulopustular acneiform lesions (85%), folliculitis,
purpura, and ulcers. Pathergy (seen in 50%) is another skin feature
associated with BD and is a pustular reaction occurring 24-­48 hours
after a sterile needle puncture or saline injection; it is not pathognomonic of BD.
The vasculitis of BD involves both arteries and veins, thrombosis
and aneurysm formation, occlusions, or stenosis in arteries of any
size. In children, deep venous thrombosis of the lower limbs is the
most frequent vasculitic feature. If the hepatic vein is thrombosed,
Budd-­Chiari syndrome may occur. Pulmonary artery aneurysms

are the most severe feature of pediatric BD, associated with the
highest mortality. Coronary artery aneurysms may confuse BD
with Kawasaki or multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
(MIS-­C) disease. Microvascular involvement may be noted in the
nail bed capillaries.
Central nervous system (CNS) manifestations (approximately
10%) in children include meningoencephalitis (headache, meningismus, cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis), encephalomyelitis, pseudotumor cerebri, dural sinus thrombosis, and organic psychiatric
disorders (psychosis, depression, dementia). Dural sinus thrombosis is the most common CNS manifestation in children.
Gastrointestinal (GI) involvement (seen in 10–30%) manifests
with abdominal pain, diarrhea, and intestinal ulcerations, most
often in the ileocecal region. Gastrointestinal BD may be difficult
to distinguish from inflammatory bowel disease. Oligoarticular
arthritis/arthralgia is present in >50% of patients and can be recurrent, but is nondeforming. Other rare manifestations include orchitis, renal vasculitis, glomerulonephritis, or amyloidosis and cardiac
involvement.
The International Study Group for Behçet Disease (ISG) criteria
used to be the most widely used and require the presence of oral
ulcers (at least 3 times per year) along with two other major features, including genital ulcers, a positive pathergy test, uveitis, and
the characteristic skin lesions. If only one of the criteria is present
along with oral ulcerations, the term incomplete or partial Behçet
disease is applied. The revised International Criteria for Behçet Disease (ICBD) have been reported to have a much better performance
than the 1990 ISG criteria.
Additional classification criteria for children have been suggested by
the use of an international prospective observational cohort. According
to these criteria, BD is diagnosed when three of the following criteria
are present: recurrent oral aphthosis, genital ulcers, skin involvement
(necrotic folliculitis, acneiform lesions, erythema nodosum), ocular involvement, neurologic involvement, and vascular involvement
(venous thrombosis, arterial thrombosis, arterial aneurysm). These
criteria performed better than the ISG criteria in the pediatric cohort
(Table 202.1).
There are no specific laboratory tests. Acute-­phase reactants are
often mildly elevated. The diagnosis relies on the constellation of symptoms and excluding other causes.
Hughes-­Stovin syndrome is characterized by thrombophlebitis and
multiple bronchial or pulmonary artery aneurysms. This vasculitic

Table 202.1  Consensus Classification of Pediatric Behçet
Disease
ITEM

Fig. 202.1 A deep aphthous ulcer in a patient with Behçet disease.

1515

DESCRIPTION

Recurrent oral aphthosis

At least three attacks/year

Genital ulceration or aphthosis

Typically with scar

Skin involvement

Necrotic folliculitis, acneiform
lesions, erythema nodosum

Ocular involvement

Anterior uveitis, posterior uveitis,
retinal vasculitis

Neurologic signs

With the exception of isolated
headaches

Vascular signs

Venous thrombosis, arterial
thrombosis, arterial aneurysm

From Koné-­Paut I, Shahram F, Darce-­Bello M, et al, for PEDBD group. Consensus
classification criteria for paediatric Behçet’s disease from a prospective observational
cohort: PEDBD. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016;75:958–964.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1516 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
process is regarded as a clinical variant of BD (partial or incomplete)
but without ulcerations.

disease, which usually precedes the associated autoimmune disease
by years.

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Azathioprine is highly recommended to treat inflammatory eye
disease. Anti–tumor necrosis factor (TNF) treatment and interferon (IFN)-­α should be considered for refractory eye disease. For
oral and genital ulcers, topical treatment and colchicine are recommended (sucralfate, corticosteroids). Apremilast, an oral phosphodiesterase-­4 inhibitor, is effective in treating the oral ulcers of BD. In
patients without major organ involvement, colchicine significantly
improves oral and genital ulcers, skin features, and disease activity. There is no evidence-­based treatment for GI disease, but 5-­ASA
derivatives, corticosteroids, azathioprine, and anti-­TNF agents have
been recommended. For CNS disease and venous thrombosis, corticosteroids, azathioprine, and anti-­TNF agents are recommended.
Patients treated with anti-­TNF drugs have had persistent responses
in 90%, 89%, 100%, and 91% of patients with resistant mucocutaneous, ocular, GI, and CNS involvement, respectively. There is no
consensus about the benefit of anticoagulation in the management
of vein thrombosis in BD.
In patients with pulmonary arterial or cardiac involvement, cyclophosphamide is typically used initially.
Mortality in children with BD is low except for the pulmonary aneurysms. However, BD is a chronic disease associated with significant
morbidity. Early diagnosis and effective treatment improve the outcome of BD.

The etiology of Sjögren syndrome is complex and includes genetic
predisposition and possibly an infectious trigger. Lymphocytes and
plasma cells infiltrate salivary glands, forming distinct periductal and
periacinar foci that become confluent and may replace epithelial structure. Several genes regulating apoptosis influence the chronicity of
lymphocytic infiltration.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

International classification criteria have been developed for the
diagnosis of Sjögren syndrome in adult patients, but these criteria
apply poorly to children. Although diagnostic criteria in children
have been proposed, they have not been validated (Table 203.1).
Recurrent parotid gland enlargement and parotitis are the most
common manifestations in children (>70%), whereas sicca syndrome (dry mouth, painful mucosa, halitosis, widespread dental caries) predominates in adults. Children tend to have a higher
prevalence of systemic symptoms, including fevers and adenopathy, compared to adults. In a cross-­sectional study of children with
Sjögren syndrome, manifestations included recurrent parotitis
(72%), sicca symptoms (38%), polyarthritis (18%), vulvovaginitis
(12%), hepatitis (10%), Raynaud phenomenon (10%), fever (8%),
renal tubular acidosis (9%), lymphadenopathy (8%), and central
nervous system (CNS) involvement (5%).

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 203.1  Proposed Pediatric Criteria for Diagnosis of
Sjögren Syndrome (SS)
JUVENILE SS

Chapter 203

Sjögren Syndrome
C. Egla Rabinovich

Sjögren syndrome is a chronic, inflammatory autoimmune disease
characterized by progressive lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration
of the exocrine glands, especially salivary and lacrimal (parotid being
prototypical), with potential for systemic manifestations. It is rare in
children and has classic symptoms of dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis
sicca) and dry mouth (xerostomia).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Sjögren syndrome typically manifests at 35-­45 years of age, with
90% of cases among females, but it is underrecognized in children
because symptoms often start in childhood. The mean age at diagnosis in children is 9-­10 years; 75% are female. The disease can
occur as an isolated disorder, referred to as primary Sjögren syndrome (sicca complex), or as a secondary Sjögren syndrome in
association with other rheumatic disorders, such as systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), scleroderma, or mixed connective tissue

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS
1.	Recurrent parotitis or parotid enlargement
2.	Recurrent conjunctivitis (nonallergic and noninfectious)
3.	Recurrent vaginitis
4.	Systemic: fever of unknown origin, arthralgias, hypokalemic
paralysis, or abdominal pain
OBJECTIVE
5.	Ocular dryness (ocular staining or a Schirmer test)
6.	Abnormal sialography
7.	Elevated serum amylase
8.	Leukopenia or elevated ESR
9.	Hyperimmunoglobulinemia (polyclonal)
10. Renal tubular acidosis
SEROLOGY
11. At least one of anti-­SSA, anti-­SSB, high titer ANA (speckled
pattern), RF
HISTOPATHOLOGY
12. Lymphocytic infiltration of salivary glands or other organs
DIAGNOSIS OR CLASSIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
13. Diagnosis requires at least 4 of 12 items
Modified from Yokogawa N, Lieberman SM, Sherry DD, Vivino FB. Features
of childhood Sjögren’s syndrome in comparison to adult Sjögren’s syndrome:
considerations in establishing child-­specific diagnostic criteria. Clin Exper Rheumatol.
2016;34:343–351, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 203 u Sjögren Syndrome 1517
Subjective symptoms of xerostomia complaints are relatively
rare in juvenile cases, perhaps indicating that Sjögren syndrome
is a slowly progressive disease; however, increased dental caries is
seen clinically in children. Serologic markers (antinuclear antibodies [ANAs], antibodies to Ro [SSA] and La [SSB]) and articular
manifestations are significantly more common in adults. Reported
frequencies of ANAs and SSA and SSB antibodies in children are
78%, 75%, and 65%, respectively, with rheumatoid factor present
in 67%. Additional clinical manifestations from a variety of organ
involvement patterns include a decreased sense of smell; hoarseness; chronic otitis media; leukocytoclastic vasculitis (purpura);
and internal organ exocrine disease involving the lungs (diffuse
interstitial lymphocytosis), pancreas, hepatobiliary system, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys (renal tubular acidosis), musculoskeletal
(arthritis and arthralgia), hematologic (cytopenias), peripheral nervous system (sensory and autonomic neuropathy), and CNS (optic
neuritis, transverse myelitis, meningoencephalitis).
Nonexocrine disease manifestations of Sjögren syndrome may be
related to inflammatory vascular disease (skin, muscle and joints,
serosal surfaces, CNS, peripheral nervous system), noninflammatory
vascular disease (Raynaud phenomenon), mediator-­induced disease
(hematologic cytopenias, fatigue, fever), and autoimmune endocrinopathy (thyroiditis).

DIAGNOSIS

Clinical presentation of recurrent parotitis and/or recurrent parotid
gland swelling in a child or adolescent is characteristic and should
raise the suspicion for Sjögren syndrome. The diagnosis is based on
clinical features supported by biopsy of salivary or parotid glands
demonstrating foci of lymphocytic infiltration, the current gold
standard for diagnosis. Children are more likely to have normal
minor salivary gland but abnormal parotid gland biopsies. Supporting laboratory abnormalities include cryoglobulinemia, elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, hypergammaglobulinemia, positive
rheumatoid factor, and presence of SSA and SSB antibodies. The
Schirmer test detects abnormal tear production (≤5 mm of wetting
of a filter paper strip in 5 minutes). Special dyes (e.g., fluorescein,
Lissamine green) detects damaged ocular epithelial conjunctival
and corneal cells. Imaging studies, including MRI, technetium
(99mTc) scintigraphy, parotid ultrasound, and sialography, are useful in the diagnostic evaluation for Sjögren syndrome (Fig. 203.1).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of Sjögren syndrome in children includes
juvenile recurrent parotitis, characterized by intermittent unilateral
parotid swelling typically lasting only a few days; it is frequently associated with fever and may undergo remission with puberty. Unlike
in Sjögren syndrome, there is a male predominance, juvenile recurrent parotitis is seen in the younger children (3-­6 years), and there is
a lack of focal lymphocytic infiltrates on biopsy. Other conditions in
the differential diagnosis include eating disorders, infectious parotitis
(mumps, streptococcal and staphylococcal infections, Epstein-­
Barr
virus, cytomegalovirus, HIV, parainfluenza, influenza enterovirus), and
local trauma to the buccal mucosa. Rarely, polycystic parotid disease,
tumors, and sarcoidosis may present with recurrent parotid swelling.

Fig. 203.1 T2-­weighted MRI of a child with Sjögren syndrome showing
parotitis (arrows).

In these conditions, sicca complex, rash, arthralgia, and ANAs are usually absent.

TREATMENT

Symptomatic treatment of Sjögren syndrome includes the use of artificial tears, massage of the parotids, oral lozenges, and fluids to limit the
damaging effects of decreased secretions. Corticosteroids, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs, and hydroxychloroquine are among the more
commonly used agents for treatment, with reports of methotrexate and
etanercept used for treatment of arthritis. Stronger immunosuppressive agents, such as cyclosporine and cyclophosphamide, are reserved
for severe manifestations (e.g., lung involvement) and life-­threatening
complications.

COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

The symptoms of Sjögren syndrome develop and progress slowly.
Diminished salivary flow typically remains constant for years. Because
monoclonal B-­lymphocyte disease originates chiefly from lymphocytic
foci within salivary glands or from parenchymal internal organs, there
is increased risk for mucosa-­associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma.
Maternal Sjögren syndrome can be an antecedent to neonatal lupus
syndrome (see Chapter 199.1).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1530 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 205

Interferonopathies
Sara E. Sabbagh and James W. Verbsky
Type I interferonopathies refer to a group of inherited autoinflammatory disorders that are characterized by dysregulation of the type I
interferon (IFN) pathway (Table 205.1). Type I interferonopathies were
recognized when a report described the phenotypic overlap between
Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome (AGS) encephalopathy, congenital viral
infections, and monogenic systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The
clinical similarities of these diseases stimulated the theory of a shared
pathologic mechanism. Pathogenic variants involved in type I IFN signaling were identified to be causative for AGS and monogenic forms
of SLE. Several other novel monogenic disorders with aberrant IFN
signaling have been identified.

Type I IFNs are ubiquitously expressed inflammatory polypeptides that are induced by microbial and viral nucleic acids. During
viral replication, accumulation of viral nucleic acids is sensed by
several different cellular mechanisms, which leads to downstream
IFN production (Fig. 205.1). Type I IFNs are released from the cell
and bind to IFN receptors (IFNRs) through autocrine and paracrine
action. The IFNR then activates signal translation through Janus
kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK-­
STAT) pathways, which promotes the expression of IFN-­simulated
genes (ISGs), which stops cell replication and protein translation of
the infected cell. There are several molecular mechanisms that lead
to altered regulation of IFN signaling: (1) loss-­of-­function variants
of genes that encode enzymes responsible for DNA or DNA-­RNA
hybrid molecule degradation; (2) variants that lead to constitutive
activation or reduction of the activation threshold of intracytosolic
nucleic acid sensors; (3) gain-­of-­function variants of positive IFN
signaling regulators; (4) loss-­of-­function variants of negative IFN
signaling regulators; and (5) proteasomal dysfunction leading to the
unfolded protein response and downstream IFN pathway activation.
Examples of these altered molecular mechanisms and the associated

Table 205.1  Mutated Gene, Protein Function, Pattern of Inheritance, and Main Symptoms of Known Type 1
Interferonopathies
DISEASE

GENE

PROTEIN FUNCTION
′
′
3 -­5 DNA exonuclease

INHERITANCE

SYMPTOMS

Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome
(AGS) type 1

TREX-­1

AGS2

RNASEH2B

AGS3

RNASEH2C

Classical AGS

AGS4

RNASEH2A

Classical AGS with dysmorphic features

AGS5

SAMHD1

Restricts the availability of
cytosolic deoxynucleotides

AR

Mild AGS, mouth ulcer, deforming
arthropathy, cerebral vasculopathy with
early-­onset stroke

AGS6

ADAR

Deaminates adenosine to
inosine in endogenous dsRNA,
preventing recognition by
MDA5 receptor

AR and AD

Classical AGS, bilateral striatal necrosis

AGS7

IFIH1

AD

Classic or mild AGS, asymptomatic

Retinal vasculopathy with
cerebral leukodystrophy
(RVCL)

TREX-­1

Cytosolic receptor for dsRNA
3′-­5′ DNA exonuclease

AD

Adult-­onset loss of vision, stroke, motor
impairment, cognitive decline, Raynaud,
and liver involvement

Spondyloenchondrodysplasia
(SPENCD)

ACP5

Lysosomal phosphatase activity

AR

Spondyloenchondrodysplasia, immune
disregulation, and in some cases
combined immunodeficiency

STING-­associated
vasculopathy with onset in
infancy (SAVI)

TMEM173

Transduction of cytoplasmic
DNA-­induced signal

AD

Systemic inflammation, cutaneous
vasculopathy, pulmonary inflammation

Proteasome-­associated
autoinflammatory syndrome
(PRAAS)

PSMB8

Part of the proteasome complex

AR

Autoinflammation, lipodystrophy,
dermatosis, hyperimmunoglobulinemia,
joint contractures, short stature

ISG15 deficiency

ISG15

Stabilizes USP18, a negative
regulator of type 1 interferon

AR

Brain calcifications, seizures, mycobacterial
susceptibility

Singleton-­Merten
syndrome (SMS)

IFIH1

Cytosolic receptor for dsRNA

AD

Dental dysplasia, aortic calcifications, skeletal
abnormalities, glaucoma, psoriasis

Atypical SMS

DDX58

Cytosolic receptor for dsRNA

AD

Aortic calcifications, skeletal abnormalities,
glaucoma, psoriasis

Trichohepatoenteric
syndrome (THES)

SKIV2L

RNA helicase

AR

Severe intractable diarrhea, hair abnormalities
(trichorrhexis nodosa), facial dysmorphism,
immunodeficiency in most cases

Components of RNase
H2 complex. Removes
ribonucleotides from RNA-­
DNA hybrids

AR and AD

Classical AGS

AR

Classical AGS

From Volpi S, Picco P, Caorsi R, Candotti F, Gattorno M. Type I interferonopathies in pediatric rheumatology. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2016;14(1):35.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 205 u Interferonopathies

1531

1
5

SAMHD1
NTPs

ISRE

?

IRF9

P

3

P

P

STAT3

TREX 1

P

STAT3

RNASEH2

P

STAT1

Proteasome

STAT1

DNA-RNA
hybrids

STAT2

1

STAT1

1

dsDNA

P

Nucleus
K1

STING

JA

IRF3 IRF7

TBK1

1
AR R2
N
IF NA
IF

MAVS

ER-GIC

IFIH1

RIG-1

2

2

dsRNA

K2

TY

IFN

USP18

4

ISG15

IF
NA
NA R1
R2

IF

ADAR

Fig. 205.1 Schematic representation of various pathways affected in genetic interferonopathies. Purple rectangles indicate variant proteins in

type I interferonopathies. Numbered yellow circles indicate the common mechanistic defect. 1. Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants of genes that
encode enzymes responsible for DNA or DNA-­RNA hybrid molecule degradation. 2. Pathogenic variants that lead to constitutive activation or
reduction of activation threshold of intracytosolic nucleic acid sensors. 3. Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants of positive IFN signaling regulators;
4. Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants of negative IFN signaling regulators; and 5. Proteasomal dysfunctional leading to the unfolded protein response and downstream IFN pathway activation. STING: stimulator of interferon genes; SAMHD1: SAM domain and HD domain deoxynucleoside
triphosphate triphosphohydrolase 1; NTPs: nucleoside triphosphates; TREX1: DNA 3′ repair exonuclease 1; ISG15: interferon-­stimulated gene 15;
MAVS: mitochondrial antiviral-­signaling protein; RIG-­I: retinoic acid-­inducible gene I; TBK1: TANK-­binding kinase 1; USP18: ubiquitin-­specific peptidase 18; RNASEH2, ribonuclease H domain 2; IFIH1: IFN-­induced helicase C domain-­containing protein 1; ADAR: RNA adenosine deaminase; IRF3:
interferon regulatory factor 3; IRF7: interferon regulatory factor 7; IRF9: interferon regulatory factor 9; ERGIC: endothelial reticulum–Golgi intermediate compartment; IFNAR: interferon-­α receptor; ISGF3: the transcriptional activator induced by interferon-­α; ISRE: interferon-­sensitive response
element; JAK1: Janus kinase 1; TYK2: tyrosine kinase 2; STAT: signal transducer and activator of transcription. P indicates phosphorylation.

genetic variants are depicted in Figure 205.1. Each genetic variant
that leads to dysregulation of IFN signaling is causative of a unique
clinical syndrome or subtype of a clinical syndrome that has been
classified as a type I interferonopathy. Despite some disease heterogeneity, interferonopathies have a characteristic clinical phenotype,
which may include recurrent fevers, early onset of skin vasculopathy with chilblains, livedo reticularis, panniculitis, lipodystrophy,
interstitial lung disease with fibrosis, and encephalopathic CNS
involvement (Fig. 205.2 and Table 205.2).

AUTOINFLAMMATORY INTERFERONOPATHIES
Aicardi-­Goutières Syndrome

AGS is a clinically heterogeneous disease with a spectrum of associated phenotypes. AGS is characterized by an early-­onset progressive
encephalopathy with basal ganglia calcifications, leukoencephalopathy, and cerebral atrophy with elevated type I IFN cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels and CSF pleocytosis. Cutaneous features,
seen in about 30% of patients, include chilblains, or cold-­induced
acral dermatosis of the digits and auricles secondary to peripheral
inflammatory vasculopathy. Other common manifestations include
thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, transaminitis, psoriasis,
interstitial lung disease, and intermittent fever. Most frequently,
AGS has an infantile onset in which patients develop abrupt irritability, sterile pyrexias, and developmental regression within the

first few months of life. Neurologic symptoms may include limb
hypertonia with truncal hypotonia, dystonia, excessive startle,
abnormal eye movements, epileptic seizures, and slowing of head
growth. RNASEH2B variants are commonly seen in this context;
however, variants of any associated AGS-­related genes may present
with this clinical scenario. AGS may also present prenatally with a
striking similarity to transplacentally acquired infections (pseudo-­
TORCH), with onset of disease in utero. At birth, patients may have
irritability, feeding difficulties, jitteriness, microcephaly, abnormal
movements, epileptic seizures, thrombocytopenia, anemia, and
liver dysfunction. This presentation is most frequently associated
with TREX1 pathogenic variants and leads to profound developmental sequelae and increased risk of death in infancy. In both
clinical presentations, neuroimaging shows a highly characteristic
pattern of diffuse abnormal white matter, intracranial calcifications, swelling of temporal or frontal lobes, and cerebral atrophy,
similar to radiologic findings seen in congenital infections. Patients
may also develop autoimmunity, including type 1 diabetes mellitus,
hypothyroidism, hypergammaglobulinemia, and hemolytic anemia.
Rarely, AGS can have a later onset with abrupt profound neurologic
regression after an extended period of normal development.
There are seven recognized genetic variants and corresponding disease subtypes of AGS (AGS 1-­7), all of which are responsible for RNA/DNA degradation or detection, resulting in type I

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1532 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Fig. 205.2 Characteristic clinical

A

phenotypes of interferonopathies.
Chilblain lesions typical of monogenic type I interferonopathies,
seen most frequently on the toes,
fingers (A), ears (B), and nose. The
lesions are generally worse in the
cold months. C, Representative
brain CT scan of intracranial calcifications seen in a patient with
Aicardi-­
Goutières syndrome due
to TREX1 homozygous pathogenic
variants. D, Chest CT scan of a SAVI
patient (performed at the age of
12.5 years) showing evidence of
interstitial lung disease (interlobular
septal thickening, intralobular lines,
cystic lesions, and some ground-­
glass lesions) and fibrosis (honeycombing). (Modified from Melki I,
Fremond ML. Type I interferonopathies: from a novel concept to targeted therapeutics. Curr Rheum
Reports. 2020;22:32, Fig. 1.)

B

C

D

IFN production and upregulation of ISGs. These include variants
of 3′-­5′ DNA exonuclease-­TREX1 (AGS1); ribonucleases including
RNASEH2B (AGS2), RNASEH2C (AGS3), and RNASEH2A (AGS4);
SAM and HD domain-­containing deoxynucleoside triphosphate triphosphohydrolase 1-­SAMHD1 (AGS5); adenosine deaminase acting
on RNA 1-­ADAR1 (AGS6); and IFN-­induced helicase C domain–
containing protein-­IFIH1 (AGS7). The majority of AGS subtypes
are autosomal recessive; however, heterozygous gain-­of-­function
variants can also occur in AGS1 and AGS6, and variants causing
AGS7 are autosomal dominant.
There are several manifestations that are strongly associated with
distinct AGS subtypes. Bilateral striatal necrosis with severe dystonia is associated with variants in ADAR1 (AGS6), and spastic paraparesis has been associated with variants in ADAR1 (AGS6), IFIH1
(AGS7), and RNASEH2B (AGS2). Variants involving SAMHD1
(AGS5) have the most variable phenotype with cutaneous involvement, glaucoma, progressive contractures, stroke, and cerebral
aneurysms. Beyond the phenotype diversity between different AGS
variants, there are descriptions of marked intrafamilial variation
in siblings harboring identical homozygous variants, which raises
questions regarding how environmental factors influence disease
expression and penetrance.

D

o
A

w
p

n
r

l
i

o
l

a

d
2

e
1

,

d

2

f

o
0

Spondyloenchondrodysplasia

Spondyloenchondrodysplasia (SPENCD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder best characterized as a skeletal dysplasia with sclerosis,
enchondromas, short stature, platyspondyly, and irregularity of vertebral end plates. Patients may also develop intracranial calcifications,
spasticity, and a spectrum of autoimmunity that bears resemblance to
SLE, including hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, glomerulonephritis, malar rash, myositis, antiphospholipid syndrome, and autoantibody positivity. Patients have also developed hypothyroidism,
Raynaud phenomenon, Sjögren syndrome, and vitiligo. SPENCD is
caused by variants of the ACP5 gene on chromosome 19p13, which
encodes tartrate-­resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP). Loss of TRAP
expression impairs inactivation of osteopontin (Opn), a protein
involved in bone metabolism and Th1 differentiation, via signaling
through TLR9 in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). Increased levels of Opn thus leads to increased IFN-­α production.

STING-­Associated Vasculopathy with Onset in
Infancy

STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI) is a rare
disorder that presents with systemic inflammation, fevers, and elevated
inflammatory markers in the first months of life.

r
2

4

m
.

o

F

h

o

a

r

m

e

p

d

e

r

a

s

h

o

m
n

e

a

d
l

(
u

d
s

r
e

.

m
o

m
n

Chapter 205 u Interferonopathies

1533

Table 205.2  Suggestive Features of Type I Interferonopathies
Familial history

Several affected individuals, even if phenotypic spectrum might be variable within the same family

Age of onset

• Young age at onset, in favor of monogenic disease
• Later onset also reported

Neurologic phenotypes

Clinical signs:
• Spasticity, spastic paraparesis
• Acute or subacute dystonia
• Encephalopathy with seizures and progressive microcephaly
• Cortical blindness
• Variable developmental delay
• Ataxia
• Psychosis
• Vascular neurologic disease (Moyamoya)/strokes
• Rare demyelinating or multifocal neuropathies
Lumbar puncture:
• Meningitis (inconstant)
• Elevated pterins/neopterins in the CSF
• Elevated IFN-­α activity or protein in the CSF
Morphologic imaging features:
• CT scans: ICC, basal ganglia calcifications or progressive cerebral atrophy
• Cerebral MRI: leukoencephalopathy, white matter rarefaction, delayed myelination, bilateral
striatal necrosis, deep white matter cysts, or intracranial aneurysms

Cutaneous features

• Chilblains/FCL; necrotizing vasculitis of fingers, toes, helix, cheeks, and nose, telangiectasia,
cutaneous ulcerations
• Livedo reticularis
• Panniculitis, violaceous periorbital rash
• Lentigines
• Psoriasis
• Nail dystrophy, sparse hair

Failure to thrive/short stature

• Secondary to osseous dysplasia (ACP5)
• Secondary to the inflammatory status (TMEM173)

Systemic inflammation and immune
features

• Recurrent fevers
• Autoimmune features/SLE/autoantibodies (not necessarily specific)
• Inconstant immune deficiency
• Elevated IFN I pathway in whole blood/serum/plasma

Hematologic

• AI anemia, dyserythropoiesis
• Thrombocytopenia or thrombocytosis
• Malignancies (chronic lymphocytic leukemia, cutaneous T cell lymphoma, SAMHD1)

Lung features

• Interstitial lung disease (isolated or not)
• Lung fibrosis
• Intraalveolar hemorrhage
• Macrophagic alveolitis

Vascular features

• Calcification of the aorta or blood vessels

Musculoskeletal features

• Joint pain, arthritis
• Contractures and joint retractions
• Jaccoud arthropathy, tendon rupture
• Muscle weakness and pain/myositis
• Calcinosis
• X-­rays: acro-­osteolysis, wide medullar cavities phalange, deforming arthropathies/joint
subluxation with conserved interarticular space, calcinosis

Ophthalmologic features

• Glaucoma
• Papillary edemaa

Kidney features

• Lupus nephritis

Gastrointestinal features

• VEO-­IBD (very severe protein-­losing enteropathy)

Dental anomalies

• Retained primary teethb
• Early loss of permanent teeth

aReported in one SAVI patient treated with JAK1/2 inhibitor.
bData not published.

Ab, Autoantibodies; AI, autoimmune; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computerized tomography; FCL, familial chilblain lupus; ICC, intracranial calcifications; IFN, interferon; IFN I, type I
interferon; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; VEO-­IBD, very-­early-­onset inflammatory bowel disease.
From Melki I, Fremond ML. Type I interferonopathies: From a novel concept to targeted therapeutics. Curr Rheum Reports. 2020;22:3, Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1534 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Fig. 205.3 Clinical manifestations

A

C

B

D

of stimulator of interferon genes
(STING)–associated
vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI). A,
Typical facial distribution of telangiectatic lesions on the nose and
cheeks with atrophy and scarring
of the skin with loss of deep tissue
of the nose. B, Violaceous, scaling,
atrophic plaques on both hands
and progressive autoamputations
of several fingers. C, Hilar lymphadenopathy and bilateral interstitial
infiltrates on high-­
resolution computed tomography (CT) image.
D, Ulcerated lesions on the pinna
of the ear with scales and crusts.
(Courtesy Dr. Raphaela Goldbach-­
Mansky. From Petty RE, Laxer RM,
Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook
of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig.
39.11, p. 541.)

Cutaneous involvement is characterized by vasculopathic rashes
in acral areas (Fig. 205.3). These lesions present as violaceous
plaques or nodules on the face, ears, or nose or as distal ulceration
and may become necrotic. Lesional skin biopsy reveals leukocytoclastic vasculitis, microthrombotic angiopathy, neutrophilia, and
occasional immune complex deposition. As STING is expressed
in alveolar macrophages, type 2 pneumocytes, and bronchial epithelium, patients with SAVI also develop pulmonary complications. Paratracheal adenopathy, interstitial lung disease, and lung
fibrosis have been described to a variable extent. Patients may also
develop myositis, arthritis, arthralgia, oral ulcers, aphthosis, and
nasal septum perforation. Low-­titer autoantibodies (e.g., antinuclear antibody, anticardiolipin antibodies, and antibodies against
β2 glycoprotein I) may be seen. Notably, the presence of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (cANCA) may lead to misdiagnosis
of childhood granulomatosis with polyangiitis. SAVI is caused by
a dominant gain-­of-­function variant in TMEM173, which encodes
the stimulator of interferon genes (STING). Working as both a
direct cytosolic DNA sensor and as an adaptor protein in type I IFN
signaling, STING mediates the production of IFN-­α/β.

neutrophilic dermatosis, annular erythema, violaceous eyelid swelling, and erythema nodosum–like panniculitis. Histology reveals
a characteristic mononuclear interstitial infiltrate, which includes
“immature” neutrophils in the dermis. Lipodystrophy, usually of the
face, trunk, and upper limbs, begins in early childhood. Arthralgias,
without radiographic evidence of arthritis, are common in children,
and severe joint contractures may develop into adulthood. Acute
attacks of inflammatory myositis, aseptic meningitis, sterile epididymitis, conjunctivitis, nodular episcleritis, parotitis, pneumonitis,
nephritis, carditis, and otitis have been reported. Autoimmunity can
occur, including Coombs-­positive hemolytic anemia and hypothyroidism. Most commonly, CANDLE is due to loss-­of-­function variants in the PSMB8 gene, which encodes the proteasome β5i subunit.
More recently, variants in other genes encoding other proteasome-­
immunoproteasome subunits or the regulatory protein POMP have
been discovered in patients with CANDLE syndrome. The defective
proteasome function may lead to an accumulation of damaged proteins, resulting in cellular stress and type 1 IFN upregulation.

Chronic Atypical Neutrophilic Dermatosis with
Lipodystrophy and Elevated Temperature/
Proteasome-­Associated Autoinflammatory
Syndromes

Ubiquitin-­like protein IFN stimulated gene-­15 (ISG15) deficiency
has only been reported in a few individuals and leads to a phenotype similar to AGS, with intracranial calcifications and seizures.
ISG15 is an IFN-­induced protein that that plays a central role in
the host antiviral response, although, in humans, ISG15 deficiency
does not cause an increased susceptibility to viral infection. Rather,
the absence of intracellular ISG15 prevents the accumulation of
ubiquitin-­specific peptidase 18 (USP18), a potent negative regulator of IFN-­α/β signaling, which results in an unchecked IFN-­α/β

Chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and
elevated temperature (CANDLE) syndrome is a rare autoinflammatory disease caused by abnormal functioning of the proteasome-­
immunoproteasome. CANDLE presents in early infancy with fevers,
systemic inflammation, and cutaneous involvement including

ISG15 Deficiency/USP18 Deficiency

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 205 u Interferonopathies
response. Notably, loss-­of-­function recessive variants of USP18 have
been reported in five patients, all of whom had neonatal demise
soon after birth owing to the dysregulation of type 1 IFN responses.

Singleton-­Merten Syndrome

Singleton-­Merten syndrome (SMS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by early-­onset severe aortic and valvular calcification, dental anomalies, acro-­osteolysis, osteoporosis, and glaucoma.
There is a broad spectrum of disease with variable expressivity, and
patients have been reported to have an SLE or AGS phenotype. SMS
is caused by gain-­of-­function variants in IFIH1 and DDX58, which
encode retinoic acid–inducible gene-­I (RIG-­I)–like receptor family
members melanoma differentiation-­associated gene 5 (MDA5) and
RIG-­I, respectively. MDA5 and RIG-­I are cytosolic pattern recognition receptors that detect viral RNA and promote type I and III IFN
expression. The phenotype variability of SMS suggests that other
genetic and/or environmental factors may influence the clinical
presentation.

X-­Linked Reticulate Pigmentary Disorder

X-­linked reticulate pigmentary disorder (XLPDR) is an X-­linked
dominant disorder that manifests in the first few months of life
in affected males with recurrent pneumonia, bronchiectasis, diarrhea, and failure to thrive. Diffuse skin hyperpigmentation occurs
in early childhood, and distinct facial features develop. Female carriers typically exhibit only pigmentary changes along the lines of
Blaschko. Hypohidrosis, corneal scarring, enterocolitis, and urethral strictures can develop. The defect in XLPDR is in an intron
of the POLA1 gene, which encodes the catalytic subunit of DNA
polymerase-­a. Although this defect does not affect DNA replication, it does appear to increase IFN production and IFN-­induced
genes as well as NF-­κB–induced genes in response to dsDNA, cytosolic dsRNA, and TNF-­α.

DNAse II Deficiency

Deoxyribonucleases (DNAses) degrade double-­
stranded DNA
molecules and exist in several forms. DNAse II degrades DNA
contained in lysosomes, and recently deficiency of DNAse II was
shown to cause a form of monogenic SLE. This autosomal recessive disease presents with severe anemia, thrombocytopenia, and
hepatosplenomegaly at birth that may resolve over time. In childhood patients may then develop membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, arthropathy, lipodystrophy, chilblain-­
like vasculitis,
and hypogammaglobulinemia. Laboratory testing shows high titer
ANA and dsDNA antibodies and high levels of serum IFNs and
IFN-­stimulated gene expression. In addition to DNAse II, there are
two extracellular DNAses (DNAse1 and DNAse1L3) that do cause
a monogenic form of SLE. Although these are likely to exhibit high
IFN signatures, no data are available on these two diseases, and thus
they are not classically considered interferonopathies.

AUTOIMMUNE INTERFERONOPATHIES
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

There were descriptions of increased levels of IFN in the serum of
patients with SLE. Further rationale for IFN contributing to SLE
pathogenesis was supported by observational studies of patients

1535

who developed a lupuslike disease with autoantibody formation
after treatment with IFN-­α. Several groups showed that the majority of patients with SLE have an increased expression of type I IFN–
regulated genes and that active SLE could be distinguished by an
IFN-­induced gene expression pattern. Many clinical features of SLE
are associated with increased production of IFN, and a high IFN
signature has been correlated with cytopenia, autoantibody formation, and cutaneous disease activity. There are a large number of
possible inducers of IFN production in SLE. Neutrophil extracellular TRAP formation, transposable elements, and immune complexes have all been associated with IFN production in SLE patients.
From a genetic standpoint, over 100 risk loci have been associated
with SLE, many of which encode proteins with functions linked
to type I IFN production or response. There are also several rare
forms of monogenic SLE that are due to pathogenic variants involving type I IFN signaling. Monogenic forms of SLE, including loss-­
of-­function variants in DNAse II, DNASE1L3, and DNASE1, are
classically grouped under the umbrella of interferonopathies and
are characterized by typical SLE clinical manifestations with autoantibody formation and immune complex deposition (see Chapter
199). Success of targeting the IFN pathway has been documented in
SLE, and multicenter phase 3 randomized placebo-­controlled trials
are currently underway in extrarenal disease.

Juvenile Dermatomyositis

Dermatomyositis has become recognized as a disease partly driven by
aberrant IFN signaling. An elevated IFN signature was first discovered
in muscle tissue and later identified in peripheral blood cells of patients
with adult and juvenile-­onset dermatomyositis (DM, JDM). Subsequently, multiple studies have shown an association between type I IFN
in the circulation and disease activity in myositis. Targeting the IFN
pathway has shown success in treatment of DM and JDM, and there are
several ongoing clinical trials evaluating small-­molecule Janus kinase
(JAK) inhibitors for the treatment of dermatomyositis.

Therapeutics Targeting the Interferon Pathway

Treatments for interferonopathies has been historically empiric.
Numerous immunosuppressive medications, including corticosteroids and a variety of biologics, have been tried in case reports with
variable results. However, because interferonopathies have a common pathway involving IFN signaling, the use of small-­molecule
JAK inhibitors (JAKinibs) has gained interest as a targeted therapy
for these disorders. Signaling through the IFN pathway involves
JAKs that phosphorylate signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins that then dimerize and enter the nucleus
to drive transcription of IFN-­stimulated genes. JAKinibs block activation of JAK proteins and have been used to treat various autoimmune diseases. There is Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approval of several JAKinibs, including tofacitinib, baricitinib, and
upadacitinib, for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis; tofacitinib
is also approved for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis, ulcerative
colitis, and polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Clinical trials
are underway to test the utility of JAKinibs in interferonopathies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1536 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 206

Amyloidosis
Deborah L. Stone and Karyl S. Barron
Amyloidosis is the result of extracellular deposition of insoluble,
fibrous amyloid proteins in various body tissues. It may be caused by
a hereditary abnormality in an amyloidogenic protein or occur as a
result of chronic inflammation associated with some infectious and
rheumatologic diseases.

ETIOLOGY

Amyloidosis is a result of protein misfolding. These misfolded proteins
aggregate and form insoluble fibrils that can affect the normal function
of several vital organs. In the amyloidosis nomenclature, a distinction
is made between amyloidosis that develops from pathogenic gene variants in the amyloid fibril proteins (hereditary amyloidoses) and amyloidosis associated with genetic mutation in nonamyloid proteins. The
hereditary amyloidoses include diseases caused by pathogenic variants
in the genes for transthyretin and apolipoprotein A and usually do not
present in childhood. However, children may be affected by amyloid
A (AA) amyloidosis, which develops in patients with chronic inflammatory states. It is estimated that approximately 45% of all amyloid
cases worldwide are AA amyloidosis. In the past, chronic infectious
diseases such as tuberculosis, malaria, leprosy, and chronic osteomyelitis accounted for most cases of AA amyloidosis. Since the development
of effective treatments for these infections, other causes of AA have
become more common.
Individuals with chronic inflammatory rheumatic diseases, such as
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), and
ankylosing spondylitis, as well as hereditary autoinflammatory diseases, have an increased risk for the development of AA amyloidosis.
AA amyloidosis has also been associated with sarcoidosis, cystic fibrosis, Crohn disease, malignancies (mesothelioma and Hodgkin disease),
intravenous drug use disorders, and HIV infection. Approximately 6%
of AA amyloidosis cases have no identified disease association.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Only AA amyloidosis affects children in appreciable numbers. The
factors that determine the risk for amyloidosis as a complication of
inflammation are not clear. Many individuals with long-­
standing
inflammatory disease do not demonstrate tissue amyloid deposition, but some children with relatively recent onset of disease may
develop amyloid. In developed countries, before therapy with disease-­
modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) and biologic agents was
available, rheumatoid arthritis was the most common inflammatory
disease associated with AA amyloidosis. Patients who had a long history of severe and poorly controlled disease with extraarticular manifestations were at the greatest risk of developing amyloidosis, and the
median time from first symptoms of their rheumatic condition to the
diagnosis of amyloidosis was 212 months. The use of DMARDs and
biologic therapy has resulted in a sustained decline in the number of
new cases of RA-­associated amyloidosis.
JIA may be associated with AA amyloidosis, with the highest prevalence occurring in patients with systemic JIA, followed by those with
polyarticular disease. AA amyloidosis has been observed in JIA patients
as soon as 1 year after diagnosis. Before the availability of DMARDs
and biologics, the prevalence of AA amyloidosis in JIA patients ranged
from 1% to 10%. Higher prevalence was seen in Northern European
patients, especially Polish patients, who had a prevalence of 10.6%; a
lower prevalence was observed in North American patients. The reasons for this discrepancy are not completely understood, although it
is speculated that selection bias, genetic background, and tendency
toward earlier, more aggressive therapy in North Americans may
have played a role. As with RA, the occurrence of new amyloid cases

in patients with JIA has significantly decreased in the past 20 years
because of the increased efficacy of treatment with DMARDs and
biologics.
The hereditary autoinflammatory diseases define a group of illnesses characterized by attacks of seemingly unprovoked recurrent
inflammation without significant levels of either autoantibodies or
antigen-­specific T cells, which are typically found in patients with autoimmune diseases. These attacks often appear to be initiated by stress,
immunizations, or trauma. Common findings of autoinflammatory
diseases include fevers, cutaneous rashes, arthritis, serositis, and ocular involvement. The inflammatory attacks are accompanied by intense
elevations in inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate
and C-­reactive protein) and high levels of serum amyloid A (SAA).
Amyloidosis AA is associated with some, but not all, hereditary autoinflammatory diseases.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common of the
Mendelian autoinflammatory diseases and is seen most frequently in
the Armenian, Arab, Turkish, and Sephardic Jewish populations. FMF
is an autosomal recessive disease that results from pathogenic variants
in the MEFV gene, which encodes the pyrin protein. MEFV pathogenic
variants affecting the M680 and M694 amino acid residues are associated with early onset of symptoms, severe disease, and an increased
risk of AA amyloidosis. Patients residing in Armenia, Turkey, and Arab
countries have an increased risk of developing AA amyloidosis compared with patients with the same MEFV mutations living in North
America. While one might assume that FMF patients who have frequent, severe attacks would be at the highest risk for the development
of AA amyloidosis, this is not always the case. Some patients with a
history of frequent attacks never develop amyloidosis, whereas others
develop amyloidosis at an early age.
Tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated periodic syndrome
(TRAPS) is associated with pathogenic variants in the TNFRSF1A
gene, which encodes the 55-­kDa tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor protein (TNFR1). It is estimated that 14–25% of untreated patients
with TRAPS will develop AA amyloidosis. The risk of amyloidosis
appears to be greater among patients with cysteine pathogenic variants
or the T50M pathogenic variant. These cysteine residues normally create disulfide bonds within the protein, and disruption of these bonds
by amino acid substitutions is thought to interfere with protein folding.
Pathogenic variants in the NLRP3 (NLR family pyrin domain containing 3) gene encoding the NLRP3 or cryopyrin protein cause three
clinically distinct diseases or cryopyrinopathies: familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (FCAS, or NLRP3-­AID mild), Muckle-­Wells
syndrome (MWS, or NLRP3-­AID moderate), and neonatal-­onset
multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID, or NLRP3-­AID
severe), also known as chronic infantile neurologic cutaneous and
articular (CINCA) syndrome. Pathogenic variants in NLRP3 are
inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion or as de novo variants in
patients with the most severe disease. A few patients have been found
to carry somatic variants in NLRP3.
FCAS is the least severe of the cryopyrinopathies and is rarely associated with AA amyloidosis. MWS presents with fevers, myalgias,
arthralgias, urticarial-­like rash, and progressive sensorineural hearing
loss. AA amyloidosis is quite common in MWS, affecting up to one
third of the patients. NOMID/CINCA is the most severe cryopyrinopathy. NOMID patients have not developed AA amyloidosis as often as
MWS patients, but this may be attributable to the fact that before the
availability of effective treatments, 20% of NOMID patients died before
reaching adulthood.
Mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD) – mild (formally known as
Hyper-­IgD syndrome, or HIDS) is an autoinflammatory disease that
presents in early childhood with high fevers, abdominal pain, lymphadenopathy, and occasional rash. MVK-­mild is an autosomal recessive disease that involves loss-­of-­function variants in the MVK gene
that encodes the mevalonate kinase enzyme. Patients with MVK-­mild
retain a low level of enzyme activity, whereas patients with MVK-­
severe (mevalonic aciduria) have severe MVK variants that completely
abolish enzyme activity, causing recurrent fevers, dysmorphic features,
and developmental delays. Inflammatory markers are high during

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 206 u Amyloidosis 1537
MVK-­mild attacks and may remain elevated between attacks. AA amyloidosis is rare in patients with MVK-­mild but has been reported, most
often associated with the V377I/I268T genotype.
Although seen less frequently than in the hereditary periodic fever
syndromes, AA amyloidosis occurs in an estimated 1% of U.S. patients
and up to 3% of Northern European patients with Crohn disease. Conversely, AA amyloidosis in patients with ulcerative colitis is extremely
rare, with an estimated prevalence of 0.07%. Patients with Crohn disease and AA usually have a long-­standing history of aggressive, poorly
controlled disease, although there are reports of amyloidosis in patients
with well-­controlled inflammatory markers.
Thirty-­six proteins have been identified as being amyloidogenic
in humans, but most of these rarely cause disease during childhood.
Transthyretin-­related hereditary amyloidosis is an autosomal dominant disorder with variable penetrance and onset in the second to third
decades of life. Manifestations include familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy, familial amyloid cardiomyopathy, nephropathy, and ocular
disease.

PATHOGENESIS

The deposition of AA amyloid fibrils is a result of a prolonged inflammatory state that leads to misfolding of the AA amyloid protein and
deposition into tissues. The precursor protein of the fibrils in AA amyloidosis is an apolipoprotein called serum amyloid A. SAA is expressed
by three different genes on chromosome 11p15.1. SAA1 and SAA2 are
two isoforms that are acute-­phase reactants synthesized by the liver.
SAA is produced in response to proinflammatory cytokines, such as
interleukin (IL)-­1, IL-­6, and TNF-­α, and can increase more than 1,000-­
fold during inflammation.
It has been speculated that SAA has a role as a chemoattractant and
in lipid metabolism. Supporting this theory is the finding that amyloid
deposition occurs initially in organs that are major sites of lipid and
cholesterol metabolism, such as the kidney, liver, and spleen. Approximately 80% of secreted SAA1 and SAA2 is bound to lipoproteins. Usually SAA secreted by the liver is completely degraded by macrophages.
The secreted SAA protein is 104 amino acids in length and is primarily
secreted in an α-­helix structure. For reasons not completely understood, patients with AA amyloidosis have incomplete degradation
and accumulation of intermediate SAA products. In these patients,
SAA is transferred to the lysosome where the c-­terminal portion of
the 104–amino acid SAA protein is cleaved, allowing the remaining
66-­76 amino acid proteins to fold into a β-­pleated sheet configuration.
These cleaved fragments polymerize, form fibrils that are deposited in
the extracellular space, and bind proteoglycans and other proteins such
as serum amyloid P. These fibrils are resistant to proteolysis and deposit
in organ tissues.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although organ involvement may vary, AA amyloidosis most frequently affects the kidneys; 90% of patients have some degree of renal
involvement. Unexplained proteinuria may be the presenting feature
in some patients. Nephrotic syndrome and renal failure may develop
if the underlying inflammatory condition is not well-­
controlled.
Patients with higher SAA levels have a significantly higher risk of
death than those with lower SAA levels. Gastrointestinal (GI) involvement is seen in approximately 20% of patients and usually manifests
as chronic diarrhea, GI bleeding, abdominal pain, and malabsorption.
When biopsied, the testes are frequently discovered to be involved
(87%). Relatively uncommon findings associated with AA amyloidosis
include anemia, amyloid goiter, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, adrenal
involvement, and pulmonary involvement. The heart, tongue, and skin
are rarely involved.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of amyloidosis is established by a biopsy demonstrating
amyloid fibril proteins in affected tissues. The tissues tested may include
kidney, rectum, abdominal fat pad, and gingiva. Amyloid deposits are
composed of seemingly homogeneous eosinophilic material that stains
with Congo red dye and demonstrates the pathognomonic “apple-­green

birefringence” in polarized light. Tissue staining and genetic testing are
useful for diagnosing transthyretin amyloidosis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

In the United States, specific laboratory testing is not commercially
available for AA amyloid, but SAA levels are available in some other
countries and can be monitored to guide response to treatment.

TREATMENT

There is no established therapy for AA amyloidosis, and thus the primary approach is aggressive management of the underlying inflammatory or infectious disease. As newer therapies are developed to treat the
underlying conditions, emerging evidence shows that the incidence of
AA amyloidosis is decreasing. Colchicine is effective not only in controlling the attacks of FMF but also in preventing the development
of amyloidosis associated with FMF. AA amyloidosis associated with
other autoinflammatory diseases and chronic rheumatic diseases does
not respond to colchicine. Biologic agents against proinflammatory
cytokines used to treat RA, JIA, spondyloarthropathies, and the hereditary autoinflammatory diseases appear to decrease the risk of developing AA amyloidosis and may even reverse the deposition of amyloid.
The class of medications referred to as the TNF inhibitors have been
paramount in the management of RA and other autoimmune diseases,
and there are reports documenting the effectiveness of anti-­TNF agents
in blunting the progression of amyloidosis. Adverse effects of anti-­TNF
medications include reactivation of tuberculosis and hepatitis B, and
thus screening should be performed before instituting therapy. Caution should be used in prescribing anti-­TNF agents to patients with a
history of heart failure or demyelinating disease, because their use may
cause exacerbations of underlying cardiac and neurologic diseases.
The IL-­1 pathway is the target of three biologic medications used in
autoimmune and autoinflammatory diseases. The available IL-­1 antagonists are anakinra (IL-­1 receptor antagonist), rilonacept (soluble
IL-­1 receptor decoy), and canakinumab (long-­acting fully humanized
IgG1 anti–IL-­1β monoclonal antibody). A trial of canakinumab in
patients with colchicine-­resistant FMF, MKD, and TRAPS showed
that it was effective in controlling and preventing flares. The various IL-­1 inhibitors have been successful at slowing the progression of
AA amyloidosis, and in some cases treatment results in regression of
amyloid proteinuria.
Tocilizumab, an anti–IL-­6 receptor antibody, has been shown to
attenuate experimental AA amyloid and to reverse AA amyloidosis
complicating JIA and RA. A trial using eprodisate disodium in AA
amyloid patients failed to meet its primary end-­point of reducing progression to end-­stage renal disease and was halted in 2016.
Transthyretin amyloidosis has been treated with liver transplantation, which removes the source of mutated transthyretin molecules,
and several medications that inhibit the synthesis of the mutated protein, stabilize tetramers of the protein, or disrupt fibrils.

PROGNOSIS

End-­stage renal failure is the underlying cause of death in 40–60%
of patients with amyloidosis. According to a large-­scale study of 374
patients with AA amyloidosis, the factors associated with a poor prognosis include older age, a lower albumin serum level, end-­stage renal
disease at baseline, and prolonged serum elevation of SAA. An elevated
SAA value was the most powerful risk factor for end-­stage renal disease
and death from AA amyloidosis.

PREVENTION

The primary means of preventing AA amyloidosis is treatment of the
underlying inflammatory or infectious disease, resulting in decreases in
the level of SAA protein and the risk of amyloid deposition. Although
the period of latency between the onset of inflammation from the
underlying disease and the initial clinical signs of AA amyloidosis may
vary and is often prolonged, progression of the amyloid depositions
can be rapid.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1538 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 207

Macrophage Activation
Syndrome
Rebecca Trachtman and
Edward M. Behrens
Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) is a potentially fatal complication of rheumatic diseases thought to be caused by excessive activation and expansion of macrophages and T cells. These events lead to an
overwhelming inflammatory reaction, involving fever, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, cytopenias, liver dysfunction, and coagulopathy resembling disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
Extreme hyperferritinemia is a characteristic laboratory feature that
separates MAS from primary disease flare.
Inflammatory infiltrates composed predominantly of T lymphocytes
and hemophagocytic macrophages are commonly seen in the bone
marrow; they are also found in the liver, spleen, or lymph nodes. These
hemophagocytic macrophages can infiltrate most organs in the body.
Both the systemic and local inflammation can cause severe organ damage, which can be life-­threatening and progress to multiple organ failure. The abundance of tissue macrophages exhibiting hemophagocytic
activity in inflammatory lesions in MAS suggests that MAS is related to
a group of histiocytic disorders collectively known as hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although MAS can occur in many rheumatic diseases, it is seen most
frequently in systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (SJIA) and in its
adult equivalent, adult-­onset Still disease (AOSD). The reasons for this
association remain unclear; elevated interleukin (IL)-­18 may be a causative factor. Approximately 7–17% of patients with SJIA develop severe
disease, whereas more mild subclinical MAS may be seen in as many as
30% of patients with SJIA.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Kawasaki disease are other
rheumatologic conditions in which MAS occurs somewhat more
frequently than in other rheumatic diseases. In SLE, MAS occurs in
approximately 1–9% of patients.
MAS most often occurs subsequent to the onset of rheumatologic
disease; MAS has also been known to occur at the initial presentation
of a rheumatic illness. Approximately 23% of episodes of MAS have
occurred at the onset of SJIA. MAS typically occurs in the setting of
active primary rheumatic disease. However, it can occur despite good
control of underlying rheumatic disease. Many cases occur in the setting of infections and/or modifications in drug therapy. Both of these
triggers are possibly related to subsequent active rheumatic disease.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND OTHER
HYPERINFLAMMATORY SYNDROMES

The exact mechanisms behind MAS remain unclear; however, much
has been extrapolated from the pathogenesis of primary HLH (pHLH).
Consistent with parallels to pHLH, in MAS there is an abundance of
interferon-­gamma (IFN-­γ)–producing CD8+ T cells in inflammatory
lesions. Further suggesting a role for T-­cell–mediated inflammation,
cyclosporine A, a therapeutic agent that acts predominantly on T
cells, is very effective in the treatment of the majority of MAS patients.
CXCL9, a biomarker of IFN-­γ activity, is also elevated in patients during an MAS episode. Cytotoxic function appears to be impaired in certain subsets of SJIA patients, perhaps specifically in those at risk for
MAS, although this finding has been inconsistent. Some studies have
demonstrated an enrichment of heterozygous pathogenic variants in
known pHLH genes in MAS populations, suggesting that hypomorphic
lesions in cytolytic pathways may result in disease.

Translational studies in SJIA patients suggest that elevated serum IL-­
18 is a risk factor for the development of SJIA/MAS. A common link
to the “IFN-­γ-­centric” models is that IL-­18 is perhaps most noted for
its ability to stimulate IFN-­γ production by T cells and natural killer
cells. In the case of MAS caused by activating pathogenic variants in
the NLRC4 gene, IL-­18 has been shown to be highly elevated, and case
reports of IL-­18 blockade leading to resolution of both disease and
IFN-­γ activity suggest a causal link.

Cytokine Storm

A “cytokine storm” is the common pathophysiologic state in many
hyperinflammatory diseases. There is increasing interest in the relative
roles of cytokines in MAS pathophysiology, and the similarities and
differences to HLH, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
(MIS-­C) related to SARS-­CoV-­2 virus, and sepsis.

HLH

MAS belongs to a group of hemophagocytic disorders, which includes
HLH. The current classification of histiocytic disorders distinguishes
primary, or familial, HLH and secondary, or reactive, HLH (see Chapter
556.2). Clinically, they may be difficult to distinguish from each other.
pHLH is a constellation of rare autosomal recessive immune disorders
linked to genetic defects in various genes all affecting the cytolytic pathway. The clinical symptoms of pHLH usually become evident within the
first months of life. Secondary HLH tends to occur in older children or
adults. It may be associated with an identifiable infectious episode, most
often Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) or cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection.
However, when EBV-­associated HLH occurs as part of a genetic syndrome, such as the X-­linked proliferative disorders, it is more properly
considered pHLH. The group of secondary hemophagocytic disorders
also includes malignancy-­associated HLH. Some consider MAS to be a
form of secondary HLH, whereas others make a distinction and prefer
the moniker “Rheuma-­HLH” to separate MAS from other secondary
HLH conditions. The distinction between primary and secondary HLH
is becoming less distinct because of other genetic causes, some of which
are associated with less severe and more distinct clinical presentations.
Some of these may present later in life because heterozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in cytolytic pathway genes
that confer a partial dominant negative effect on the cytolytic function.
The exact relationship between HLH and MAS is an area of extensive
investigation, and some rheumatologists believe that MAS should be
categorized as secondary HLH occurring in a setting of a rheumatic
disease (or MAS-­HLH). Although there are multiple attempts to try
to standardize the nomenclature for these various syndromes, at this
point, best practice would be to use the term primary HLH for cases
with known molecular diagnoses or a clear genetic component. For
secondary cases, there is not yet a prescribed specific terminology, but
inclusion of known secondary causes can add clarity to the specific
syndromes being described (e.g., SJIA-­MAS, EBV-­HLH).

Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children
(MIS-­C)

Children may develop a postinfectious hyperinflammatory syndrome
after SARS-­CoV-­2 virus exposure that bears some resemblance to
MAS. Approximately 4-­8 weeks after infection, children developed
multiorgan dysfunction, frequently involving persistent fever, abdominal pain, and rash, and sometimes accompanied by abnormal cardiac
function or hypotension. Laboratory evaluation is significant for elevation of markers of inflammation and sometimes hyperferritinemia,
coagulopathy, and liver dysfunction. Similar to MAS, this phenomenon occurred after infectious trigger, and cytokine storm has been
invoked in multiple studies, especially involving IL-­18, IL-­10, IL-­6, and
the IFN-­γ–induced CXCL9.

CLINICAL AND LABORATORY MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical findings in overt MAS are dramatic and often evolve rapidly. High persistent fever, hepatosplenomegaly, generalized lymphadenopathy, liver dysfunction, and changes in mental status are common.
Coagulopathy resembling DIC can be associated with hemorrhagic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 207 u Macrophage Activation Syndrome
skin rashes ranging from mild petechiae to extensive ecchymotic
lesions. These can progress to epistaxis and hematemesis secondary to
upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Mental status changes, seizures, and
coma are the most common manifestations of CNS disease. Cerebrospinal fluid examination in these patients usually reveals pleocytosis
with mildly elevated protein. Deterioration in renal function has been
noted in several series and may be associated with particularly high
mortality. Pulmonary infiltrates can occur, and hemophagocytic macrophages can be found in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
These clinical symptoms are associated with notable laboratory
features. A precipitous fall in at least two of three blood cell lines
(leukocytes, erythrocytes, or platelets) is one of the early findings,
caused in part by increased destruction of cells by phagocytosis
and consumption at inflammatory sites. Decreasing erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) despite persistently high CRP is another
characteristic laboratory feature. This parallels hypofibrinogenemia, likely secondary to fibrinogen consumption and liver dysfunction. Prolonged prothrombin and partial thromboplastin
times, fibrin degradation products, and moderate deficiency of
vitamin K–dependent clotting factors are usually present as well.
Liver involvement is common in MAS, and most patients develop
marked hepatomegaly, and sometimes mild jaundice. Liver function tests frequently reveal high serum transaminase activity and
mildly elevated levels of serum bilirubin. Serum ammonia levels
are typically normal or only mildly elevated. Additional laboratory
findings in MAS include hypertriglyceridemia, hypoalbuminemia,
and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH).
Perhaps the most striking laboratory change in MAS is the elevation of serum ferritin. Although diagnostic/classification criteria set
levels of 500 ng/mL and 684 ng/mL as cutoffs for HLH and SJIA-­MAS
respectively, levels are often greater than 10,000 ng/mL. The reasons for
this elevated ferritin are not clear and are likely multifactorial. Although
extremely high ferritin is often a good serologic marker of HLH and
MAS, high levels are not pathognomonic and can be seen in a wide variety of conditions. Thus ferritin needs to be interpreted in the context of
the other features of the disease to support a diagnosis. Further, serum
ferritin is usually 60–80% glycosylated, whereas intracellular ferritin is
not glycosylated. In hemophagocytic syndromes, the percentage of glycosylated ferritin in the serum is low, typically below 20%; assessment of
glycosylated ferritin may also be a useful tool for MAS diagnosis.
It has been recognized that as many as one third of patients with
active SJIA may have mild subclinical MAS. These patients typically
have moderate hyperferritinemia, highly increased CRP, moderately decreased hemoglobin, and relatively low platelet counts. These
patients may also have mild hepatosplenomegaly and mildly elevated
liver enzymes. Serum fibrinogen tends to remain in the normal range
despite highly increased CRP.

DIAGNOSIS

Recognition of MAS is crucial, but early diagnosis is often difficult.
There is no single clinical or laboratory feature that is specific for MAS,
including hemophagocytosis, and many clinical features of MAS overlap with those seen in the underlying rheumatic diseases. The MAS
clinical presentation also overlaps with sepsis-­like syndromes associated with infection. This is further complicated by the fact that MAS
may also be triggered by a flare of the underlying rheumatic disease or
infection. In a patient with active underlying rheumatologic disease,
persistent fevers and decrease in ESR and platelet count in combination with increasing serum ferritin and persistently high CRP should
raise suspicion for impending MAS. Increasing liver enzymes, aspartate aminotransferase in particular, is another characteristic laboratory
change. The diagnosis of MAS might be confirmed by bone marrow
biopsy, with the presence of increased hemophagocytosis. However,
demonstration of hemophagocytosis may be limited by sampling
error, particularly at the early stages of the syndrome. In such cases,
additional staining of the bone marrow with anti-­CD163 antibodies
may be helpful. Features consistent with MAS include massive expansion of highly activated histiocytes. The diagnosis of MAS is supported
by elevated levels of soluble IL2Rα and soluble CD163 in serum.

1539

Table 207.1  The Classification Criteria for Macrophage
Activation Syndrome in Systemic Juvenile
Idiopathic Arthritis
A febrile patient with known or suspected systemic juvenile
idiopathic arthritis is classified as having macrophage activation
syndrome if the following criteria are met:
Ferritin >684 ng/mL and any two of the following:
Platelet count ≤181 × 109/L
Aspartate aminotransferase >48 U/L
Triglycerides >156 mg/dL
Fibrinogen ≤360 mg/dL

Evidence is mounting that IFN-­γ is the pivotal cytokine in MAS;
however, peripheral measurement of IFN-­γ can be difficult because
of retention in tissues. Therefore the IFN-­induced chemokine CXCL9
may be a more reliable serum biomarker of MAS. Although substantial
elevation in the serum levels of soluble IL2Rα receptors and CXCL9 in
an SJIA patient is highly suggestive of MAS, these assessments remain
nonspecific, and elevation can be associated with some malignancies
and viral infections, such as viral hepatitis.
Striking clinical similarities between MAS and HLH have led some
to advocate for the use of the HLH-­2004 diagnostic guidelines developed by the HLH Study Group of the International Histiocyte Society
(see Chapter 556.2). However, the application of the HLH diagnostic criteria to SJIA patients with suspected MAS is problematic, both
because there is significant overlap with common features of active
rheumatic disease and because SJIA patients may reach some of the
criteria only later in the clinical course. NK function testing as a means
to assess cytotoxic activity is problematic, as defects in this pathway are
only variably associated with SJIA and MAS.
Criteria for the diagnosis of MAS complicating SJIA are noted in
Table 207.1. In cross-­validation analyses, the criteria revealed a sensitivity of 0.72-­0.76 and a specificity 0.97-­0.99. It should be noted
that these criteria were developed for classification for studies and
trials and were not optimized for clinical diagnostic purposes. One
limitation of the MAS classification criteria is that background treatment with biologics might modify the clinical presentation of MAS.
Although IL-­1 and IL-­6 inhibitors effectively control the disease in the
majority of SJIA patients, they do not provide full protection against
MAS and may impede diagnosis. Furthermore, the MAS classification criteria are less likely to classify tocilizumab-­treated patients
as having MAS compared with historical controls or canakinumab-­
treated patients.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

It is most important to distinguish MAS from a flare of an underlying
rheumatologic disease and from intercurrent infection. Further, one
must consider other clinical entities associated with hyperferritinemia,
hepatic dysfunction, coagulopathy, cytopenias, or encephalopathy,
specifically DIC, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), and
malignancy-­associated HLH. Some other important differential diagnoses include sepsis and drug reactions; a thorough infectious workup
is necessary for the majority of MAS patients. Hyperferritinemia is not
specific for hemophagocytic syndromes and may be observed in various liver and kidney diseases, hematologic malignancies, or conditions
requiring chronic blood transfusions.

TREATMENT

MAS is still associated with high mortality rates; therefore prompt
recognition and initiation of immediate therapeutic intervention are
critical. To achieve rapid reversal of coagulation abnormalities and
cytopenias, most clinicians start with intravenous methylprednisolone
pulse therapy (30 mg/kg for three consecutive days) followed by 2 to 3
mg/kg/day in four divided doses.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1540 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
If response to glucocorticoids is not satisfactory, cyclosporine A (2-­7
mg/kg/day) is usually added to the treatment regimen based on several
reports describing the rapid resolution of MAS features in response to
this medication. Cyclosporine is preferentially used orally, and careful
monitoring for toxicity is required, especially if it is administered intravenously. In many patients, administration of cyclosporine A not only
provides rapid control of symptoms but also avoids excessive use of
steroids. Case reports support the use of tacrolimus as an alternative to
cyclosporine A, as it is often effective and has a desirable safety profile.
There is also reported efficacy with the use of anakinra for MAS. Because
MAS episodes may be triggered by disease flare, biologics that neutralize
IL-­1 could extinguish the underlying inflammation driving the cytokine
storm. There are several case reports and two case series of anakinra treatment for MAS with promising results, particularly when used in higher
doses. However, in established SJIA, continuous treatment with standard
doses of anti–IL-­1 and anti-IL-­6 biologic therapies does not absolutely
protect against MAS even if the underlying disease responds well to the
treatment. In the phase 3 clinical trial of canakinumab, IL-­1 blockade did
not confer full protection from MAS even in patients with fully controlled
SJIA. These results suggest that IL-­1 inhibition effectively treats MAS in
many patients, but does not completely prevent the occurrence of MAS,
particularly in the setting of viral infection in treated subjects.
Intravenous immune globulin treatment has been successful in
virus-­associated reactive HLH. Rituximab—a treatment that depletes
B lymphocytes, the main type of cells harboring EBV virus—has been
successfully used in EBV-­
induced lymphoproliferative disease and
could be considered in EBV-­driven MAS.
If MAS remains active despite the use of corticosteroids, anakinra, and
cyclosporine A, the HLH-­2004 treatment protocol developed by the HLH
Study Group of the International Histiocyte Society may be considered. In
addition to steroids and cyclosporine A, this protocol includes etoposide
(or VP16), a podophyllotoxin derivative that inhibits DNA synthesis by
forming a complex with topoisomerase II and DNA. However, this protocol is limited by the toxicity of etoposide and its likelihood of causing
kidney and liver damage. In addition, severe bone marrow suppression,
overwhelming infection, and death have been reported. The use of lower
doses of etoposide (50-­100 mg/m2 range rather than 150 mg/m2, as suggested by the HLH-­2004 protocol) has been advocated by some groups.
It has also been suggested that antithymocyte globulin (ATG) might
be a safer alternative to etoposide, particularly in patients with renal
and hepatic impairment. ATG depletes both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
through complement-­dependent cell lysis. Mild depletion of monocytes is noted in some patients as well. Although this treatment was tolerated well in reported cases, infusion reactions are frequently reported
with the use of ATG, and adequate laboratory and supportive medical
resources must be readily available if this treatment is used. Occasional
reports describe successful use of cyclophosphamide to control MAS,
mainly in patients with SLE.
The monoclonal antibody tocilizumab is very effective in treating
SJIA. However, in a phase 3 clinical trial of tocilizumab in SJIA, several
patients developed MAS. Similar to canakinumab, at the time of MAS
presentation, underlying SJIA in most of these patients was well controlled. Furthermore, tocilizumab can cause normalization of some of
the laboratory parameters of MAS, without actually altering the course
of MAS activity itself, providing false reassurance of disease control.
In a patient with an inflammasomopathy caused by gain-­of-­function
pathogenic variants in NLRC4, administration of the recombinant
IL-­18BP resulted in rapid and sustained improvement, including the
resolution of all MAS-­like features. It remains unclear whether a similar therapeutic intervention might be effective in MAS as well. Based
on their essential roles in transmitting cytokine-­induced signals, particularly from IFN-­γ, the JAK/STAT pathways have become a target for
pharmacologic manipulation in inflammatory diseases. Ruxolitinib, a
potent inhibitor of JAK1 and JAK2, has been shown to ameliorate the
disease-­influencing patterns of JAK/STAT-­dependent gene expression
in animal models of pHLH, but it remains to be determined whether
this treatment will be routinely effective in patients with MAS.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 208

Kawasaki Disease
Mindy S. Lo, Mary Beth F. Son, and
Jane W. Newburger
Kawasaki disease (KD), formerly known as mucocutaneous lymph node
syndrome and infantile polyarteritis nodosa, is an acute febrile illness
of childhood seen worldwide, with the highest incidence occurring in
Asian children. KD is a systemic inflammatory disorder manifesting as
a vasculitis with a predilection for the coronary arteries. Approximately
20–25% of untreated children develop coronary artery abnormalities
(CAAs), including aneurysms, whereas <5% of children treated with
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) develop CAA. Nonetheless, KD
is the leading cause of acquired heart disease in children in most developed countries, including the United States and Japan.

ETIOLOGY

The cause of KD remains unknown. Certain epidemiologic and clinical features support an infectious origin, including the young age-­
group affected; epidemics with wavelike geographic spread of illness;
the self-­limited nature of the acute febrile illness; and the clinical
features of fever, rash, enanthem, conjunctival injection, and cervical
lymphadenopathy. Further evidence of an infectious trigger includes
the infrequent occurrence of the illness in infants <3 months old, possibly the result of protective maternal antibodies, and the rarity of
cases in adults, possibly the result of prior exposures with subsequent
immunity. Furthermore, the number of hospitalizations per year for
KD significantly decreased during the COVID-­19 pandemic, both in
Japan and the United States, possibly due to low circulating causative
viruses. However, there are also features that are not consistent with
an infectious origin; it is unusual to have multiple cases present at the
same time within a family or daycare center. Furthermore, no single
infectious etiologic agent has been successfully identified, despite an
exhaustive search. Other environmental triggers such as airborne toxins and climate shifts have also been speculated to play a role.
Genetic factors clearly influence the pathogenesis of KD, as evidenced by the higher risk of KD in Asian children regardless of country
of residence and in siblings and children of individuals with a history of
KD. The concordance rate among identical twins is approximately 13%.
Linkage studies and genome-­wide association studies (GWAS) have
identified significant potential associations between polymorphisms in
the ITPKC gene, a T-­cell regulator, with increased susceptibility to KD
and more severe disease. Other candidate genes for KD identified by
GWAS include CASP3, BLK, and FCGR2A. Lastly, multiple alleles in
different human leukocyte antigen (HLA) regions have been reported
to influence risk for KD.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

For the majority of patients, KD is a disease of early childhood, and
nearly all epidemiologic studies show a higher susceptibility to KD in
males. Large database studies suggest that the hospitalization rate for
KD in the United States has been mostly stable over time, although the
proportion of hospitalizations complicated by “KD shock syndrome”
has increased over time. In 2017, the Kids’ Inpatient Database estimated 19.3 hospitalizations/100,000 children <4 years of age. Children
of Asian/Pacific Islander descent had the highest rates of KD among all
racial groups.
In other countries, such as the United Kingdom, South Korea, and
Japan, the rate of KD seems to be increasing. In Japan, nationwide surveys have been administered every 2 years to monitor trends in KD
incidence. In 2018 the highest recorded rate thus far of 359 per 100,000
children ages 0-­4 years was described, with the highest rate in young
children ages 9-­11 months. Fortunately, the proportion of Japanese

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 208 u Kawasaki Disease

1541

No coronary artery changes

Mild, transient dilation (resolves within 4–6 wk)

Possible progression to a
normal luminal dimension

Media
Intima

Necrotizing
arteritis

Aneurysm
formation

Elastica interna
Adventitia

1. Subacute/chronic vasculitis
2. Luminal myofibroblastic proliferation
3. Laminar nonocclusive thrombosis

Destruction of intima, elastica interna,
media and, variably, adventitia

Further progression and
? possible interaction with
atherosclerosis risk factors

Calcification

Occlusive thrombus
formation

Complex stenosis
Ischemic heart disease
Myocardial infarction

Organization of thrombus
and recanalization

Fig. 208.1 Natural history of coronary artery abnormalities. (Modified from Kato H. Cardiovascular complications in Kawasaki disease: coronary
artery lumen and long-­term consequences. Prog Pediatr Cardiol. 2004;19:137–145.)

patients with coronary aneurysms and myocardial infarction has
decreased over time, at 2.6% for the former in the most recent survey.
Several risk-­stratification models have been constructed to determine which patients with KD are at highest risk for CAA. Predictors
of poor outcome across several studies include young age; being male;
persistent prolonged fever; poor response to IVIG; and laboratory
abnormalities, including neutrophilia, thrombocytopenia, transaminitis, hyponatremia, hypoalbuminemia, elevated levels of N-­terminal
brain natriuretic protein, and elevated C-­reactive protein (CRP) levels.
Asian, Pacific Islander, and Hispanic ethnicity are also risk factors for
CAA. Three risk scores for IVIG resistance, which refers to incomplete response to the first treatment, have been constructed by Japanese researchers; of these, the Kobayashi score is the most widely used
and has high sensitivity and specificity. Unfortunately, when applied to
non-­Japanese populations, these scores do not appear to be as accurate
in identifying children at risk for IVIG resistance and CAA. Body surface area (BSA)–adjusted coronary artery dimensions on initial echocardiography are good predictors of CAA development. In a North
American cohort, coronary artery z scores ≥2.0 are predictive of CAA
development; similar findings have been reported in Japanese cohorts
as well. Accordingly, coronary artery z scores at initial presentation
are useful imaging biomarkers that can be used to guide adjunctive
therapy for high-­risk patients.

PATHOLOGY

KD is a vasculitis that predominantly affects medium-­size arteries.
The coronary arteries are most often involved, although other arteries (e.g., axillary, subclavian, femoral, popliteal, brachial) can also
develop dilation. A three-­phase process to the arteriopathy of KD has
been described. The first phase is a neutrophilic necrotizing arteritis

occurring in the first 2 weeks of illness that begins in the endothelium
and moves through the coronary wall. Saccular aneurysms may form
from this arteritis. The second phase is a subacute/chronic vasculitis
driven by lymphocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils, which may last
weeks to years and results in fusiform aneurysms. The vessels affected
by the subacute/chronic vasculitis then develop smooth muscle cell
myofibroblasts, which may cause diminution of internal lumen dimension and progressive stenosis in the third phase. Thrombi may form in
the lumen and obstruct blood flow (Fig. 208.1).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Fever is characteristically high (≥38.3°C [101°F]), persistent, and unresponsive to antipyretics. The duration of fever without treatment is
generally 1-­2 weeks but may be as short as 5 days or may persist for 3-­4
weeks. In addition to fever, the five principal clinical criteria of KD
are (1) bilateral nonexudative conjunctival injection with limbal sparing; (2) erythema of the oral and pharyngeal mucosa with strawberry
tongue and red, cracked lips; (3) edema (induration) and erythema of
the hands and feet; (4) rash of various forms (maculopapular, urticarial,
erythema multiforme–like, scarlatiniform, and rarely, micropustular
or psoriatic-­like); and (5) nonsuppurative cervical lymphadenopathy,
usually unilateral, with node size >1.5 cm (Table 208.1 and Figs. 208.2-­
208.5). Superficial perineal desquamation is common in the acute
phase. Periungual desquamation of the fingers and toes begins 2-­3
weeks after the onset of illness and may progress to involve the entire
hand and foot (Fig. 208.6).
Additional symptoms other than the principal clinical criteria
are common in the 10 days before diagnosis of KD, which may be
explained in part by the finding that up to a third of patients with
KD have confirmed, concurrent infections. Gastrointestinal (GI)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1542 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 208.1  Clinical and Laboratory Features of Kawasaki Disease
EPIDEMIOLOGIC CASE DEFINITION (CLASSIC CLINICAL CRITERIA)*
Fever persisting at least 5 days†
Presence of at least four principal features:
Changes in extremities

• Acute: erythema of palms, soles; edema of hands, feet
• Subacute: periungual peeling of fingers, toes in wk 2 and 3

Polymorphous exanthem
Bilateral bulbar conjunctival injection without exudate
Erythema and cracking of lips, strawberry tongue, and/or erythema
of oral and pharyngeal mucosa
Cervical lymphadenopathy (>1.5 cm diameter), usually unilateral
Exclusion of other diseases with similar findings‡
These features do not have to occur concurrently.
OTHER CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
Cardiovascular System
Myocarditis, pericarditis, valvular regurgitation, cardiogenic
shock
Coronary artery abnormalities
Aneurysms of medium-­sized noncoronary arteries
Peripheral gangrene
Aortic root enlargement
Respiratory System
Peribronchial and interstitial infiltrates on chest
radiograph
Pulmonary nodules
Musculoskeletal System
Arthritis, arthralgias (pleocytosis of synovial fluid)
Gastrointestinal Tract
Diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain
Hepatitis, jaundice
Hydrops of gallbladder
Pancreatitis
Parotitis

Central Nervous System
Extreme irritability
Aseptic meningitis (pleocytosis of cerebrospinal
fluid)
Facial nerve palsy
Sensorineural hearing loss
Genitourinary System
Urethritis/meatitis, hydrocele
Other Findings
Desquamating rash in groin
Retropharyngeal phlegmon
Anterior uveitis by slit-­lamp examination
Erythema, induration at bacille Calmette-­Guérin inoculation site
LABORATORY FINDINGS IN ACUTE KAWASAKI
DISEASE
Leukocytosis with neutrophilia and immature forms
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Elevated C-­reactive protein
Elevated nitrogen-­terminal pro B-­type natriuretic peptide
(NT-­proBNP)
Anemia
Abnormal plasma lipids
Hypoalbuminemia
Hyponatremia
Thrombocytosis after wk 1§
Sterile pyuria
Elevated serum transaminase
Elevated serum γ-­glutamyl transpeptidase
Pleocytosis of cerebrospinal fluid
Leukocytosis in synovial fluid

*Patients with fever at least 5 days and fewer than four principal criteria can be diagnosed with Kawasaki disease when coronary artery abnormalities are detected by two-­dimensional
echocardiography or angiography.
†In the presence of four or more principal criteria, particularly when redness and swelling of the hands and feet are present, Kawasaki disease diagnosis can be made on day 4 of
illness. Experienced clinicians who have treated many patients with Kawasaki disease may establish a diagnosis before day 4 in rare cases.
‡See the differential diagnosis (Table 208.3).
§Rarely infants present with thrombocytopenia and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
From McCrindle BW, Rowley A, Newburger JW, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and long-­term management of Kawasaki disease: a scientific statement for health professionals from the
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135(17):e927–e999.

Fever
Strawberry tongue
Conjunctivitis
Desquamation
Polymorphous skin rashes
Induration
Pyuria
BCG
LAP
Diarrhea
CAD
Arthritis

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Percentage of Cases

Fig. 208.2 Clinical symptoms and signs of Kawasaki disease. Sum-

mary of clinical features from 110 cases of Kawasaki disease seen in Kaohsiung, Taiwan. LAP, Lymphadenopathy in head and neck area; BCG,
reactivation of bacille Calmette-­Guérin inoculation site; CAD, coronary
artery dilation, defined by an internal diameter >3 mm. (From Wang CL,
Wu YT, Liu CA, et al. Kawasaki disease: infection, immunity and genetics.
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2005;24:998–1004.)

Fig. 208.3 Kawasaki disease. Strawberry tongue in patient with mu-

cocutaneous lymph node syndrome. (Courtesy Tomisaku Kawasaki, MD.
From Hurwitz S. Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 1993.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 208 u Kawasaki Disease

Fig. 208.4 Kawasaki disease. Congestion of bulbar conjunctiva in a

patient with mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. (Courtesy Tomisaku Kawasaki, MD. From Hurwitz S. Clinical Pediatric Dermatology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1993.)

Fig. 208.5 Kawasaki disease. Indurative edema of the hands in a patient with mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. (Courtesy Tomisaku
Kawasaki, MD. From Hurwitz S. Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1993.)

Fig. 208.6 Kawasaki disease. Desquamation of the fingers in a patient with mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. (Courtesy Tomisaku
Kawasaki, MD. From Hurwitz S. Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1993.)

symptoms (vomiting, diarrhea, or abdominal pain) occur in >60% of
patients, and at least one respiratory symptom (rhinorrhea or cough)
occurs in 35%. Other clinical findings can include significant irritability that is especially prominent in infants and likely caused by aseptic
meningitis, mild hepatitis, hydrops of the gallbladder, urethritis and
meatitis with sterile pyuria, uveitis, and arthritis. Arthritis may occur
early in the illness or may develop in the second or third week. Small or

1543

large joints may be affected, and the arthralgias may persist for several
weeks. Patients previously vaccinated with bacillus Calmette-­Guerin
(BCG) may show reactivation at the inoculation site. Clinical features
that are not consistent with KD include exudative/purulent conjunctivitis; exudative pharyngitis; generalized lymphadenopathy; discrete
oral lesions (e.g., ulceration); splenomegaly; and bullous, petechial, or
vesicular rashes.
Cardiac involvement is the most important manifestation of KD.
Myocarditis may occur in patients with acute KD and may manifest
as tachycardia disproportionate to fever, along with diminished left
ventricular systolic function. Occasionally, patients with KD present
in cardiogenic shock (KD shock syndrome), with hypotension and
greatly diminished left ventricular function. In addition, KD shock
syndrome may manifest with thrombocytopenia, a high band count,
and a high CRP. Case series of KD shock syndrome indicate that these
patients may be at higher risk for coronary artery dilation. Pericarditis
with a small pericardial effusion can also occur during the acute illness. Mitral regurgitation of at least mild severity is evident on echocardiography in 10–25% of patients at presentation but diminishes
over time, except among rare patients with coronary aneurysms and
ischemic heart disease. Up to 25% of untreated patients develop CAA
by Japanese Ministry of Health criteria in the second to third week of
illness; initially these are usually asymptomatic and detected by echocardiography. Almost all the morbidity and mortality in KD occur in
patients with large or giant coronary artery aneurysms, defined by
the 2017 American Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement on
the diagnosis and treatment of KD as having a z score ≥10 or an absolute dimension of ≥8 mm. Specifically, large or giant aneurysms are
associated with the greatest risk of later thrombosis or stenosis, angina,
and myocardial infarction (Figs. 208.7 and 208.8A). Rupture of a giant
aneurysm is a rare complication that generally occurs in the first month
after illness onset and may present as hemopericardium with tamponade. Axillary, popliteal, iliac, or other systemic medium-­sized muscular
arteries may also become aneurysmal, but always in the setting of giant
coronary aneurysms (see Fig. 208.8B); these usually regress.
Occasionally KD presents initially with only fever and lymphadenopathy (node-­first KD). This presentation may be confused with bacterial or viral cervical lymphadenitis and may delay the diagnosis and
treatment. Persistence of high fever, lack of response to antibiotics, and
subsequent development of other signs of KD suggest the diagnosis.
Children with node-­first KD tend to be older (4 vs 2 years) and have
more days of fever and higher CRP levels. In addition to cervical adenopathy, many node-­first patients had retropharyngeal and peritonsillar inflammation on CT scans (Fig. 208.9). Patients with node-­first KD
have a higher incidence of coronary aneurysms. Patients with infectious adenitis usually respond to antibiotics; they may have abscesses
noted on imaging studies (ultrasonography or CT).
KD can be divided into three clinical phases. The acute febrile phase
is characterized by fever and the other acute signs of illness and usually
lasts 1-­2 weeks. The subacute phase is associated with desquamation,
thrombocytosis, development of CAA, and the highest risk of sudden
death in patients who develop aneurysms; it generally lasts 3 weeks.
The convalescent phase begins when all clinical signs of illness have
disappeared and continues until the erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR) returns to normal, typically 6-­8 weeks after the onset of illness.

LABORATORY AND RADIOLOGY FINDINGS

There is no diagnostic test for KD, but patients usually have characteristic laboratory findings. The leukocyte count is often elevated, with a
predominance of neutrophils and immature forms. Normocytic, normochromic anemia is common. The platelet count is generally normal
in the first week of illness and rapidly increases by the second to third
week of illness, sometimes exceeding 1 million/mm3. An elevated ESR
or CRP value is universally present in the acute phase of illness. The
ESR may remain elevated for weeks, in part from the effect of IVIG.
Sterile pyuria, mild elevations of the hepatic transaminases, hyperbilirubinemia, and cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis may also be present. KD
is unlikely if the ESR, CRP, and platelet counts are normal after 7 days
of fever.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1544 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

LAD

RCA

Fig. 208.7 Coronary angiograms in 6-­yr-­old boy with Kawasaki dis-

ease. Left, Giant aneurysm of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) with obstruction. Right, Giant aneurysm of the right coronary
artery (RCA) with an area of severe narrowing. (From Newburger JW,
Takahashi M, Gerber MA, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and long-­term
management of Kawasaki disease. Pediatrics. 2004;114:1708–1733.)

Two-­dimensional echocardiography is the most useful test to monitor
for development of CAA. Although frank aneurysms are rarely detected
in the first week of illness, coronary arteries are commonly dilated. Coronary artery dimensions, adjusted for BSA (z scores), may increase over
the first 6 weeks of illness, and higher z scores at the time of diagnosis
are the strongest risk factor for the presence of coronary aneurysms 2-­8
weeks after illness onset. Children with non-­KD febrile illnesses also
have mildly increased z scores compared with nonfebrile controls, but
to a lesser degree than patients with KD. Aneurysms have been defined
with the use of absolute dimensions by the Japanese Ministry of Health
and are classified as small (≤4 mm internal diameter [ID]), medium (>4
to ≤8 mm ID), or giant (>8 mm ID). Some experts believe that a z score–
based system for classification of aneurysm size may be more discriminating, because it adjusts the coronary dimension for BSA. The AHA z
score classification system is noted in Table 208.2.
Echocardiography should be performed at diagnosis and again after
1-­2 weeks of illness. If the results are normal, a repeat study should be
performed 6-­8 weeks after onset of illness. If results of either of the
initial studies are abnormal or the patient has recurrent fever or symptoms, more frequent echocardiography or other studies may be necessary. In patients in whom CAA has not developed in the first 4-­6 weeks
of illness, the patient may be discharged from cardiology care, although
follow-­up through 12 months may be considered. Children and families should be counseled regarding healthy diet and the importance of
exercise at regular primary care visits. For patients with CAA, the type
of testing and the frequency of cardiology follow-­up visits are tailored
to the patient’s coronary artery status (see Table 208.2).

DIAGNOSIS

A

B

Fig. 208.8 MRI of coronary and peripheral artery aneurysms in Kawa-

saki disease. A, Image of left ventricular outflow tract showing a giant
right coronary artery (RCA) aneurysm with nonocclusive thrombus (yellow
arrow) and a giant left main coronary artery (LMCA) aneurysm. Ao, Aorta;
AoV, aortic valve; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. B, Aneurysms in
the axillary and subclavian arteries and the iliac and femoral arteries (arrows). (From McCrindle BW, Rowley A, Newburger JW, et al. Diagnosis,
treatment, and long-­term management of Kawasaki disease: a scientific
statement for health professionals from the American Heart Association.
Circulation 2017;135[17]:e927–e999, Fig. 2G and H, p. e935.)

A

B

Fig. 208.9 Contrast-­enhanced CT in 3-­yr-­old boy with Kawasaki dis-

ease. A, Right-­sided cervical lymphadenopathy (arrows), peritonsillar
hypodense area (curved arrow), and swelling of right palatine tonsil
(arrowhead). B, Right-­sided cervical lymphadenopathy with perinodal
infiltration (arrows) and intranodal focal low attenuation (arrowheads).
(From Kato H, Kanematsu M, Kato Z, et al. Computed tomographic
findings of Kawasaki disease with cervical lymphadenopathy. J Comput
Assist Tomogr. 2012;36[1]:138–142, Fig. 1, p. 139.)

The diagnosis of KD is based on the presence of characteristic clinical
signs. For classic KD, the diagnostic criteria require the presence of
fever for at least 5 days and at least four of five of the other principal characteristics of the illness (see Table 208.1). The diagnosis of KD
should be made within 10 days, and ideally within 7 days, of fever onset
to improve coronary artery outcomes. In incomplete KD, patients
have persistent fever but fewer than four of the five characteristic clinical signs. In patients with incomplete KD, laboratory and echocardiographic data can assist in the diagnosis (Fig. 208.10). Incomplete cases
occur most frequently in infants, who also have the highest likelihood
of development of CAA. Ambiguous cases should be referred to a center with experience in the diagnosis of KD. Establishing the diagnosis
with prompt initiation of treatment is essential to prevent potentially
devastating coronary artery disease. For this reason, it is recommended
that any infant age ≤6 months with fever for ≥7 days and signs of systemic
inflammation without explanation undergo echocardiography to assess
the coronary arteries.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Adenovirus, measles, and scarlet fever lead the list of common childhood infections that mimic KD (Table 208.3). Children with adenovirus typically have exudative pharyngitis and exudative conjunctivitis,
allowing differentiation from KD. A common clinical problem is the
differentiation of scarlet fever from KD in a child who is a group A
streptococcal carrier. Patients with scarlet fever typically have a rapid
clinical response to appropriate antibiotic therapy. Such treatment for
24-­48 hours with clinical reassessment generally clarifies the diagnosis.
Furthermore, ocular findings are quite rare in group A streptococcal
pharyngitis and may assist in the diagnosis of KD.
Features of measles that distinguish it from KD include exudative
conjunctivitis, Koplik spots, rash that begins on the face and hairline and
behind the ears, and leukopenia. Cervical lymphadenitis can be the initial
diagnosis in children who are ultimately recognized to have KD. Less common infections such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever and leptospirosis are
occasionally confused with KD. Rocky Mountain spotted fever is a potentially lethal bacterial infection, and appropriate antibiotics should not be
withheld if the diagnosis is under consideration. Its distinguishing features
include pronounced myalgias and headache at onset, centripetal rash, and
petechiae on the palms and soles. Leptospirosis can also be an illness of
considerable severity. Risk factors include exposure to water contaminated

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 208 u Kawasaki Disease

1545

Table 208.2  Classification of Coronary Artery Dilation or Aneurysms (after AHA Guidance with Modification)
FOLLOW-­UP
INTERVAL

IMAGING REQUIRED TO ASSESS
FOR INDUCIBLE ISCHEMIA
(STRESS ECHO OR STRESS MRI)

REGIONAL SPECIALIST
KAWASAKI DISEASE
CLINIC

CLASSIFICATION
OF RISK LEVEL

DESCRIPTION OF
CORONARY ARTERIES

1

No involvement at any
time point
(z score<2)

2 wk
6 wk
6 mo
12 mo
Discharge if normal
at 12 mo

None

No

No—annual cardiac
and general health
review with GP
recommended*

2

Dilation only
(2< z score ≤2.5): resolves
within 1 year

2 wk
6 wk
6 mo
12 mo
Discharge if normal
at 12 mo

None

No

No—annual cardiac
and general health
review with GP
recommended*

3

Small aneurysm
(2.5≤ z score <5):
(a) current or persistent
(b) decreased to normal
or z score <2.5

2 wk
6 wk
6 mo
12 mo
Annual review

Coronary angiography (preferably
CT) at 12 mo as baseline
Consider stress imaging for inducible
myocardial ischemia every 2 years
Imaging (echo) for coronary
surveillance annually

Yes

Yes

4

Medium aneurysm
(5 ≤z score <10):
(a) persistent aneurysm
(b) decreased to normal or
z score <2.5

2 wk
6 wk
6 mo
12 mo
Annual review

Coronary angiography (preferably
CT) at 12 mo as baseline
Consider stress imaging for inducible
myocardial ischemia annually
Imaging (echo, CT,† or MRI) for coronary
thrombus surveillance annually

Yes

Yes

5

Giant aneurysm
(z score ≥10 or ≥8 mm):
(a) persistent giant
aneurysm
(b) persistent aneurysm
(but regressed to medium
or small aneurysms)
(c) regressed to normal
dimensions

2 wk
6 wk
3 mo
6 mo
9 mo
12 mo
Then every 6 mo

Coronary angiography (preferably
CT) at 6-­12 mo as baseline
Consider stress imaging for inducible
myocardial ischemia annually
Imaging (echo, CT,† or MRI) for
coronary thrombus surveillance
every 6 mo

Yes

Yes

PSP

*GP review should include clinical examination, blood pressure measurement, general health discussion, and advice on avoidance of cardiovascular risk factors and lifestyle choices,
including maintaining a healthy weight, reducing the risk of diabetes, avoiding smoking, and taking regular exercise. This provides the opportunity to discuss any parent or patient
questions and concerns.
†CT should not be used repeatedly if possible. Use MRI or ultrasound where possible to reduce radiation exposure.
ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; AHA, American Heart Association; FBC, full blood count; GP, general practitioner; PSP, person-­specific protocol.
From McCrindle BW, Rowley AH, Newburger JW, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and long-term management of Kawasaki disease: A scientific statement for health professionals from the
American Heart Association [published correction appears in Circulation. 2019 Jul 30;140(5):e181-e184]. Circulation. 2017;135(17):e927–e999.).

with urine from infected animals. The classic description of leptospirosis
is of a biphasic illness with a few asymptomatic days between an initial
period of fever and headache and a late phase with renal and hepatic failure. In contrast, patients with KD have consecutive days of fever at diagnosis and rarely have renal or hepatic failure.
Drug hypersensitivity reactions, including Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome, share some characteristics with KD. Drug reaction features such
as the presence of oral ulcerations and a normal or minimally elevated
ESR are not seen in KD. Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) is
also characterized by fever and rash, but physical findings include diffuse lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Arthritis may or may
not be present in the initial illness. Fevers typically show a quotidian or
double-­quotidian pattern, in contrast to the unremitting fevers seen in
KD. Laboratory findings may include coagulopathy, elevated fibrin degradation product values, and hyperferritinemia. Interestingly, there are
reports of children with sJIA who have echocardiographic evidence of
CAA. Coronary aneurysms have also been reported in Behçet disease,
primary cytomegalovirus infection, granulomatosis with polyangiitis,
lupus, infantile polyarteritis nodosa, hyper-IgE syndrome, hyper-IgD
syndrome (mevalonic aciduria), and meningococcemia.

Children with KD may present with Kawasaki disease shock
syndrome, with a clinical picture similar to that of toxic shock syndrome or of the multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
associated with COVID-­19 (MIS-­C; see Chapter 311). Features
of toxic shock syndrome that are not usually seen in KD include
renal insufficiency, coagulopathy, pancytopenia, and myositis.
With COVID-­19 disease, some children developed a KD-­like illnesses presenting in cardiogenic shock. multisystem inflammatory
syndrome in children (MIS-C), also known as pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with SARS-­CoV-­2
(PIMS-­TS), occurs 2-­6 weeks after infection with SARS-­C oV-­2. The
initial infection may be asymptomatic. Children with MIS-­C may
show conjunctival injection, oropharyngeal changes, and rashes
similar to that seen in KD. CAAs have also been described in MIS-­
C, but the risk of CAA in MIS-­C does not strictly correlate with
criteria for incomplete or complete KD. Furthermore, patients are
often older and have a greater degree of myocardial dysfunction
as compared with KD; distinguishing laboratory features include
greater hyperferritinemia, more pronounced cytopenias, and elevated d-­dimer in MIS-­C (Table 208.4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1546 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Evaluation of suspected incomplete Kawasaki disease1
Children with fever ≥5 days and 2 or 3 compatible clinical criteria2 OR
infants with fever for ≥7 days without other explanation3

Assess laboratory tests

CRP≥3.0 mg/dL and/or ESR≥40 mm/hr

CRP<3.0 mg/dL and ESR<40 mm/hr

3 or more laboratory findings:

Serial clinical and
laboratory re-evaluation if
fevers persist
Echocardiogram if typical
peeling6 develops

1) Anemia for age
2) Platelet count of ≥450,000 after the
7th day of fever
3) Albumin ≤3.0 g/dL
4) Elevated ALT level
5) WBC count of ≥15,000/mm3
6) Urine ≥10 WBC/hpf

NO

YES
Treat5

OR

Positive echocardiogram4

Fig. 208.10 Algorithm for the evaluation of suspected incomplete Kawasaki disease (KD). 1In the absence of a gold standard for diagnosis of KD,

this algorithm cannot be evidence based, but rather represents the informed opinion of the expert committee. Consultation with an expert should
be sought any time assistance is needed. 2Clinical findings of KD are listed in Table 208.1. Characteristics suggesting that another diagnosis should
be considered include exudative conjunctivitis, exudative pharyngitis, ulcerative intraoral lesions, bullous or vesicular rash, generalized adenopathy,
and splenomegaly. 3Infants ≤6 months of age are most likely to develop prolonged fever without other clinical criteria for KD; these infants are at
particularly high risk of developing coronary artery abnormalities. 4Echocardiography is considered positive for purposes of this algorithm if any of
three conditions are met: z score of left anterior descending coronary artery or right coronary artery ≥2.5; coronary artery aneurysm is observed; or
three or more other suggestive features exist, including decreased left ventricular function, mitral regurgitation, pericardial effusion, or z scores in the
left anterior descending coronary artery or right coronary artery of 2-­2.5. 5If the echocardiogram is positive, treatment should be given within 10 days
of fever onset or after the 10th day of fever in the presence of clinical and laboratory signs (C-­reactive protein [CRP], erythrocyte sedimentation rate
[ESR]) of ongoing inflammation. 6Typical peeling begins under the nail beds of fingers and toes. ALT, Alanine transaminase; WBC, white blood cell.
(From McCrindle BW, Rowley A, Newburger JW, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and long-­term management of Kawasaki disease: A scientific statement
for health professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999, Fig. 2, p. e937.)

Table 208.3  Differential Diagnosis of Kawasaki Disease
VIRAL INFECTIONS*
Adenovirus
Enterovirus
Measles
Epstein-­Barr virus
Cytomegalovirus
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
Scarlet fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Leptospirosis
Bacterial cervical lymphadenitis ± retropharyngeal phlegmon
Meningococcemia
Urinary tract infection
RHEUMATOLOGIC DISEASE
Systemic-­onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Behçet disease
Rheumatic fever
Polyarteritis nodosa
Takayasu arteritis
OTHER
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) associated
with COVID-­19
Toxic shock syndromes
Serum sickness
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
Macrophage activation syndrome (may also complicate Kawasaki disease)
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Drug hypersensitivity reactions
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
Aseptic meningitis
Autoinflammatory diseases
*Detection of a virus does not exclude Kawasaki disease in the presence of the principal
clinical features (see Table 208.1).

Table 208.4  Comparing and Contrasting Multisystem
Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-­C)
with Kawasaki Disease
MIS-­C

KAWASAKI DISEASE

Mean age 8-­12 years

Mean age <5 years

Fever >24 hr

Fever >5 days

GI symptoms common (severe
abdominal pain) (50–90%)

GI complaints not common
(∼20%)

Myocarditis/myocardial dysfunction
(left ventricular dysfunction)

Myocardial function normal/
mildly reduced*

Coronary artery dilation or
aneurysms (25–50%)

Coronary artery abnormalities
such as aneurysms common if
untreated

Hypotension

Normal BP*

Renal involvement more common

Renal involvement rare

Proinflammatory state common

Proinflammatory state common

Lymphopenia common

Lymphopenia not common

Thrombocytopenia

Thrombocytosis

Elevated ferritin

Ferritin usually normal

*Except in Kawasaki shock syndrome (∼5%).
GI, Gastrointestinal.
Modified from Naka F, Melnick L, Gorelik M, et al. A dermatologic perspective on
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children. Clin Dermatol. 2021;39(1):163–168, Table 5.

TREATMENT

Patients with acute KD should be treated with 2 g/kg of IVIG as a single
infusion, usually administered over 10-­12 hours within 10 days of disease onset, and ideally as soon as possible after diagnosis (Table 208.5).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 208 u Kawasaki Disease
In addition, moderate-­dose (30-­50 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours)
aspirin should be administered until the patient is afebrile, then lowered to antiplatelet doses (3-­5 mg/kg/day). Other NSAIDs should not
be given during therapy with aspirin because they may block aspirin’s
antiplatelet effect. The mechanism of action of IVIG in KD is likely
multifaceted, but treatment results in defervescence and resolution of
clinical signs of illness in approximately 85% of patients. Using Japanese Ministry of Health criteria, the prevalence of coronary disease is
20–25% in children treated with aspirin alone and falls to <5% in those
treated with IVIG and aspirin within the first 10 days of illness. In children diagnosed after the 10th day of fever, IVIG should still be offered
to patients with persistent fever, abnormal dimensions of the coronary
arteries, or signs of systemic inflammation. Low-­dose aspirin is continued for its antithrombotic effect until 6-­8 weeks after illness onset and
is then discontinued in patients who have had normal echocardiography findings throughout the course of their illness. Patients with CAA
continue with aspirin therapy longer and may require anticoagulation,
depending on the degree of coronary dilation (see later).
Glucocorticoids have been used as primary therapy with the first dose
of IVIG in hopes of improving coronary outcomes. A North American
trial using a single pulse dose of intravenous methylprednisolone (30 mg/
kg) with IVIG as primary therapy did not improve coronary outcomes.
However, a trial in Japan using the Kobayashi score to identify high-­risk
children demonstrated improved coronary outcomes with a regimen of
Table 208.5  Treatment of Kawasaki Disease
ACUTE STAGE
Standard risk:
Intravenous immune globulin 2 g/kg over 10-­12 hr
and
Aspirin 30-­50 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hr orally until patient is
afebrile for at least 48 hr
High risk* for coronary artery abnormalities:
Intravenous immune globulin and aspirin as above, plus
methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg/d IV divided q12hr until afebrile, then
prednisolone orally until CRP normalized, then taper over 2-3 wk
CONVALESCENT STAGE
Aspirin 3-­5 mg/kg once daily orally until 6- after illness onset if normal
coronary findings throughout course
*High risk for coronary artery abnormalities is defined as age <6 months or baseline
left anterior descending (LAD) or right circumflex artery (RCA) z-score greater than or
equal to 2.5.

1547

methylprednisolone/prednisolone (2 mg/kg/day, divided every 12 hours)
plus IVIG as primary therapy. Furthermore, a systematic review and
meta-­analysis of 16 comparative studies demonstrated that early treatment with glucocorticoids improved coronary artery outcomes in children with KD. These data suggest that primary glucocorticoid therapy in
addition to standard of care (IVIG plus aspirin) may be helpful in children at high risk for CAA. Fewer data are available to support the use of
TNF alpha inhibitors for prevention of coronary artery aneurysms.
IVIG-­resistant KD (nonresponders) occurs in approximately 15%
of patients and is defined by persistent or recrudescent fever 36 hours
after completion of the initial IVIG infusion. Patients with IVIG resistance are at increased risk for CAA. Therapeutic options for the child
with IVIG resistance include a second dose of IVIG (2 g/kg), a tapering course of glucocorticoids, infliximab, or possibly anakinra (Table
208.6). For the most severely affected patients with enlarging coronary
aneurysms, additional therapies such as cyclosporine or cyclophosphamide may be administered, with consultation from specialists in pediatric rheumatology and cardiology.

COMPLICATIONS

Acute KD is complicated in 1–2% of patients by macrophage activation syndrome (MAS; see Chapter 207), a syndrome of life-­threatening
hyperinflammation on the spectrum of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. MAS may mimic MIS-­C. These patients may present with
hyperferritinemia, coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia, and shock, warranting more aggressive immunosuppressive therapy.
In all phases of KD, patients with giant coronary aneurysms may
experience myocardial infarction, angina, and sudden death due to
thrombosis. For this reason, aspirin is continued indefinitely in children with coronary aneurysms (Table 208.7). When aneurysms are
moderate-­sized, dual antiplatelet therapy (e.g., aspirin and clopidogrel) is
sometimes administered. For those with large or giant aneurysms, anticoagulation with warfarin or low-­molecular-­weight heparin is added to
aspirin. For acute thrombosis that occasionally occurs in an aneurysmal
or stenotic coronary artery, thrombolytic therapy may be lifesaving. In
very rare circumstances of severe, giant aneurysms, rupture can occur.
Long-­term follow-­up of patients with CAAs is tailored to the past (i.e.,
worst-­ever) and current coronary status, with a schedule of testing recommended in the 2017 AHA scientific statement on KD (see Table 208.2).
Testing may include echocardiography, assessment for inducible ischemia,
advanced imaging (CT, MRI, or invasive angiography), physical activity counseling, and cardiovascular risk factor assessment and management. Patients with coronary artery stenosis and inducible ischemia may
be managed with coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or catheter

Table 208.6  Treatment Options for IVIG-­Resistant Patients with Kawasaki Disease*
AGENT

DESCRIPTION

DOSE

MOST FREQUENTLY ADMINISTERED
IVIG: second infusion
Pooled polyclonal IG

2 g/kg IV

IVIG + methylprednisolone/
prednisolone

IVIG + glucocorticoid

IVIG: 2 g/kg IV + methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg/d IV divided every 12 hr
until afebrile, then oral prednisolone 2 mg/kg/d divided twice daily

Infliximab

Monoclonal antibody against TNF-­α

Single infusion: 5-­10 mg/kg IV

ALTERNATIVE TREATMENTS
Anakinra
Recombinant IL-­1β receptor antagonist

2-­8 mg/kg/day given by subcutaneous injection or IV infusion

Cyclosporine

Inhibitor of calcineurin-­NFAT pathway

IV: 3 mg/kg/d divided every 12 hr
PO: 4-­8 mg/kg/d divided every 12 hr
Adjust dose to achieve trough 50-­150 ng/mL; 2 hr peak level 300-­600 ng/mL

Cyclophosphamide

Alkylating agent blocks DNA replication

10-­15 mg/kg IV, 1 or 2 doses

Plasma exchange

Replaces plasma with albumin

1-5 cycles

*IVIG resistance is defined as persistent or recrudescent fever at least 36 hr and <7 days after completion of first IVIG infusion. The top three treatments have been most frequently
used, although no comparative effectiveness trial has been performed. Pulsed high-­dose corticosteroid treatment is not recommended. The alternative treatments have been used
in a limited number of patients with KD.
CRP, C-­reactive protein; IG, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; IV, intravenous(ly); IVIG, intravenous immune globulin; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells; PO, oral; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1548 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 208.7  Anticoagulation for Coronary Artery
Abnormalities in Kawasaki Disease

Chapter 209

LONG TERM THERAPY
Small aneurysms: Aspirin 3-5 mg/kg/d

Sarcoidosis

Medium aneurysms: Aspirin +/- clopidogrel 1 mg/kg/d
(max 75 mg/d)
Giant aneurysms: Aspirin + anticoagulation with warfarin, low molecular
weight heparin, or direct oral anticoagulants (e.g. apixaban)
ACUTE CORONARY THROMBOSIS
Prompt fibrinolytic therapy with tissue plasminogen activator or
other thrombolytic agent under the supervision of a pediatric
cardiologist

interventions, including percutaneous transluminal coronary rotational
ablation, directional coronary atherectomy, and stent implantation.
Patients undergoing long-­term aspirin therapy should receive annual
influenza vaccination to reduce the risk of Reye syndrome. A different
antiplatelet agent can be substituted for aspirin during the 6 weeks after
varicella vaccination. IVIG may interfere with the immune response
to live virus vaccines as a result of a specific antiviral antibody, so the
measles-­mumps-­rubella and varicella vaccinations should generally be
deferred until 11 months after IVIG administration. Nonlive vaccinations do not need to be delayed.

PROGNOSIS

The vast majority of patients with KD return to normal health;
timely treatment reduces the risk of coronary aneurysms to <5%.
Acute KD recurs in 1–3% of cases. Published fatality rates are very
low, generally <1%. The prognosis for patients with CAA depends
on the severity of coronary disease; therefore recommendations
for follow-­up and management are stratified according to coronary artery status. A 6-­week echocardiogram may be unnecessary
in patients with normal coronary artery measurements at baseline
and at 2 weeks of illness, as these children very rarely develop new
abnormalities over time. Overall, ∼50% of CAAs remodel to normal
lumen diameter by 1-­2 years after the illness, with smaller aneurysms being more likely to regress. Intravascular ultrasonography
has demonstrated that regressed aneurysms are associated with
marked myointimal thickening and abnormal vascular function.
Giant aneurysms are less likely to regress to normal lumen diameter
and are more likely to lead to thrombosis or stenosis. Bypass grafting may be required if there is inducible ischemia; it is best accomplished with the use of arterial grafts, which grow with the child and
are more likely than venous grafts to remain patent over the long
term. Heart transplantation has been required in rare cases where
revascularization is not feasible because of distal coronary stenoses,
distal aneurysms, or severe ischemic cardiomyopathy. A study from
Japan reported outcomes in adult patients with a history of KD and
giant aneurysms. These patients required multiple cardiac and surgical procedures, but the 30-­years survival rate approached 90%.
The long-­term outcomes of children who have had KD and never
had coronary artery abnormalities, based upon reliable echocardiograms performed early in the course of disease, appear to be similar
to those in the normative population. Although studies of endothelial
dysfunction in children with a history of KD and normal coronary
dimensions have produced conflicting results, reassuring data suggest
that the standardized mortality ratio among adults in Japan who had
KD in childhood without aneurysms is indistinguishable from that of
the general population. All children with a history of KD should be
counseled regarding a heart-­healthy diet, adequate amounts of exercise, tobacco avoidance, and intermittent lipid monitoring. Among
children with coronary aneurysms, the AHA recommends treatment
thresholds for risk factors for atherosclerotic heart disease that are
lower than those for the normal population.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Laura Cannon and Eveline Y. Wu
Sarcoidosis is a rare multisystem granulomatous disease of unknown
etiology. There appears to be two distinct, age-­dependent patterns of
disease among children with sarcoidosis. The clinical features in older
children are similar to those in adults (pediatric-­onset adult sarcoidosis), with frequent systemic features (fever, weight loss, malaise), pulmonary involvement, and lymphadenopathy. In contrast, early-­onset
sarcoidosis manifesting in children <4 years of age is characterized by
the triad of rash, uveitis, and polyarthritis.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of sarcoidosis remains obscure but likely results from
exposure of a genetically susceptible individual to one or more unidentified antigens. This exposure initiates an exaggerated immunologic
response that ultimately leads to the formation of granulomas. The
human major histocompatibility complex is located on chromosome
6, and specific human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I and class II
alleles are associated with disease phenotype. Genetic polymorphisms
involving various cytokines and chemokines may also have a role in
development of sarcoidosis. Familial clustering supports the contribution of genetic factors to sarcoidosis susceptibility. Environmental
and occupational exposures are also associated with disease risk. There
are positive associations between sarcoidosis and agricultural employment, occupational exposure to insecticides, and moldy environments
typically associated with microbial bioaerosols.
Blau syndrome is an autosomal dominant, familial form of sarcoidosis and is typified by the early onset of granulomatous inflammation
involving the skin, eyes, and joints. Pathogenic genetic variants in the
CARD15/NOD2 gene have been found in affected family members
and appear to be associated with development of sarcoidosis. Similar
genetic variants have been found in individuals with a sporadic early-­
onset sarcoidosis (EOS) (rash, uveitis, arthritis), suggesting that this
nonfamilial form and Blau syndrome are genetically and phenotypically identical (see Chapter 204).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

A nationwide patient registry of childhood sarcoidosis in Denmark
estimated the annual incidence to be 0.22-­0.27 per 100,000 children.
The incidence increases with age, and peak onset occurs at 20-­39 years.
The most common age of reported childhood cases is 13-­15 years. In
comparison, an international registry and Spanish cohort of Blau syndrome and EOS reported the mean age of disease onset as 30 months
and 36 months, respectively. There is no clear gender predilection in
any form of childhood sarcoidosis. The majority of U.S. childhood sarcoidosis cases are reported in the southeastern and southcentral states.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Noncaseating, epithelioid granulomatous lesions are a cardinal feature
of sarcoidosis. Activated macrophages, epithelioid cells, and multinucleated giant cells, as well as CD4+ T lymphocytes, accumulate and
become tightly packed in the center of the granuloma. The causative
agent that initiates this inflammatory process is unknown. The periphery of the granuloma contains a loose collection of monocytes, CD4+
and CD8+ T lymphocytes, and fibroblasts. The interaction between the
macrophages and CD4+ T lymphocytes is important in the formation
and maintenance of the granuloma. The activated macrophages secrete
high levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α and other proinflammatory mediators. The CD4+ T lymphocytes differentiate into type 1 helper
T cells and release interleukin (IL)-­2 and interferon (IFN)-­γ, promoting proliferation of lymphocytes. Granulomas may heal or resolve with
complete preservation of the parenchyma. In approximately 20% of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 209 u Sarcoidosis 1549
lesions, the fibroblasts in the periphery proliferate and produce fibrotic
scar tissue, leading to significant and irreversible organ dysfunction.
The sarcoid macrophage is able to produce and secrete
1,25-­(OH)2-­vitamin D, or calcitriol, an active form of vitamin D typically produced in the kidneys. The hormone’s natural functions are
to increase intestinal absorption of calcium and bone resorption and
decrease renal excretion of calcium and phosphate. An excess of calcitriol may result in hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria in patients with
sarcoidosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Sarcoidosis is a multisystem disease, and granulomatous lesions may
occur in any organ of the body. The clinical manifestations depend
on the extent and degree of granulomatous inflammation and are
extremely variable. Children may present with nonspecific symptoms,
such as fever, weight loss, and general malaise. In adults and older children, pulmonary involvement is most frequent, with infiltration of the
thoracic lymph nodes and lung parenchyma. Isolated bilateral hilar
adenopathy on chest radiograph is the most common finding (Fig.
209.1), but parenchymal infiltrates and miliary nodules may also be
seen (Figs. 209.2, 209.3, and 209.4). Patients with lung involvement are
usually found to have restrictive changes on pulmonary function testing. Symptoms of pulmonary disease are seldom severe and generally
consist of a dry, persistent cough.
Extrathoracic lymphadenopathy and infiltration of the liver, spleen,
and bone marrow also occur often (Table 209.1). Infiltration of the liver
and spleen typically leads to isolated hepatomegaly and splenomegaly,
respectively, but actual organ dysfunction is rare. Cutaneous disease,
such as plaques, nodules, erythema nodosum in acute disease, or lupus
pernio in chronic sarcoidosis, appears in one quarter of cases and is usually present at onset. Red-­brown to purple maculopapular lesions <1
cm on the face, neck, upper back, and extremities are the most common skin finding (Fig. 209.5). Papulonodular granulomatous lesions
have been reported to develop in cosmetic (eyebrows) and decorative
tattoos (tattoo sarcoidosis). Ocular involvement is frequent and has
variable manifestations, including anterior or posterior uveitis, conjunctival granulomas, eyelid inflammation, and orbital or lacrimal gland
infiltration. The arthritis in sarcoidosis can be confused with juvenile
idiopathic arthritis (JIA). Central nervous system (CNS) involvement
is rare in early childhood but may manifest as seizures, cranial nerve
involvement, intracranial mass lesions, and hypothalamic dysfunction
(Fig. 209.6). Kidney disease occurs infrequently in children but typically

Fig. 209.2 Sarcoidosis. Chest radiograph of 10-­year-­old girl showing

widely disseminated peribronchial infiltrates, multiple small nodular
densities, hyperaeration of the lungs, and hilar lymphadenopathy.

A

B
Fig. 209.3 Typical features of lung sarcoidosis on CT. A, Usual peri-

lymphatic distribution of micronodules with fissural spreading. B, Typical nodules with irregular margins and satellite micronodules known as
the galaxy sign. (From Valerye D, Prasse A, Nunes H, et al. Sarcoidosis.
Lancet. 2014;383:1155–1167, Fig. 2, p. 1158.)

Fig. 209.1 Sarcoidosis. Chest radiograph demonstrating stage I dis-

ease with enlarged mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes. (From Iannuzzi
M. Sarcoidosis. In Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman’s Cecil Medicine, 24th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012: Fig. 95-­1, p. 582.)

manifests as renal insufficiency, proteinuria, transient pyuria, or microscopic hematuria caused by early monocellular infiltration or granuloma
formation in kidney tissue. Only a small fraction of children have hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria. Sarcoid granulomas can also infiltrate the
heart and lead to cardiac arrhythmias and, rarely, sudden death. Other

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1550 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 209.1  Sarcoidosis: Extrapulmonary Localizations
SYMPTOMS
Skin

Papules, nodules, plaques, scar sarcoidosis,
lupus pernio, subcutaneous sarcoidosis,
granuloma annulare, lip granulomas, vitiligo,
erythema nodosum, Lofgren syndrome*

Peripheral
lymphadenopathy

Mostly cervical or supraclavicular; inguinal,
axillary, epitrochlear, or submandibular lymph
node sites also possible; painless and mobile

Eye

Anterior, intermediate, or posterior uveitis;
retinal vascular change; conjunctival nodules;
lacrimal gland enlargement

Liver

Often symptom free; abnormal liver function
tests in 20–30% of patients; hepatomegaly;
rarely hepatic insufficiency, chronic intrahepatic
cholestasis, or portal hypertension

Spleen

Splenomegaly; rarely, pain or pancytopenia;
very rarely, splenic rupture

Heart

Atrioventricular or bundle branch block; ventricular
tachycardia or fibrillation; congestive heart
failure; pericarditis; impairment of sympathetic
nerve activity; sudden death

rare sites of disease involvement include blood vessels of any size, the
gastrointestinal tract, parotid gland, muscles, bones, and testes.
In contrast to the variable clinical presentation of sarcoidosis in
older children, Blau syndrome and EOS (NOD2-­associated sarcoidosis) classically manifest as the triad of uveitis, arthritis, and rash (see
Chapter 204). Infantile-­onset panniculitis with uveitis and systemic granulomatosis is an uncommon manifestation of sarcoidosis.

Nervous system

Facial nerve palsy, optic neuritis, leptomeningitis,
diabetes insipidus, hypopituitarism, seizures,
cognitive dysfunction, deficits, hydrocephalus,
psychiatric manifestations, spinal cord disease,
polyneuropathy, small-­fiber neuropathy

Kidney

Rare symptoms; increased creatinine
sometimes associated with hypercalcemia;
nephrocalcinosis; kidney stones

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Parotitis

Symmetric parotid swelling; Heerfordt syndrome
when associated with uveitis, fever, and facial palsy

Nose

Nasal stuffiness, nasal bleeding, crusting, anosmia

Larynx

Hoarseness, breathlessness, stridor, dysphagia

Bones

Often asymptomatic; hands and feet classically most
involved, also large bones and axial skeleton

Skeletal
muscles

Proximal muscle weakness, amyotrophy,
myalgia, intramuscular nodules

Genitourinary tract

All organs can be involved, including breast,
uterus, epididymis, and testicle

Gastrointestinal
tract

Most often symptom free, but the esophagus,
stomach, small intestine, and colon can be
involved

Fig. 209.4 Confluent parenchymal lung nodules and mediastinal and

bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy with increased FDG uptake in a female
with biopsy-­proven sarcoidosis. PET/CT shows confluent parenchymal
lung nodules (yellow arrow) and mediastinal and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy (blue arrow). These abnormalities show increased FDG uptake on fused PET/CT. (Modified from Prabhakar HB, Rabinowitz CB,
Gibbons FK, et al. Imaging features of sarcoidosis on MDCT, FDG PET,
and PET/CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2008;190:S1–S6, Fig. 6, p. S4.)

There is no single standard laboratory test diagnostic of sarcoidosis.
Anemia, leukopenia, and eosinophilia may be seen. Other nonspecific
findings include hypergammaglobulinemia and elevations in acute-­
phase reactants, including ESR and CRP. Hypercalcemia and/or hypercalciuria occur in only a small proportion of children with sarcoidosis.
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme (ACE) is produced by the epithelioid
cells of the granuloma, and its serum value may be elevated, but this
finding lacks diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. ACE levels are estimated to be elevated in >50% of children with sarcoidosis. In addition,
ACE values may be difficult to interpret because reference values for
serum ACE are age dependent. Fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography (FDG-­PET) (with either CT or MRI) can help identify nonpulmonary (lymph nodes, bone, cardiac, liver, spleen) sites for
a diagnostic evaluation or biopsy (Fig. 209.7).

DIAGNOSIS

Definitive diagnosis ultimately requires demonstration of the characteristic noncaseating granulomatous lesions in a biopsy specimen (usually taken from the most readily available affected organ) and exclusion
of other known causes of granulomatous inflammation. Skin and transbronchial lung biopsies have higher yield, greater specificity, and fewer
associated adverse events than biopsy of mediastinal lymph nodes or
liver. Additional diagnostic testing includes chest radiography, pulmonary function testing with measurement of diffusion capacity, hepatic
enzyme measurements, and renal function assessment. Ophthalmologic slit-­lamp examination is essential because ocular inflammation is
frequently present and may be asymptomatic in sarcoidosis, and vision
loss is a sequela of untreated disease.
Bronchoalveolar lavage may be used to assess for disease activity, and
the fluid typically reveals an excess of lymphocytes with an increased
CD4+/CD8+ ratio of 2-­13:1. In addition to flexible bronchoscopy with
transbronchial biopsy, endosonographic-­
guided intrathoracic node
aspiration has been valuable in obtaining tissue to assess for noncaseating granulomas.

*Lofgren syndrome: acute arthritis, erythema nodosum, and hilar adenopathy.
Adapted from Valerye D, Prasse A, Nunes H, et al. Sarcoidosis. Lancet. 2014;383:1155–
1167, Table 1.

Fig. 209.5 Sarcoidosis nodules on the face. (From Shah BR, Laude TA.
Atlas of Pediatric Clinical Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 209 u Sarcoidosis 1551
Table 209.2  Granulomatous Disorders with Head and
Neck Manifestations
AUTOIMMUNE
GPA (Wegener granulomatosis)
Churg-­Strauss syndrome
Behçet disease
INFECTIOUS
Tuberculosis
Cat-­scratch fever
Syphilis
Leprosy
Fungal (blastomycosis, histoplasmosis)
Actinomycosis
IDIOPATHIC/INFLAMMATION
Sarcoidosis
Orofacial granulomatosis (Melkersson-­Rosenthal syndrome)
HEREDITARY
CGD

Fig. 209.6 Neurologic involvement in sarcoidosis. Typical involvement of hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and optic chiasm seen on a sagittal gadolinium-­enhanced T1-­weighted sequence MRI (small arrow).
Abnormal nodular enhancement of the fourth ventricle is seen (large
arrow). (Modified from Valerye D, Prasse A, Nunes H, et al. Sarcoidosis.
Lancet. 2014;383:1155–1167, Fig. 3D, p. 1160.)

OTHER DISEASES WITH SECONDARY GRANULOMATOUS
MANIFESTATIONS
Relapsing polychondritis
LCH
SLE
Rheumatoid arthritis
Chemical exposure (e.g., cocaine, talc, beryllium)
CGD, chronic granulomatous disease; GPA, Granulomatosis with polyangiitis;
LCH, Langerhans cell histiocytosis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Modified from Nwawka OK, Nadgir R, Fujita A, Sakai O. Granulomatous disease in the
head and neck: Developing a differential diagnosis. RadioGraphics. 2014;34(5):1240–
1256, Table 1.

lesions involving the head, neck, and orofacial regions are noted in Table
209.2. Immunodeficiencies that may manifest with granulomatous lesions
include common variable immunodeficiency, selective IgA deficiency,
chronic granulomatous disease, ataxia telangiectasia, and severe combined
immunodeficiency. Granulomas of the lung, skin, or lymph nodes have
been reported in patients treated with anti-­TNF agents. Lymphoma should
be ruled out in cases of hilar or other lymphadenopathy. Sarcoid arthritis
may mimic JIA. Evaluation for endocrine disorders is needed in the setting
of hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria.

TREATMENT

Fig. 209.7 Palpable submental lymph node with FDG uptake. Axial

fused contrast-­enhanced PET/CT image shows enlarged left submental
lymph node (arrow) with increased FDG uptake. Lesion was biopsied
and was consistent with sarcoidosis. (From Prabhakar HB, Rabinowitz
CB, Gibbons FK, et al. Imaging features of sarcoidosis on MDCT, FDG
PET, and PET/CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2008;190:S1–S6, Fig. 5, p. S3.)

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Because of its protean manifestations, the differential diagnosis of sarcoidosis is extremely broad and depends largely on the initial clinical manifestations. Granulomatous infections, including tuberculosis, cryptococcosis,
pulmonary mycoses (histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis),
brucellosis, tularemia, and toxoplasmosis, must be excluded. Other causes
of granulomatous inflammation are granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis), hypersensitivity pneumonia, chronic
berylliosis, and other occupational exposures to metals. Localized granulomatous lesions of the head and neck may be due to orofacial granulomatosis (Melkersson-­
Rosenthal syndrome). Other granulomatous

Treatment should be based on disease severity and the number and
type of organs involved. Corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment
for most acute and chronic disease manifestations. The optimal dose
and duration of corticosteroid therapy in children have not been established. Induction treatment typically begins with oral prednisone or
prednisolone (1-­2 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg daily) for 8-­12 weeks until
manifestations improve. Corticosteroid dosage is then gradually
decreased over 6-­12 months to the minimal effective maintenance
dose (e.g., 5-­10 mg/day) that controls symptoms, or discontinued if
symptoms resolve. Methotrexate or leflunomide may be effective as a
corticosteroid-­sparing agent. On the basis of the role of TNF-­α in the
formation of granulomas, there is rationale for the use of TNF-­α antagonists. Results of small clinical trials showed modest effects with infliximab and adalimumab treatment of selected disease manifestations
(CNS, lupus pernio, pulmonary, ocular), whereas etanercept does not
appear to be particularly effective. Other therapeutics used for sarcoidosis manifestations include topical corticosteroids (eye), inhaled corticosteroids (lung), azathioprine (CNS), cyclophosphamide (cardiac,
CNS), hydroxychloroquine (skin), mycophenolate mofetil (CNS, skin),
thalidomide or its analogs (skin), and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs (joints).

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of childhood sarcoidosis is not well defined. The disease may be self-­limited with complete recovery or may persist with
a progressive or relapsing course. Outcome is worse in the setting of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1552 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
multiorgan or CNS involvement. Most children requiring treatment
experience considerable improvement with corticosteroids, although
a significant number have morbid sequelae, mainly involving the lungs
and eyes. Children with early-­onset sarcoidosis have a poorer prognosis and generally experience a more chronic, progressive disease course.
The greatest morbidity is associated with ocular involvement, including cataract formation, development of synechiae, and loss of visual
acuity or blindness. Long-­term systemic treatment may be required for
the eye disease. Progressive polyarthritis may result in joint destruction. The overall mortality rate in older children with sarcoidosis is low.
Serial pulmonary function tests and chest radiographs are useful in
following the course of lung involvement. Monitoring for other organ
involvement should also include electrocardiogram with consideration
of an echocardiogram, urinalysis, renal function tests, and measurements of hepatic enzymes and serum calcium. Other potential indicators of disease activity include inflammatory markers and serum
ACE, although changes in ACE level do not always correlate with other
indicators of disease status. Given the frequency of asymptomatic eye
disease and the ocular morbidity associated with pediatric sarcoidosis,
all patients should have an ophthalmologic examination at presentation with monitoring at regular intervals, perhaps every 3-­6 months, as
recommended in children with JIA.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 210

Vasculitis Syndromes
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and
Stacy P. Ardoin

INTRODUCTION

Childhood vasculitis encompasses a broad spectrum of diseases that
share inflammation of the blood vessels as the central pathophysiology.
The pathogenesis of the vasculitides is generally idiopathic. Some forms
of vasculitis are associated with infectious agents and medications,
whereas others may occur in the setting of preexisting autoimmune
or autoinflammatory diseases. The pattern of vessel injury provides
insight into the form of vasculitis and serves as a framework to delineate
the different vasculitic syndromes. The distribution of vascular injury
includes small vessels (capillaries, arterioles, and postcapillary venules),
medium vessels (renal arteries, mesenteric vasculature, and coronary
arteries), and large vessels (the aorta and its proximal branches) (Fig.
210.1). Additionally, some forms of small vessel vasculitis are characterized by the presence of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
(ANCAs), whereas others are associated with immune complex deposition in affected tissues. A combination of clinical features, histologic
appearance of involved vessels, and laboratory data is used to classify
vasculitis (Tables 210.1-­210.4). A nomenclature system from the 2012
International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference (see Table 210.1) has
proposed using the pathologic diagnosis rather than eponyms for vasculitis nomenclature. For example, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura would
be referred to as IgA vasculitis. Additionally, the classification criteria endorsed by the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR),
Pediatric Rheumatology International Trial Organization (PRINTO),
and Pediatric Rheumatology European Society (PRES) have been validated in childhood vasculitis (see Table 210.2).

Immune Complex Small Vessel Vasculitis
Cryoglobulinemic Vasculitis
IgA Vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein)
Hypocomplementemic Urticarial Vasculitis
(Anti-C1q Vasculitis)
Medium Vessel Vasculitis
Polyarteritis Nodosa
Kawasaki Disease

Anti-GBM Disease

ANCA-Associated Small Vessel Vasculitis
Microscopic Polyangiitis
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis
(Churg-Strauss)

Large Vessel Vasculitis
Takayasu Arteritis
Giant Cell Arteritis

Fig. 210.1 Distribution of vessel involvement in large, medium, and

small vessel vasculitis. There is substantial overlap with respect to arterial involvement, and all three major categories of vasculitis can affect
any size artery. Large vessel vasculitis affects large arteries more often
than other vasculitides. Medium vessel vasculitis predominantly affects
medium arteries. Small vessel vasculitis predominantly affects small
vessels, but medium arteries and veins may be affected, although immune complex small vessel vasculitis rarely affects arteries. Not shown
is variable vessel vasculitis, which can affect any type of vessel, from
aorta to veins. The diagram depicts (from left to right) aorta, large artery, medium artery, small artery/arteriole, capillary, venule, and vein.
ANCA, Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; GBM, glomerular basement membrane. (From Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon PA, et al. 2012
Revised International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference Nomenclature
of Vasculitides. Arthritis Rheum. 2013;65:1–11, Fig. 2, p. 4.)

Childhood vasculitis varies from a relatively benign and self-­limited
disease such as Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (IgA vasculitis) to catastrophic disease with end-­organ damage, as seen in granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis). Vasculitis generally
manifests as a heterogeneous multisystem disease. Although some features, such as purpura, are easily identifiable, others, such as hypertension
secondary to renal artery stenosis or glomerulonephritis, can be subtler.
Ultimately, the key to recognizing vasculitis relies heavily on pattern recognition. Demonstration of vessel injury and inflammation on biopsy or
vascular imaging is required to confirm a diagnosis of vasculitis.
Clues to the diagnosis of a vasculitis disorder are noted in Table
210.3, and a broad diagnostic approach is noted in Table 210.5.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

210.1 Henoch-­Schönlein Purpura
(IgA Vasculitis)
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and Stacy P. Ardoin
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (HSP) is the most common vasculitis
of childhood and is characterized by leukocytoclastic vasculitis and
immunoglobulin A deposition in the small vessels in the skin, joints,
gastrointestinal tract, and kidney. HSP is also referred to as IgA vasculitis, based on the presence of vasculitis with predominance of IgA
deposits affecting small vessels.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

1553

Table 210.1  2012 Chapel Hill Consensus Conference on Nomenclature of Systemic Vasculitis
LARGE VESSEL VASCULITIS (LVV)*
Giant cell (temporal) arteritis (GCA)

Takayasu arteritis (TAK)
MEDIUM VESSEL VASCULITIS (MVV)*
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)
Kawasaki disease (KD)

SMALL VESSEL VASCULITIS (SVV)*
ANCA-­associated vasculitis (AAV)
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener)
(GPA)
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(Churg-­Strauss) (EGPA)
Microscopic polyangiitis (MPA)

Immune Complex Small Vessel Vasculitis
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein) (IgAV)
Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis (CPV)
Anti–glomerular basement membrane
(anti-­GBM) disease
Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
VARIABLE VESSEL VASCULITIS (VVV)
Behçet disease (BD)
Cogan syndrome (CS)
SINGLE-­ORGAN VASCULITIS (SOV)
Cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis
Cutaneous arteritis
Primary central nervous system vasculitis
Isolated aortitis
Others

Granulomatous arteritis of the aorta and its major branches with a predilection for the extracranial
branches of the carotid artery
Often involves the temporal artery
Usually occurs in patients older than 50 yr of age and often associated with polymyalgia rheumatica†
Granulomatous inflammation of the aorta and its major branches
Usually occurs in patients much younger than 50 yr of age
Necrotizing inflammation of medium-­sized or small arteries without glomerulonephritis or vasculitis
in arterioles, capillaries, or venules and not associated with ANCAs
Arteritis involving large, medium-­sized, and small arteries associated with mucocutaneous
lymph node syndrome
Coronary arteries are often involved
Aorta and veins may be affected
Usually occurs in children

Granulomatous inflammation involving the respiratory tract associated with necrotizing vasculitis
affecting small-­to medium-­sized vessels
Necrotizing glomerulonephritis is common
Eosinophilic and granulomatous inflammation involving the respiratory tract accompanied by
necrotizing vasculitis affecting small to medium-­sized vessels associated with asthma and eosinophilia
Necrotizing vasculitis with few or no immune deposits, affecting small vessels
Necrotizing arteritis involving small and medium-­sized arteries may be present
Necrotizing glomerulonephritis is common
Pulmonary capillaritis often occurs
Vasculitis characterized by immunoglobin A–dominant immune deposits affecting small vessels
Typically involves skin, gut, and glomeruli. Arthralgias and arthritis are common
Vasculitis with cryoglobulin immune deposits affecting small vessels associated with cryoglobulinemia
Skin and glomeruli are often involved
Vasculitis affecting pulmonary and renal capillaries with deposition of anti–glomerular basement
membrane antibodies
Associated with anti-­Clq antibodies
Affects kidney, joints, lungs, and eyes
Affects arteries and veins with thrombosis, arteritis, and arterial aneurysms
Oral and/or genital aphthous ulcers and can involve skin, eyes, joints, and central nervous system
Affects small, medium, or large arteries; aortitis, aortic, and mitral valvulitis
Vasculitis
Isolated cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis without systemic vasculitis or glomerulonephritis
Cutaneous vasculitis not associated with systemic vasculitis
CNS vasculitis not associated with systemic vasculitis
Aortitis not associated with systemic vasculitis

VASCULITIS ASSOCIATED WITH SYSTEMIC DISEASE
Lupus vasculitis
Rheumatoid vasculitis
Sarcoid vasculitis
Others
VASCULITIS ASSOCIATED WITH PROBABLE ETIOLOGY
Hepatitis C–associated cryoglobulinemia vasculitis
Hepatitis B–associated vasculitis
Syphilis-­associated vasculitis
Drug-­associated immune complex vasculitis
Drug-­associated ANCA associated vasculitis
Cancer-­associated vasculitis
Others
*Large vessels: aorta and its larger branches directed toward major anatomic regions; medium vessels: renal, hepatic, coronary, and mesenteric arteries; small vessels: venules,
capillaries, arterioles, and intraparenchymal distal arteries and arterioles.
†Essential components are in normal type; italicized type represents usual, but not essential, components.

Adapted from Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon P, et al. Arthritis Rheum. 2013;65(1):1–11.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1554 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 210.2  EULAR/PRES Classification of Childhood
Vasculitis
I. PREDOMINANTLY LARGE-­SIZED VESSEL VASCULITIS
• Takayasu arteritis
II. PREDOMINANTLY MEDIUM-­SIZED VESSEL VASCULITIS
• Childhood polyarteritis nodosa
• Cutaneous polyarteritis
• Kawasaki disease
III. PREDOMINANTLY SMALL-­SIZED VESSEL VASCULITIS
A. Granulomatous
• Wegener granulomatosis*
• Churg-­Strauss syndrome*
B. Nongranulomatous
• Microscopic polyangiitis
• Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
• Isolated cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis
• Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
IV. OTHER VASCULITIDES
• Behçet disease
• Vasculitis secondary to infection (including hepatitis B–associated
polyarteritis nodosa), malignancies, and drugs (including
hypersensitivity vasculitis)
• Vasculitis associated with connective tissue diseases
• Isolated vasculitis of the central nervous system
• Cogan syndrome
• Unclassified
*This classification predated the removal of eponyms and histopathologic
subclassification by the CHCC 2012.
From Ozen S, Ruperto N, Dillon MJ, Bagga A, Barron K, Davin JC, et al. EULAR/PReS
endorsed consensus criteria for the classification of childhood vasculitides. Ann Rheum
Dis. 2006;65:936–941.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

HSP occurs worldwide and affects all ethnic groups. The incidence
is estimated at 14-­20 per 100,000 children per year and affects males
more than females, with a 1.2-­1.8:1 male/female ratio. Approximately
90% of HSP cases occur in children, usually between ages 3 and 10
years. HSP is distinctly less common in adults, who often have severe
and chronic complications. HSP is more common in the winter and
spring and is unusual in summer months. Many cases of HSP follow a
documented upper respiratory infection.

PATHOLOGY

Skin biopsies demonstrate leukocytoclastic vasculitis of the dermal capillaries and postcapillary venules. The inflammatory infiltrate
includes neutrophils and monocytes. Renal histopathology typically
shows endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis, ranging from a
focal segmental process to extensive crescentic involvement. In all tissues, immunofluorescence identifies IgA deposition in walls of small
vessels (Fig. 210.2), accompanied to a lesser extent by deposition of C3,
fibrin, and IgM.

PATHOGENESIS

The exact pathogenesis of HSP remains unknown. Given the seasonality of HSP and the frequency of preceding upper respiratory infections,
infectious triggers such as group A β-­hemolytic streptococcus, Staphylococcus aureus, Mycoplasma, and adenovirus have been suspected.
The common finding of deposition of IgA, specifically IgA1, suggests
that HSP is a disease mediated by IgA and IgA immune complexes.
HSP occasionally clusters in families, suggesting a genetic component.
HLA-­B34 and HLA-­DRB1*01 alleles have been linked to HSP nephritis. Patients with familial Mediterranean fever, hereditary periodic
fever syndromes, and complement deficiencies are at increased risk for
developing HSP, suggesting that genetically determined immune dysregulation may contribute.

Table 210.3  Features that Suggest a Vasculitic Syndrome
CLINICAL FEATURES
Fever, weight loss, fatigue of unknown origin
Skin lesions (palpable purpura, fixed urticaria, livedo reticularis,
nodules, ulcers)
Neurologic lesions (headache, mononeuritis multiplex, focal central
nervous system lesions)
Arthralgia or arthritis, myalgia, or myositis, serositis
Hypertension, hematuria, renal failure
Pulmonary infiltrates or hemorrhage
Myocardial ischemia, arrhythmias
LABORATORY FEATURES
Increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-­reactive protein level
Leukocytosis, anemia, thrombocytosis
Eosinophilia
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
Elevated factor VIII–related antigen (von Willebrand factor)
Cryoglobulinemia
Circulating immune complexes
Hematuria
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, Wedderburn LR. Textbook of Pediatric
Rheumatology, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2016.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The hallmark of HSP is its rash: palpable purpura starting as pink macules or wheals and developing into petechiae, raised purpura, or larger
ecchymoses. Occasionally, bullae and ulcerations develop. The skin
lesions are usually symmetric and occur in gravity-­dependent areas
(lower extremities), the extensor aspect of the upper extremities, or
on pressure points (buttocks) (Figs. 210.2 and 210.3). The skin lesions
often evolve in groups, typically lasting 3-­10 days, and may recur up to
4 months after initial presentation. Subcutaneous edema localized to
the dorsa of the hands and feet, periorbital area, lips, scrotum, or scalp
is also common.
Musculoskeletal involvement, including arthritis and arthralgias, is
common, occurring in up to 75% of children with HSP. The arthritis
tends to be self-­limited and oligoarticular, with a predilection for large
joints such as the knees and ankles, and does not lead to deformities.
Periarticular swelling and tenderness without erythema or effusions are
common. The arthritis usually resolves within 2 weeks but can recur.
Gastrointestinal (GI) manifestations occur in up to 80% of children
with HSP and include abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, paralytic
ileus, and melena. Intussusception, mesenteric ischemia, and intestinal
perforation are rare but serious complications. Endoscopic evaluation
is usually not needed but may identify vasculitis of the intestinal tract.
Renal involvement occurs in up to 30% of children with HSP, manifesting as microscopic hematuria, proteinuria, hypertension, frank
nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and acute or chronic renal failure.
However, progression to end-­stage renal disease (ESRD) is uncommon
in children (1–2%) (see Chapter 560.3). Renal manifestations can be
delayed for several months after the initial illness, so close follow-­up
with serial urinalyses and blood pressure monitoring is necessary.
Neurologic manifestations of HSP, caused by hypertension (posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome) or central nervous system
(CNS) vasculitis, may also occur, including intracerebral hemorrhage, seizures, headaches, depressed level of consciousness, cranial or
peripheral neuropathies, and behavior changes. Other, less common
potential manifestations of HSP are inflammatory eye disease, carditis,
pulmonary hemorrhage, orchitis, and testicular torsion.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of HSP is clinical and often straightforward when the
typical rash is present. However, in at least 25% of cases, the rash
appears after other manifestations, making early diagnosis challenging.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

1555

Table 210.4  Clinicopathologic Characteristics of Vasculitides in Childhood
SYNDROME

FREQUENCY

VESSELS AFFECTED

CHARACTERISTIC PATHOLOGY

Rare

Medium-­size and small muscular
arteries and sometimes arterioles

Common

Coronary and other muscular
arteries

Focal segmental (often near bifurcations);
fibrinoid necrosis; gastrointestinal, renal
microaneurysms; lesions at various
stages of evolution
Thrombosis, fibrosis, aneurysms, especially
of coronary vessels

Common

Arterioles and venules, often small
arteries and veins
Arterioles and venules

Leukocytoclasis; mixed cells, eosinophils,
IgA deposits in affected vessels
Leukocytoclastic or lymphocytic, varying
eosinophils, occasionally granulomatous;
widespread lesions at same stage of
evolution

Rare

Small arteries and veins, occasionally
larger vessels

Rare

Small arteries and veins, often
arterioles and venules

Upper and lower respiratory tract,
necrotizing granulomata
glomerulo­nephritis
Necrotizing extravascular granulomata;
lung involvement; eosinophilia

GIANT CELL ARTERITIS
Takayasu arteries

Uncommon

Large arteries

Temporal arteritis

Rare

Medium-­size and large arteries

POLYARTERITIS
Polyarteritis nodosa

Kawasaki disease
LEUKOCYTOCLASTIC VASCULITIS
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (IgA
vasculitis)
Hypersensitivity angiitis

GRANULOMATOUS VASCULITIS
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(Wegener granulomatosis)
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (Churg-­Strauss syndrome)

Rare

Granulomatous inflammation, giant cells;
aneurysms, dissection
Granulomatous inflammation, giant cell
arteries

Adapted from Cassidy JT, Petty RE. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011.

Table 210.6 summarizes the EULAR/PRES classification criteria for
HSP. Most patients are afebrile.
The differential diagnosis for HSP depends on specific organ
involvement, but usually includes other small vessel leukocytoclastic
vasculitides (Table 210.7), infections, acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, coagulopathies, and other
acute intraabdominal processes. Additional disorders in the differential include papular-­purpuric glove and sock syndrome, systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), other vasculitides (urticarial, hypersensitivity),
and thrombocytopenia.
Infantile acute hemorrhagic edema (AHE), an isolated cutaneous
leukocytoclastic vasculitis that affects infants <2 years of age, resembles
HSP clinically. AHE manifests as fever; tender edema of the face, scrotum, hands, and feet; and ecchymosis (usually larger than the purpura
of HSP) on the face and extremities (Fig. 210.4). The trunk is spared,
but petechiae may be seen in mucous membranes. The patient usually appears well except for the rash. The platelet count is normal or
elevated, and the urinalysis results are normal. The younger age, nature
of the lesions, absence of other organ involvement, and a biopsy may
help distinguish infantile AHE from HSP.

in atypical or severe cases, and characteristically show leukocytoclastic
vasculitis with IgA deposition in affected tissues.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

COMPLICATIONS

No laboratory finding is diagnostic of HSP. Common but nonspecific
findings include leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, mild anemia, and elevations of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-­reactive protein
(CRP). The platelet count is normal in HSP. Occult blood is frequently
found in stool specimens. Serum albumin levels may be low because
of renal or intestinal protein loss. Autoantibody testing such as antinuclear antibody (ANA) is not useful diagnostically except to exclude
other diseases. Serum IgA values are often elevated but are not routinely measured. Assessment of renal involvement with blood pressure,
urinalysis, and serum creatinine is necessary.
Ultrasound is often used in the setting of GI complaints to look for
bowel wall edema or the rare occurrence of an associated intussusception. Barium enema can also be used to both diagnose and treat intussusception. Although often unnecessary in typical HSP, biopsies of skin
and kidney can provide important diagnostic information, particularly

TREATMENT

Treatment for mild and self-­
limited HSP is supportive, with an
emphasis on ensuring adequate hydration, nutrition, and analgesia.
Corticosteroids are most often used to treat significant GI involvement or other life-­threatening manifestations. Glucocorticoids such
as oral prednisone (1-­2 mg/kg/day), or in severe cases, intravenous
(IV) methylprednisolone for 1-­2 weeks, followed by taper, reduce
abdominal and joint pain but do not alter the overall prognosis. Corticosteroids are not routinely recommended for prevention of complications such as nephritis. Rapid tapering of corticosteroids may lead
to a flare of HSP symptoms. Although few data are available to demonstrate efficacy, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and plasma
exchange are sometimes used for severe disease. In some patients,
chronic HSP renal disease is managed with a variety of immunosuppressants, including azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine,
and mycophenolate mofetil. ESRD develops in <5% of children with
HSP nephritis.
Acutely, serious GI involvement, including intussusception and intestinal perforation, imparts significant morbidity and mortality. Renal
disease is the major long-­term complication, occurring in 1–2% of
children with HSP. Renal disease can develop up to 6 months after
diagnosis but rarely does so if the initial urinalysis findings are normal.
Therefore, it is recommended that children with HSP undergo serial
monitoring of blood pressure and urinalysis for at least 6 months after
diagnosis to monitor for development of nephritis.

PROGNOSIS

Overall, the prognosis for childhood HSP is excellent, and most
children experience an acute, self-­limited course lasting on average
4 weeks. However, 15–60% of children with HSP experience one or
more recurrences, typically within 4-­6 months of diagnosis. With each
relapse, symptoms are usually milder than at presentation. Children

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1556 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 210.5  Recommendations on the Diagnosis of Rare Pediatric Systemic Vasculitides
RECOMMENDATION

RECOMMENDATION

1.	In any pediatric patient with ongoing or a history of unexplained
systemic inflammation, the diagnosis of systemic vasculitis should
be considered and referral to a pediatric rheumatologist should
be made, particularly in the presence of unexplained organ
involvement.
2.	Clinical features combined with laboratory evidence of inflammation
that suggest a vasculitic syndrome warranting referral to a pediatric
rheumatologist are included in the following nonexhaustive list:
• Pyrexia of unknown origin
• Vasculitic skin rash
• PNS or CNS involvement
• Unexplained arthritis, myalgia, serositis
• Unexplained pulmonary, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, or renal
disease
3.	When vasculitis is suspected, the diagnosis is often difficult and
differential diagnoses are broad. The general workup for diagnosis
of a specific vasculitic syndrome should include tissue histology,
imaging, and determination of ANCA.
4.	In every patient in whom a specific vasculitic syndrome is suspected,
basic screening investigations, along with blood pressure
measurement, should include:
• Hematology and acute-­phase reactants:
• Full blood count, ESR, CRP, clotting, prothrombotic screen (if
patchy ischemia of digits or skin)
• Peripheral blood smear
• Basic biochemistry:
• Renal function, liver function, CPK, LDH
• Urine dipstick test of urine with UA:UC ratio or UP:UC ratio

• Selective contrast visceral arteriography
• Tissue biopsy (e.g., skin, nasal or sinus, kidney, sural nerve,
lung, liver, gut, temporal artery, brain)
• Nail fold capillaroscopy
• Possible bone/joint involvement: radiograph of suspected sites
• Eye symptoms: ophthalmology screen
• Pulmonary symptoms: V/Q scan
• Renal involvement: Tc-­99m DMSA scan
• Peripheral vascular symptoms: ultrasound scan Doppler of
peripheral arteries
• Neuropathy: nerve conduction studies
• Cerebral involvement: MRI/MRA of brain and cerebral contrast
angiography
• Organ-­specific autoantibodies (e.g., ASCAs, brain/neuronal
specific autoantibodies)
• Cryoglobulins or cryoprecipitants (technical expertise required),
particularly if skin involved predominantly at peripheral sites
• The following may be useful when the differential diagnosis
includes malignancy:
• Lymph node excision biopsy
• Bone marrow analysis
• PET-­CT
• The following may be useful when the differential diagnosis
includes infection:
• Tuberculosis screen
• PCR for viral infection (e.g., CMV, EBV, enterovirus, adenovirus,
VZV, HBV, HCV)
• Serology for HIV, rickettsiae, Borrelia burgdorferi, Mycoplasma
• Viral serology for hepatitis B and C, parvovirus B19
• Cryoglobulins or cryoprecipitants (technical expertise required)
• The following may be useful when the differential diagnosis
includes autoinflammatory syndromes:
• DNA analysis for MEFV (familial Mediterranean fever),
TNFRSF1A (TNF-­α receptor–associated periodic fever syndrome
[TRAPS]), MVK (mevalonate kinase deficiency; previously
referred to as hyper-­IgD syndrome [HIDS]), NLRP3 (cryopyrin-­
associated periodic syndrome [CAPS]), NOD2 (Crohn/Blau/
juvenile sarcoid mutations), ADA2 (deficiency of ADA2), genetic
screening for SAVI (TMEM173) and CANDLE (PSMB8, 4, 9, and
other proteasome genes if available).
6.	In the clinical assessment of suspected systemic vasculitis,
a structured multiorgan assessment should take place.
7.	For suspected systemic vasculitis, the Pediatric Vasculitis Activity Score
(PVAS) may facilitate structured multiorgan assessment. The PVAS can
be found here: http://ard.bmj.com/content/72/10/1628.short
8.	At diagnosis and in ongoing follow-­up of systemic vasculitis, a
PVAS score should be performed to assess disease activity.
9.	At diagnosis and in ongoing follow-­up of systemic vasculitis, a
multiorgan assessment of damage should be undertaken.
10.	There is no currently validated tool to assess pediatric vasculitis
damage. This is an ongoing unmet need. The PVDI, while
unvalidated, can be assessed here: https://ard.bmj.com/content/73/
Suppl_2/696.4

• Infection:

• Routine pediatric infection screen
• Anti–streptolysin O antibody titer (ASOT) and/or anti–DNase b
• VZV antibody status
• Immunologic tests:
• ANA, ENA antibodies, ANCA, antiphospholipid antibodies
• Immunoglobulins IgG/IgA/IgM/IgE
• Complement (C3, C4)
• RF (if nephritis or interstitial lung disease)
• GBM antibody
• Radiologic/other:
• CXR
• Doppler abdominal ultrasound scan
• ECG; echocardiography
• Digital clinical photography of lesions
5.	When considering a specific vasculitic syndrome, depending on
presenting symptoms, tests with specific indications should be
considered:
• The following may be useful if blood pressure abnormalities:
• Four limb blood pressure measurements
• 24-­hr ambulatory blood pressure monitor
• The following may be useful if evidence/suspicion of specific
organ involvement:
• CT (e.g., thorax, abdomen, brain)
• MRI
• MRI/MRA of aorta and major branches

PNS, Peripheral nervous system; PVAS, pediatric vasculitis activity score; PVDI, pediatric vasculitis damage index; CNS, central nervous system; CPK, creatine phosphokinase;
LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; UA:UC, urine albumin to urinary creatinine ratio; UP:UC, urine protein to urinary creatinine ratio; VZV, varicella-zoster virus; CXR, chest x-­ray; ECG,
electrocardiogram; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; V/Q, ventilation/perfusion; DMSA, dimercaptosuccinic acid; ASCA, anti–Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies; SAVI,
STING-­associated vasculitis of infancy; CANDLE, chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis lipodystrophy and elevated temperature.
Modified from de Graeff N, Groot N, Brogan P, et al. European consensus-­based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of rare paediatric vasculitides – the SHARE
initiative. Rheumatology. 2019;58(4):656–671, Table 1.

with a more severe initial course are at higher risk for relapse. The long-­
term prognosis usually depends on the severity and duration of GI or
renal involvement. Chronic renal disease develops in 1–2% of children
with HSP, and <5% of those with HSP nephritis go on to have ESRD.

The risk of HSP recurrence and graft loss after renal transplantation is
estimated at 7.5% after 10 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

1557

Table 210.6  Classification Criteria for Henoch-­Schönlein
Purpura*
EUROPEAN LEAGUE AGAINST RHEUMATISM/PEDIATRIC
RHEUMATOLOGY EUROPEAN SOCIETY CRITERIA†
Palpable purpura (in absence of coagulopathy or thrombocytopenia)
and one or more of the following criteria must be present:
• Abdominal pain (acute, diffuse, colicky pain)
• Arthritis or arthralgia
• Biopsy of affected tissue demonstrating predominant IgA
deposition
• Renal involvement (proteinuria >0.3 g/24 hr), hematuria, or red
cell casts

A

B

Fig. 210.2 Henoch-­Schönlein purpura. A, Typical palpable purpura in
lower extremities. B, Skin biopsy of lesion shows direct immunofluorescence of IgA (arrows) within the walls of dermal capillaries.

*Classification criteria are developed for use in research and are not validated for
clinical diagnosis.
†Developed for use in pediatric populations only.
Adapted from Ozen S, Pistorio A, Iusan SM, et al. EULAR/PRINTO/PRES criteria for
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, childhood polyarteritis nodosa, childhood Wegener
granulomatosis and childhood Takayasu arteritis: Ankara 2008. Part II. Final classification
criteria. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69:798–806.

Table 210.7  Conditions Associated with Leukocytoclastic
Vasculitis
Immunoglobulin (Ig) A vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein)
Hypersensitivity vasculitis
Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
Mixed cryoglobulinemia
Cutaneous polyarteritis
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)–associated small-­vessel
vasculitis*
Goodpasture syndrome
Rheumatic disorders: systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), juvenile
dermatomyositis, mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD),
scleroderma, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)
Mucha-­Habermann disease
Relapsing polychondritis
Köhlmeier-­Degos syndrome
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and
elevated temperature (CANDLE) syndrome
Malignancy-­associated disease
Sweet syndrome
Cronkhite-­Canada syndrome
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
Erythema elevatum diutinum
COVID-­19/MIS-­C
*Leukocytoclastic vasculitis may occur in cutaneous lesions in some patients with
ANCA-­associated vasculitis and collagen vascular diseases.
Modified from Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric
Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Box 33.1, p. 457.

Fig. 210.3 Henoch-­Schönlein purpura. (From Korting GW. Hautkrankheiten bei Kindern und Jungendlichen, 3rd ed. Stuttgart: FK
Schattaur Verlag; 1982.)

210.2 Takayasu Arteritis
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and Stacy P. Ardoin
Takayasu arteritis (TA), also known as pulseless disease, is a chronic
large vessel vasculitis of unknown etiology that predominantly involves
the aorta and its major branches.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although TA occurs worldwide and can affect all ethnic groups, the
disease is most common in those of Asian descent. Age of onset is
typically between 10 and 40 years. Most children are diagnosed as

adolescents, on average at age 13 years. Up to 20% of individuals with
TA are diagnosed before 19 years. Younger children may be affected,
but diagnosis in infancy is rare. TA preferentially affects females, with
a reported 2-­4:1 female/male ratio in children and adolescents and a
9:1 ratio among adults. Occlusive complications are more common in
the United States, Western Europe, and Japan, whereas aneurysms predominate in Southeast Asia and Africa.

PATHOLOGY

TA is characterized by inflammation of the vessel wall, starting in the
vasa vasorum. Involved vessels are infiltrated by T cells, natural killer
cells, plasma cells, and macrophages. Giant cells and granulomatous
inflammation develop in the media. Persistent inflammation damages the elastic lamina and muscular media, leading to blood vessel

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1558 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 210.8  Proposed Classification Criteria for Pediatric-­
Onset Takayasu Arteritis
Angiographic abnormalities (conventional, CT, or magnetic
resonance angiography) of the aorta or its main branches
and at least one of the following criteria:
• Decreased peripheral artery pulse(s) and/or claudication of
extremities
• Blood pressure difference between arms or legs of >10 mm Hg
• Bruits over the aorta and/or its major branches
• Hypertension (defined by childhood normative data)
• Elevated acute-­phase reactant (erythrocyte sedimentation rate or
C-­reactive protein)
Adapted from Ozen S, Pistorio A, Iusan SM, et al. EULAR/PRINTO/PRES criteria for
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, childhood polyarteritis nodosa, childhood Wegener
granulomatosis and childhood Takayasu arteritis: Ankara 2008. Part II. Final classification
criteria. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69:798–806.

valvular insufficiency. Other findings may include pericardial effusion,
pericarditis, pleuritis, splenomegaly, and arthritis.
Supradiaphragmatic (aortic arch) disease often manifests with CNS
(stroke, transient ischemic attack) and cardiac (heart failure, palpitations) symptoms. Infradiaphragmatic (midaortic syndrome) disease
may produce hypertension, abdominal bruits, and pain. Most patients
have involvement in both areas.
Fig. 210.4 Infantile acute hemorrhagic edema. Typical lesions on the

arm of an infant. (From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook
of Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001.)

dilation and the formation of aneurysms. Progressive scarring and intimal proliferation can result in stenotic or occluded vessels. The subclavian, renal, and carotid arteries are the most commonly involved
aortic branches; pulmonary, coronary, and vertebral arteries may also
be affected.

PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of TA remains unknown. The presence of abundant T cells
with a restricted repertoire of T-­cell receptors in TA vascular lesions
points to the importance of cellular immunity and suggests the existence of a specific but unknown aortic tissue antigen. Expression of
interleukin (IL)-­1, IL-­6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α is reported
to be higher in patients with active TA than in patients with inactive TA
and in healthy controls. In some patient populations, IL-­1 genetic polymorphisms are linked to TA. Some individuals with TA have elevated
serum values of antiendothelial antibodies. The increased prevalence
of TA in certain ethnic populations and its occasional occurrence in
monozygotic twins and families suggest a genetic predisposition to the
disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The diagnosis of TA is challenging because early disease manifestations are often nonspecific. As a result, diagnosis can be delayed for
several months, and the time to diagnosis is usually longer in children than in adults. Fever, malaise, weight loss, headache, hypertension, myalgias, arthralgias, dizziness, and abdominal pain are common
early complaints in the prepulseless phase of the disease. Among children, hypertension and headache are particularly common presenting
manifestations and should prompt consideration of TA when present
without alternative explanation. Some individuals with TA report no
systemic symptoms and instead present with vascular complications.
It is only after substantial vascular injury that evidence of hypoperfusion becomes clinically evident. Later manifestations of disease include
diminished pulse, asymmetric blood pressure, claudication, Raynaud
phenomenon, renal failure, and symptoms of pulmonary or cardiac
ischemia. Inflammation can extend to the aortic valve, resulting in

DIAGNOSIS

Specific pediatric criteria for TA have been proposed (Table 210.8). The
2022 ACR/ EULAR classification criteria for Takayasu arteritis propose
a criterion-based scoring system in adults (Table 210.9). Radiographic
demonstration of large vessel vasculitis is necessary. A thorough physical examination is required to detect an aortic murmur, diminished
or asymmetric pulses, and vascular bruits. Four extremity blood pressures should be measured; >10 mm Hg asymmetry in systolic pressure
is indicative of disease.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

In the early phase of TA, when nonspecific symptoms predominate, the
differential diagnosis includes a wide array of systemic infections, autoimmune conditions, and malignancies. Although giant cell arteritis,
also known as temporal arteritis, is a common large vessel vasculitis
in older adults, this entity is rare in childhood. Noninflammatory
conditions that can cause large vessel compromise include fibromuscular dysplasia, Marfan syndrome, and Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The laboratory findings in TA are nonspecific, and there is no specific
diagnostic laboratory test. ESR and CRP values are typically elevated, and
other nonspecific markers of chronic inflammation may include leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, anemia of chronic inflammation, and hypergammaglobulinemia. Autoantibodies, including ANA and ANCA, are
not useful in diagnosing TA except to help exclude other autoimmune
diseases.
Radiographic assessment is essential to establish large vessel arterial
involvement. Conventional arteriography of the aorta and major branches,
including carotid, subclavian, pulmonary, renal, and mesenteric branches,
can identify luminal defects, including dilation, aneurysms, and stenoses, even in smaller vessels such as the mesenteric arteries. Figure 210.5
shows a conventional arteriogram in a child with TA. Although not yet
thoroughly validated in TA, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
and computed tomographic angiography (CTA) also provide important
information about vessel wall thickness and enhancement, although they
may not image smaller vessels as well as conventional angiography. Positron emission tomography (PET) may detect vessel wall inflammation
but has not been studied extensively. Ultrasound with duplex color flow
Doppler imaging may identify vessel wall thickening and assesses arterial flow. Echocardiography is recommended to assess for aortic valvular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

1559

Table 210.9  2022 American College of Rheumatology/
EULAR Classification Criteria for Takayasu
Arteritis
Considerations when applying these criteria:
• These classification criteria should be applied to classify the patient
as having Takayasu arteritis when a diagnosis of medium-vessel or
large-vessel vasculitis has been made.
• Alternate diagnoses mimicking vasculitis should be excluded
before applying the criteria.
ABSOLUTE REQUIREMENTS
Age ≤ 60 yr at time of diagnosis
Evidence of vasculitis on imaging1
ADDITIONAL CLINICAL CRITERIA
Female sex
Angina or ischemic cardiac pain
Arm or leg claudication
Vascular bruit2
Reduced pulse in upper extemity3
Carotid artery abnormality4
Systolic blood pressure difference in arms
≥20 mm Hg
ADDITIONAL IMAGING CRITERIA
Number of affected arterial territories (select one)5
One arterial territory
Two arterial territories
Three arterial territories
Symmetric involvement of paired arteries6
Abdominal aorta involvement with renal or
mesenteric involvement7

+1
+2
+2
+2
+2
+2
+1

+1
+2
+3
+1
+3
*TOTAL:

*Sum the scores for 10 items, if present. A score of ≥ 5 points is needed for the
classification of Takayasu arteritis.
1Evidence of vasculitis in the aorta or branch arteries must be confirmed by vascular
imaging (e.g., computed tomographic/catheter-based/magnetic resonance
angiography, ultrasonography, positron emission tomography).
2Bruit detected by auscultation of a large artery, including the aorta, carotid,
subclavian, axillary, brachial, renal, or iliofemoral arteries.
3Reduction or absence of pulse by physical examination of the axillary, brachial, or
radial arteries.
4Reduction or absence of pulse of the carotid artery or tenderness of the carotid
artery.
5Number of arterial territories with luminal damage (e.g., stenosis, occlusion, or
aneurysm) detected by angiography or ultrasonography from the following nine
territories: thoracic aorta, abdominal aorta, mesenteric, left or right carotid, left or
right subclavian, left or right renal arteries.
6Bilateral luminal damage (stenosis, occlusion, or aneurysm) detected by angiography
or ultrasonography in any of the following paired vascular territories: carotid,
subclavian, or renal arteries.
7Luminal damage (stenosis, occlusion, aneurysm) detected by angiography or
ultrasonography involving the abdominal aorta and either the renal or mesenteric
arteries.
From Grayson PC, Ponte C, Suppiah R, et al. 2022 American College of Rheumatology/
EULAR classification criteria for Takayasu arteritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2022;81(12):
1654–1660. Fig. 1.

involvement. Serial vascular imaging is usually necessary to assess response
to treatment and to detect progressive vascular damage.

TREATMENT

Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of therapy, typically starting with high
doses (1-­2 mg/kg/day of prednisone or methylprednisolone IV) followed
by gradual dosage tapering. When TA progresses or recurs, steroid-­
sparing therapy is often required, usually involving methotrexate or azathioprine. Cyclophosphamide is reserved for severe or refractory disease.
Results of small case series also suggest that mycophenolate mofetil or
anti–TNF-­α therapy may be beneficial in select patients. Anti–IL-­6 therapy with tocilizumab has shown promising results in a small case series

Fig. 210.5 Child with Takayasu arteritis. Conventional angiogram shows
massive bilateral carotid dilation, stenosis, and poststenotic dilation.

of children with TA. Antihypertensive medications are often necessary to
control blood pressure caused by renovascular disease.

COMPLICATIONS

Progressive vascular damage can result in arterial stenoses, aneurysms,
and occlusions, which produce ischemic symptoms and can be organ
or life threatening. Potential ischemic complications include stroke,
renal impairment or failure, myocardial infarction, mesenteric ischemia, and limb-­threatening arterial disease. When these complications
occur or are imminent, intervention with surgical vascular grafting or
catheter-­based angioplasty and stent placement may be necessary to
restore adequate blood flow. A high rate of recurrent stenosis has been
reported after angioplasty and stent placement. Aortic valve replacement may be required if significant aortic insufficiency develops.

PROGNOSIS

Although up to 20% of individuals with TA have a monophasic course
and achieve sustained remission, most suffer relapses. Survival for individuals with TA has improved considerably over the decades, although
higher mortality rates are reported in children and adolescents. The
overall estimated survival for individuals with TA is 93% at 5 years
and 87% at 10 years. However, morbidity from vascular complications
remains high, particularly when there is evidence of ongoing active
inflammation as detected by elevated CRP or ESR. Given the chronic
endothelial insult and inflammation, children and adolescents with TA
are probably at high risk for accelerated atherosclerosis. Early detection
and treatment are critical to optimizing outcomes in TA.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1560 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

210.3 Polyarteritis Nodosa and Cutaneous
Polyarteritis Nodosa
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and Stacy P. Ardoin
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is a systemic necrotizing vasculitis affecting small and medium-­size arteries. Aneurysms and stenoses form at
irregular intervals throughout affected arteries. Cutaneous PAN is limited to the skin.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

PAN is rare in childhood. Males and females are equally affected, and
the mean age at presentation is 9 years. The cause is unknown, but the
development of PAN after infections, including group A streptococcus
and chronic hepatitis B, suggests that PAN may represent a postinfectious autoimmune response. Infections with other organisms, including
Epstein-­Barr virus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, and hepatitis C virus, have also been associated with PAN. There
is a possible association between PAN and familial Mediterranean fever.

PATHOLOGY

Biopsies show necrotizing vasculitis with granulocytes and monocytes
infiltrating the walls of small and medium-­size arteries. Involvement is
usually segmental and tends to occur at vessel bifurcations. Granulomatous
inflammation is not present, and deposition of complement and immune
complexes is rarely observed. Different stages of inflammation are found,
ranging from mild inflammatory changes to panmural fibrinoid necrosis
associated with aneurysm formation, thrombosis, and vascular occlusion.

PATHOGENESIS

Immune complexes are believed to be pathogenic, but the mechanism
is poorly understood. It is not known why PAN has a predilection for
small and medium-­size blood vessels. The inflamed vessel wall becomes
thickened and narrowed, impeding blood flow and contributing to
end-­organ damage characteristic of this disease. Although there is no
clear genetic association with PAN, PAN-­like vasculitis is a component
of three recently described monogenic autoinflammatory conditions.
Deficiency in adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2), caused by mutations in the CECR1 gene, causes a familial form of vasculitis with an
autosomal recessive inheritance (see Chapter 204).

Fig. 210.6 Purpuric and necrotic lesions on the legs of a child with

polyarteritis nodosa. (From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds.
Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2021: Fig. 34.1, p. 468.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical presentation of PAN is variable but generally reflects the
distribution of inflamed vessels. Constitutional symptoms are present
in most children at disease onset. Weight loss and severe abdominal
pain suggest mesenteric arterial inflammation and ischemia. Renovascular arteritis can cause hypertension, hematuria, or proteinuria,
although glomerulonephritis is not typical. Cutaneous manifestations
include purpura, livedo reticularis, ulcerations, digital ischemia, and
painful nodules (Fig. 210.6). Arteritis affecting the nervous system can
result in cerebrovascular accidents, transient ischemic attacks, psychosis, and ischemic motor or sensory peripheral neuropathy (mononeuritis multiplex). Myocarditis or coronary arteritis can lead to heart
failure and myocardial ischemia; pericarditis and arrhythmias have
also been reported. Arthralgias, arthritis, or myalgias are frequently
present. Less common symptoms include testicular pain that mimics
testicular torsion, bone pain, and vision loss as a result of retinal arteritis. The pulmonary vasculature is usually spared in PAN.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of PAN requires demonstration of vessel involvement
on biopsy or angiography (Table 210.10). Biopsy of cutaneous lesions
shows small or medium vessel vasculitis. Kidney biopsy in patients with
renal manifestations may show necrotizing arteritis. Electromyography
in children with peripheral neuropathy identifies affected nerves, and
sural nerve biopsy may reveal vasculitis. Conventional arteriography is
the gold-­standard diagnostic imaging study for PAN and reveals areas
of aneurysmal dilation and segmental stenosis, the classic “beads on a
string” appearance (Fig. 210.7). MRA and CTA, less invasive imaging

alternatives, are gaining acceptance but may not be as effective in identifying small vessel disease or in younger children.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Early skin lesions may resemble those of HSP, although the finding of
nodular lesions and the presence of systemic features help distinguish
PAN. Because pulmonary vascular involvement is very rare in PAN,
pulmonary lesions suggest ANCA-­associated vasculitis or Goodpasture
disease. Other rheumatic diseases, including SLE, have characteristic
target-­organ involvement and associated autoantibodies distinguishing
them from PAN. Prolonged fever and weight loss should also prompt
consideration of inflammatory bowel disease or malignancy.
Deficiency of DADA2 is a mimic of PAN and should be suspected in
the presence of vasculitic rash (Fig. 210.8), hypogammaglobulinemia,
cytopenias, and strokes. In addition, SAVI (STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy) presents in infancy with ulcerating skin
lesions that form eschars, cytopenias, interstitial lung disease, and failure to thrive (see Chapter 204).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Nonspecific laboratory findings include elevations of ESR and CRP,
anemia, leukocytosis, and hypergammaglobulinemia. Abnormal urine
sediment, proteinuria, and hematuria indicate renal disease. Laboratory findings may be normal in cutaneous PAN or similar to those of
systemic PAN. Elevated hepatic enzyme values may suggest hepatitis B
or C infection. Serologic tests for hepatitis (hepatitis B surface antigen
and hepatitis C antibody) should be performed in all patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

1561

Table 210.10  Proposed Classification Criteria for Pediatric-­
Onset Polyarteritis Nodosa*
CRITERION

FINDINGS

Histopathology

Necrotizing vasculitis in medium or
small arteries

Angiographic abnormalities

Angiography showing aneurysm,
stenosis, or occlusion of medium or
small artery not from noninflammatory
cause

Cutaneous findings

Livedo reticularis, tender
subcutaneous nodules, superficial
skin ulcers, deep skin ulcers, digital
necrosis, nail bed infarctions, or
splinter hemorrhages

Muscle involvement

Myalgia or muscle tenderness

Hypertension

Systolic or diastolic blood pressure
>95th percentile for height

Peripheral neuropathy

Sensory peripheral neuropathy, motor
mononeuritis multiplex

Renal involvement

Proteinuria (>300 mg/24 hr equivalent),
hematuria or red blood cell casts,
impaired renal function (glomerular
filtration rate <50% normal)

*The presence of five criteria provides 89.6% sensitivity and 99.6% specificity for the
diagnosis of childhood-­onset polyarteritis nodosa.
Adapted from Ozen S, Pistorio A, Iusan SM, et al: EULAR/PRINTO/PRES criteria for
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, childhood polyarteritis nodosa, childhood Wegener
granulomatosis and childhood Takayasu arteritis: Ankara 2008. Part II. Final classification
criteria. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69:798–806.

Fig. 201.8 Retiform purpura in a child with deficiency of adenosine

deaminase type 2. (From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds.
Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2021, Fig. 34.3, p. 469.)

be warranted for life-­threatening disease. If hepatitis B is identified,
appropriate antiviral therapy should be initiated (see Chapter 406).
Most cases of cutaneous PAN can be treated with less intense therapy
such as corticosteroids alone, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), and methotrexate. Azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil,
IVIG, thalidomide, cyclosporine, and anti-­TNF agents such as infliximab have all been reported as successful in the treatment of refractory
cutaneous or systemic PAN. If an infectious trigger for PAN is identified, antibiotic prophylaxis can be considered.

COMPLICATIONS

Cutaneous nodules may ulcerate and become infected. Hypertension
and chronic renal disease may develop from renovascular involvement
in PAN. Cardiac involvement may lead to decreased cardiac function or coronary artery disease. Mesenteric vasculitis can predispose
to bowel infarction, rupture, and malabsorption. Stroke and rupture
of hepatic arterial aneurysm are uncommon complications of this
disorder.

PROGNOSIS

The course of PAN varies from mild disease with few complications to a
severe, multiorgan disease with high morbidity and mortality. Poor prognostic factors in PAN include elevated serum creatinine, proteinuria,
severe GI involvement, cardiomyopathy, and CNS involvement. Early
and aggressive immunosuppressive therapy increases the likelihood of
clinical remission. Compared with disease in adults, childhood PAN is
associated with less mortality. Cutaneous PAN is unlikely to transition
to systemic disease. Early recognition and treatment of the disease are
important to minimizing potential long-­term vascular complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 210.7 Child with polyarteritis nodosa. Abdominal aortogram
shows bilateral renal artery aneurysms (arrows), superior mesenteric
artery aneurysm (asterisk), and left common iliac artery occlusion (arrowhead). (Courtesy Dr. M. Hogan.)

TREATMENT

Oral prednisone (1-­2 mg/kg/day) or IV pulse methylprednisolone (30
mg/kg/day) are the mainstay of therapy. Oral or IV cyclophosphamide is often used as adjunctive therapy, and plasma exchange may

210.4 Antineutrophilic Cytoplasmic
Antibody–Associated Vasculitis
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and Stacy P. Ardoin
The ANCA-­associated vasculitides are characterized by small vessel
involvement, circulating ANCAs, and a paucity of immune complex
deposition in affected tissues, thus the term pauci-­immune vasculitis. ANCA-­associated vasculitis is categorized into three distinct
forms: granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) (Table 210.11),

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1562 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 210.11  2022 American College of Rheumatology/
EULAR Classification Criteria for
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis
Considerations when applying these criteria:
• These classification criteria should be applied to classify a
patient as having granulomatosis with polyangiitis when a
diagnosis of small-vessel or medium-vessel vasculitis has been
made.
• Alternate diagnoses mimicking vasculitis should be excluded
before applying the criteria.
CLINICAL CRITERIA
Nasal involvement: bloody discharge, ulcers, crusting,
congestion, blockage, or septal defect / perforation
Cartilaginous involvement (inflammation of ear or nose
cartilage, hoarse voice or stridor, endobronchial
involvement, or saddle nose deformity
Conductive or sensorineural hearing loss
LABORATORY, IMAGING, AND BIOPSY CRITERIA
Positive test for cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (cANCA) or antiproteinase 3 (anti-PR3)
antibodies
Pulmonary nodules, mass, or cavitation on chest imaging
Granuloma, extravascular granulomatous inflammation, or
giant cells on biopsy
Inflammation, consolidation, or effusion of the nasal/
paranasal sinuses, or mastoiditis on imaging
Pauci-immune glomerulonephritis on biopsy
Positive test for perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (pANCA) or antimyeloperoxidase (anti-MPO)
antibodies
Blood eosinophil count ≥ 1 × 109/liter

+3
+2
+1
+5
+2
+2
+1
+1
–1
–4
*TOTAL:

*Sum the scores for 10 items, if present. A score of ≥ 5 points is needed for the
classification of granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
From Robson JC, Grayson PC, Ponte C, et al. 2022 American College of
Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology classification
criteria for granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2022;81(3):315–320.
Fig. 1.

formerly Wegener granulomatosis; microscopic polyangiitis (MPA)
(Table 210.12); and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(Table 210.13), formerly Churg-­Strauss syndrome (CSS). The 2022
ACR/ EULAR classification criteria for adults with GPA, MPA and
EGPA employ a criterion-based scoring system for classification of
these vasculitides.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

GPA is a necrotizing, granulomatous, small and medium vessel vasculitis that occurs at all ages and targets the upper and lower respiratory
tracts and the kidneys. Most cases of GPA occur in adults; the disease
also occurs in children with a mean age at diagnosis of 14 years. There
is a female predominance of 3-­4:1, and pediatric GPA is most prevalent
in the White population.
MPA is a small vessel necrotizing vasculitis with clinical features
similar to those of GPA, but without granulomas and upper airway involvement. CSS is a small vessel necrotizing granulomatous
(allergic granulomatosis) vasculitis associated with a history of
refractory asthma and peripheral eosinophilia. MPA and CSS are
rare in children, and there does not appear to be a gender predilection in either disease.

PATHOLOGY

Necrotizing vasculitis is the cardinal histologic feature in both
GPA and MPA. Kidney biopsies typically demonstrate crescentic
glomerulonephritis with little or no immune complex deposition

Table 210.12  Presenting Manifestations (Reported as
Percentages) in Children with Granulomatosis
with Polyangiitis and Microscopic Polyangiitis
from the ARChiVe Cohort (n = 231)
CLINICAL FEATURE

GPA (n = 183)

MPA (n = 48)

CONSTITUTIONAL/GENERAL
Malaise, fatigue
Fever
Weight loss

88
83
53
44

85
77
52
31

RENAL
Proteinuria
Hematuria
Biopsy proven
glomerulonephritis
Elevated serum creatinine

83
72
72
94 (101 of 108)

75
69
60
94 (30 of 32)

54

58

PULMONARY
Hemoptysis/alveolar
hemorrhage
Nodules
Fixed pulmonary infiltrates
Oxygen dependency
Pleurisy
Requiring ventilation

74
42

44
15

54
36
22
14
12

0
0
13
8
4

EAR, NOSE, THROAT
Nasal involvement
Sinusitis
Otitis/mastoiditis
Subglottic involvement
Hearing loss
Oral ulcers

70
53
39
17
10
10
15

4
0
0
0
0
0
4

MUSCULOSKELETAL
Arthralgia/arthritis
Myalgia, muscle weakness, or
myositis

65
61*
14

52
42
19

CUTANEOUS
Palpable purpura/petechia

47
27

52
31

EYES
Nonspecific red eye
Conjunctivitis
Scleritis/episcleritis

43
10
11
8

31
2
6
4

GASTROINTESTINAL
Nonspecific abdominal pain
Chronic nausea

36
22
12

58
38
33

NERVOUS SYSTEM
Severe headache
Dizziness

20
11
7

21
13
4

CARDIOVASCULAR

5

6

*Arthralgias and arthritis at disease onset were not reported separately.
GPA, Granulomatosis with polyangiitis; MPA, microscopic polyangiitis.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology,
8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Table 36.2, p. 487.

(“pauci-­immune”), in contrast to biopsies from patients with SLE.
Although granulomatous inflammation is common in GPA and
CSS, it is typically not present in MPA. Biopsies showing perivascular eosinophilic infiltrates distinguish CSS from both MPA
and GPA.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes
Table 210.13  American College of Rheumatology
Criteria for Classification of Eosinophilic
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis Syndrome
CRITERION*

DESCRIPTION

Asthma

History of wheezing or diffuse high-­
pitched rales on expiration

Eosinophilia

Eosinophils >10% of differential
white blood cell count

History of allergy

History of seasonal allergy (e.g.,
allergic rhinitis) or documented
allergies, including food,
contactants, and others (except
for drug allergies)

Mononeuropathy or
polyneuropathy

Mononeuropathy, multiple mono­
neuropathies or polyneuropathy
(i.e., glove/stocking distribution)
attributable to a systemic vasculitis

Pulmonary infiltrates

Migratory or transitory pulmonary
infiltrates on radiographs
attributable to a systemic vasculitis

Paranasal sinus abnormality

History of acute or chronic
paranasal sinus pain or tenderness
or radiographic opacification of
the paranasal sinuses

Extravascular eosinophils

Biopsy including artery, arteriole, or
venule, showing accumulation of
eosinophils in extravascular areas

*For classification purposes, a patient is said to have EGPA if at least four of these
criteria are present. The presence of any four or more criteria has a sensitivity of 85%
and a specificity of 99.7%.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology,
8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021, Fig. 36.7, p. 495.

1563

organ system involvement throughout the disease course in GPA
are as follows: respiratory tract, 74%; kidneys, 83%; joints, 65%;
eyes, 43%; skin, 47%; sinuses, 70%; and nervous system, 20%. Table
210.11 lists the classification criteria for pediatric-­onset GPA.
The clinical presentation of MPA closely resembles that of GPA,
although sinus disease is less common; systemic features of fever, malaise, weight loss, myalgias, and arthralgias may be dominant. MPA predominantly affects the kidney and lungs; other organ systems include
skin, CNS, muscle, heart, and eyes (see Table 210.12).
CSS frequently causes inflammation of the upper and lower respiratory tracts, but cartilage destruction is rare. CSS may initially demonstrate chronic or recurrent rhinitis/sinusitis, nasal polyposis, nonfixed
pulmonary lesions, and difficult-­to-­treat asthma. Eosinophilia (>10%
of leukocytes) with pulmonary infiltrates may precede a vasculitic
phase. Other organ involvement includes skin, cardiac, peripheral neuropathy, GI tract, and muscle. Renal involvement in CSS is uncommon.

DIAGNOSIS

GPA should be considered in children who have recalcitrant sinusitis,
pulmonary infiltrates, and evidence of nephritis. Chest radiography
often fails to detect pulmonary lesions, and chest CT may show nodules, ground-­glass opacities, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and cavitary lesions (Fig. 210.10). The diagnosis is confirmed by the presence of
c-­ANCA with anti-­PR3 specificity (PR3-­ANCAs) and the finding of necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis on pulmonary, sinus, or renal biopsy.
The ANCA test result is positive in approximately 90% of children with
GPA, and the presence of anti-­PR3 increases the specificity of the test.
In MPA, ANCAs are also frequently present (70% of patients) but
are usually p-­ANCA with reactivity to MPO (MPO-­ANCAs). MPA
can be distinguished from PAN by the presence of ANCAs and the
tendency for small vessel involvement. The ANCA test result is positive
in 50–70% of cases of CSS, and MPO-­ANCAs are more common than
PR3-­ANCAs. In addition, the presence of chronic asthma and peripheral eosinophilia suggests the diagnosis of CSS.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of ANCA-­associated vasculitis remains unknown,
although neutrophils, monocytes, and endothelial cells are
involved in disease pathogenesis. Neutrophils and monocytes are
activated by ANCAs, specifically by the ANCA-­associated antigens proteinase-­3 (PR3) and myeloperoxidase (MPO), and release
proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-­α and IL-­8 . Localization
of these inflammatory cells to the endothelium results in vascular
damage characteristic of the ANCA vasculitides. Why the respiratory tract and kidneys are preferential targets in GPA and MPA is
unknown.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The early disease course is characterized by nonspecific constitutional symptoms, including fever, malaise, weight loss, myalgias,
and arthralgias. In GPA, upper airway involvement can manifest as
sinusitis, nasal ulceration, epistaxis, otitis media, and hearing loss.
Lower respiratory tract symptoms in GPA include cough, wheezing, dyspnea, and hemoptysis. Pulmonary hemorrhage can cause
rapid respiratory failure. Compared with adults, childhood GPA
is more frequently complicated by subglottic stenosis (Fig. 210.9).
Inflammation-­induced damage to the nasal cartilage can produce
a saddle nose deformity (see Fig. 210.9). Ophthalmic involvement
includes conjunctivitis, scleritis, uveitis, optic neuritis, and invasive orbital pseudotumor (causing proptosis). Perineural vasculitis or direct compression on nerves by granulomatous lesions can
cause cranial and peripheral neuropathies. Hematuria, proteinuria,
and hypertension in GPA signal renal disease. Cutaneous lesions
include palpable purpura and ulcers. Venous thromboembolism is
a rare but potentially fatal complication of GPA. The frequencies of

ANCAs are absent in other granulomatous diseases, such as sarcoidosis and tuberculosis. Goodpasture syndrome is characterized by
antibodies to glomerular basement membrane. Medications such as
propylthiouracil, hydralazine, and minocycline are associated with
drug-­induced ANCA (usually perinuclear ANCA) vasculitis. SLE and
HSP can manifest as pulmonary hemorrhage and nephritis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Nonspecific laboratory abnormalities include elevated ESR and CRP
values, leukocytosis, and thrombocytosis, which are present in most
patients with an ANCA-­
associated vasculitis but are nonspecific.
Anemia may be caused by chronic inflammation or pulmonary hemorrhage. ANCA antibodies show two distinct immunofluorescence
patterns: perinuclear (p-­ANCA) and cytoplasmic (c-­ANCA). In addition,
ANCAs can be defined by their specificity for PR3 or MPO antigen. GPA
is strongly associated with c-­ANCAs/anti-­PR3 antibodies, whereas 75%
of patients with MPA have a positive p-­ANCA. There is no clear correlation between ANCA titers and disease activity or relapse.

TREATMENT

When the lower respiratory tract or kidneys are significantly involved,
initial induction therapy usually consists of prednisone (oral 2 mg/
kg/day oral or IV methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg/day × 3 days) in conjunction with daily oral or monthly IV cyclophosphamide. Rituximab,
a monoclonal antibody to CD20 on activated B cells, is an option for
induction therapy in ANCA-­positive vasculitides, although it has been
studied primarily in adults. Plasmapheresis in conjunction with methylprednisolone has a role in the therapy of patients with severe disease
manifestations such as pulmonary hemorrhage or ESRD, with the potential for reducing dialysis dependency. Patients are transitioned to a less
toxic maintenance medication (usually methotrexate, azathioprine, or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1564 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

A

C

B

Fig. 210.9 Adolescent with granulomatosis with polyangiitis. A and B, Anterior and lateral views of saddle nose deformity. C, Segment of subglottic posterior tracheal irregularity (between arrows) on lateral neck radiograph.

A

B

Fig. 210.10 Radiographs of lower respiratory tract disease in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA). A, Chest radiograph of 14-­yr-­old girl with

GPA and pulmonary hemorrhage. Extensive bilateral, fluffy infiltrates are visualized. B, Chest CT scan in 17-­yr-­old boy with GPA. Air space consolidation, septal thickening, and a single cavitary lesion are present. (A from Cassidy JT, Petty RE. Granulomatous vasculitis, giant cell arteritis and
sarcoidosis. In Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1995; B from Kuhn JP, Slovis TL, Haller JO. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004.)

mycophenolate mofetil) within 3-­6 months once remission is achieved.
The Childhood Arthritis and Rheumatology Research Alliance has published treatment guidelines for the induction and maintenance therapy of
children with severe ANCA-­associated vasculitides consisting of induction therapy with cyclophosphamide or rituximab and maintenance
therapy with rituximab, methotrexate, or azathioprine. Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (one 160 mg/800 mg tablet 3 days/week) is often prescribed both for prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jirovecii infection and
to reduce upper respiratory bacterial colonization with S. aureus, which
may trigger disease activity. If disease is limited to the upper respiratory
tract, corticosteroids (1-­2 mg/kg/day) and methotrexate (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/
week) may be first-­line treatment. Avacopan, a C5a receptor inhibitor,
has been shown to be effective in reducing the need for corticosteroids in
addition to standard therapy in adults with ANCA-­associated vasculitis
but has not been studied in children.
Mepolizumab, an anti–IL-­5 monoclonal antibody, may have a role
in the treatment of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(CSS).

COMPLICATIONS

Upper respiratory tract lesions can invade the orbit and threaten the
optic nerve, and lesions in the ear can cause permanent hearing loss.
Respiratory complications include potentially life-­threatening pulmonary hemorrhage and upper airway obstruction caused by subglottic
stenosis. Chronic lung disease secondary to granulomatous inflammation, cavitary lesions, and scarring can predispose to infectious complications. Chronic glomerulonephritis may progress to ESRD in a subset
of patients with advanced or undertreated disease.

PROGNOSIS

The course is variable, but disease relapse occurs in up to 60% of
patients. Mortality has been reduced with the introduction of cyclophosphamide and other immunosuppressive agents. Compared with
adults, children are more likely to develop multiorgan involvement,
renal involvement, and subglottic stenosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

210.5 Other Vasculitis Syndromes:
Hypersensitivity, CNS, and
COVID-­19 Related
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and Stacy P. Ardoin
Other vasculitic conditions can occur in childhood; the most common
is Kawasaki disease (see Chapter 208). Behçet disease is a rare form of
vasculitis seen in children of Turkish and Mediterranean descent, characterized by the triad of recurrent aphthous stomatitis, genital ulcers,
and uveitis (see Chapter 202).
Hypersensitivity vasculitis is a cutaneous vasculitis triggered by
medication or toxin exposure. The rash consists of palpable purpura or other nonspecific rash. Skin biopsies reveal characteristic
changes of leukocytoclastic vasculitis (small vessels with neutrophilic perivascular or extravascular neutrophilic infiltration) (Table
210.14). Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis involves
small vessels and manifests as recurrent urticaria that resolves over
several days but leaves residual hyperpigmentation. This condition
is associated with low levels of complement component C1q and
systemic findings that include fever, GI symptoms, arthritis, and
glomerulonephritis. Some patients with urticarial vasculitis have
normal complement levels. Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis can complicate mixed essential cryoglobulinemia and is a small vessel vasculitis affecting skin, joints, kidneys, and lungs.
Primary angiitis of the central nervous system represents vasculitis confined to the CNS and requires exclusion of other systemic
vasculitides. Large vessel disease (angiography positive) may be
progressive or nonprogressive and may manifest with focal deficits
similar to an occlusive stroke, with hemiparesis, focal gross or fine
motor deficits, language disorders, or cranial nerve deficits. Diffuse
cognitive, memory, and concentration deficits and behavioral disorders are seen in 30–40% of patients. Small vessel disease (angiography negative, biopsy positive) more often results in language
problems and diffuse deficits, such as cognitive, memory, behavior,
and concentration problems, as well as focal seizures. In both types

Table 210.14  Criteria for Diagnosis of Hypersensitivity
Vasculitis*
CRITERION

DEFINITION

Age at onset >16 yr

Development of symptoms after 16 yr
of age

Medication at disease
onset

Medication that may have been a
precipitating factor was taken at the
onset of symptoms

Palpable purpura

Slightly elevated purpuric rash over
one or more areas; does not blanch
with pressure and is not related to
thrombocytopenia

Maculopapular rash

Flat and raised lesions of various sizes
over one or more areas of the skin

Biopsy, including arteriole
and venule

Histologic changes showing
granulocytes in a perivascular or
extravascular location

*For purposes of classification, a patient is said to have hypersensitivity vasculitis if at
least three of these criteria are present. The presence of three or more criteria has
a diagnostic sensitivity of 71.0% and specificity of 83.9%. The age criterion is not
applicable for children.
Adapted from Calabrese LH, Michel BA, Bloch DA, et al. The American College of
Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the classification of hypersensitivity vasculitis. Arthritis
Rheum. 1990;33:1108–1113, Table 2, p. 1110; and Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB,
Wedderburn LR. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders;
2016: Table 38.2, p. 511.

1565

of cerebral angiitis, patients may have an elevated ESR or CRP and
abnormal CSF findings (increased protein, pleocytosis), although
these are not consistent findings in all patients. Diagnosis remains
a challenge, and brain biopsy is often indicated to confirm the diagnosis and exclude vasculitis mimics such as infections that could
worsen with immunosuppressive therapy (Table 210.15).

Table 210.15  Differential Diagnosis of Small Vessel Primary
Central Nervous System (CNS) Vasculitis in
Children
CNS VASCULITIS COMPLICATING OTHER DISEASES
Infections
• Bacterial: Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae,
Streptococcus pneumoniae
• Viral: Epstein-­Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, enterovirus, varicella-­
zoster virus, hepatitis C virus, parvovirus B19, West Nile virus
• Fungal: Candida albicans, Actinomyces, Aspergillus
• Spirochetal: Borrelia burgdorferi, Treponema pallidum
Rheumatic and Inflammatory Diseases
• Systemic vasculitis such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis,
microscopic polyangiitis, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, Kawasaki
disease, polyarteritis nodosa, Behçet disease
• Systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile dermatomyositis,
morphea
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Autoinflammatory syndromes
• Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
• Neurosarcoidosis
• Adenosine deaminase-­2 deficiency
Other
• Drug-­induced vasculitis
• Malignancy-­associated vasculitis
NONVASCULITIS INFLAMMATORY BRAIN DISEASES
Demyelinating Diseases
• Multiple sclerosis, acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis
(ADEM), optic neuritis, transverse myelitis
Antibody-­Mediated Inflammatory Brain Disease
• Anti–NMDA receptor encephalitis, neuromyelitis optica (NMO),
antibody-­associated limbic encephalitis (antibodies against
LGI, AMP, AMP-­binding protein), Hashimoto encephalopathy,
celiac disease, pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders
associated with streptococcal infections (PANDAS)
T-­Cell–Associated Inflammatory Brain Disease
• Rasmussen encephalitis
Other
• Febrile infection-­related epilepsy syndrome (FIRES)
NONINFLAMMATORY VASCULOPATHIES
• Hemoglobinopathies (sickle cell disease), thromboembolic
disease
• Radiation vasculopathy, graft versus host disease
• Metabolic and genetic diseases such as cerebral autosomal
dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), mitochondrial encephalopathy
lactic acidosis and strokelike episodes (MELAS), cerebral
autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and
leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL), Moyamoya disease, Fabry disease
• Malignancy (lymphoma)
Modified from Gowdie P, Twilt M, Benseler SM. Primary and secondary central nervous
system vasculitis. J Child Neurol. 2012;27:1448–1459.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1566 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 210.16  Diagnostic Considerations for Other
Vasculitis Syndromes
VASCULITIS SYNDROME

APPROACH TO DIAGNOSIS

Hypersensitivity vasculitis

Skin biopsy demonstrating
leukocytoclastic vasculitis

Hypocomplementemic urticarial
vasculitis

Biopsy of affected tissue
demonstrating small vessel
vasculitis
Low levels of circulating C1q

Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis

Biopsy of affected tissue
demonstrating small vessel
vasculitis
Measurement of serum
cryoglobulins
Exclusion of hepatitides B and C
infections

Primary angiitis of CNS

Conventional, CT, or MRA
evidence of CNS vasculitis
Consideration of dura or brain
biopsy

Nonprogressive angiography-­
positive CNS vasculitis

Conventional, CT, or MRA
evidence of CNS vasculitis

Cogan syndrome

Ophthalmology and audiology
evaluations
Conventional, CT, or MRA
evidence of CNS or aortic
vasculitis

Table 210.17  Acral and Nonacral Potential Cutaneous
Manifestations of Pediatric COVID-­19
ACRAL

NONACRAL

Pernio-­like lesions
EM-­like lesions
Plantar papules
Retiform purpura
Ecchymotic-­like lesions
Livedo reticularis

Urticaria
Erythematous patches
EM-­like lesions
Vesicles/papulovesicles
Herpetiform oral eruption
Roseola-­like rash
Maculopapular rash
Macular eruption
Lingual papillitis
Eccrine hidradenitis
Erythema nodosum
Petechiae
Purpura

Nonprogressive angiography-­
p ositive CNS vasculitis, also
known as transient CNS angiopathy, represents a more benign variant and can be seen after varicella infection. Cogan syndrome is
rare in children; its potential clinical manifestations include constitutional symptoms; inflammatory eye disease such as uveitis,
episcleritis, or interstitial keratitis; vestibuloauditory dysfunction
(vertigo, hearing loss, tinnitus); arthritis; and large vessel vasculitis
or aortitis. Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is caused
by pathogenic variants in the NOTCH3 gene and manifests with
stroke, mood changes, cognitive decline, and migraines; it is a vasculitis mimic and demonstrates osmophilic granules in cerebral
arteries. Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL) is another mimic of
angiitis caused by pathogenic variants in the HTRA1 gene. It manifests with early-­onset hair loss, spasticity, stroke, memory loss, and
personality changes.
Identification of these vasculitis syndromes requires a comprehensive history and physical examination. Table 210.16 outlines
other diagnostic considerations. Although tailored to disease severity, treatment generally includes prednisone (up to 2 mg/kg/day).
Potent immunosuppressive medications, such as cyclophosphamide, are often indicated, particularly in primary angiitis of the
CNS to prevent rapid neurologic decline. For hypersensitivity vasculitis, withdrawal of the triggering medication or toxin is indicated
if possible.
COVID-­19, including multisystem inflammatory syndrome in
children (MIS-­C), has been associated with a variety of cutaneous
lesions that resemble vasculitis, vasculopathy, and vasoocclusive
etiologies (see Chapter 311) (Table 210.17, Fig. 210.11). Lesions
include pernio (chilblain: COVID toes)–like lesions suggestive of a
vasculitis. Other cutaneous manifestations include urticarial vasculitis and livedo reticularis–like or livedo racemosa—both resemble
a pauci-­inflammatory occlusive vasculitis. Sweet syndrome and
erythema multiforme–like lesions have also been described. Most
cutaneous lesions associated with known COVID-­19 or MIS-­C do
not require a biopsy, but some of those that were biopsied have
demonstrated a leukocytoclastic vasculitis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Modified from Neale H, Hawryluk EB. COVID-­19 pediatric dermatology. Dermatol Clin.
2021;39:505–519, Table 4, p. 513.

A

B

C

D

Fig. 210.11 Pernio-­like lesions in children. A, A child with purpuric papules on the first, second, fourth, and fifth right digits and second proxi-

mal left digit. B, Digits on the same child appearing with increased erythema. C, Right toes of a child appearing with pink and dusky papules and
plaques, also involving the child’s left digits (D). (From Neale H, Hawryluk EB. COVID-­19 pediatric dermatology. Dermatol Clin. 2021;39:505–519,
Fig. 3, p. 511.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 211 u Musculoskeletal Pain Syndromes

Chapter 211

Musculoskeletal Pain
Syndromes
James J. Nocton
Musculoskeletal pain is a frequent reason for children to visit a healthcare provider and is the most common problem referred to pediatric
rheumatology clinics. Prevalence estimates of persistent musculoskeletal pain in community samples range from 10% to 40%. Although
inflammatory diseases such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are associated with musculoskeletal pain, noninflammatory conditions such as trauma, hypermobility, overuse, and idiopathic pain syndromes are much more common
causes of musculoskeletal pain in children.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Acute and subacute musculoskeletal pain in children is most commonly the result of trauma, overuse, hypermobility, or some combination of these. The history and physical findings of trauma are most
often readily apparent, and the pain associated with overuse or hypermobility is most often described as related to activities and improving
with rest. The physical examination of children with pain related to
overuse, hypermobility, and other mechanical causes of pain does not
reveal signs of inflammation such as warmth, swelling, or limited range
of motion and most often reveals hypermobility with perhaps mild tenderness over tendons and their insertion points.
Chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes are defined
by pain of at least 3 months duration in the absence of objective abnormalities on physical examination or laboratory screening (see Chapter
212). The prevalence of chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes increases with age and is higher in females. These syndromes
often persist despite treatment with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) and other analgesics. Chronic pain may occur anywhere and is most often diffuse and poorly localized, but may sometimes involve only a single extremity or part of an extremity. Pain may
start in one location before potentially developing in other areas over
time.
Psychologic and emotional distress, including anxiety, depression, stress, or a combination of these, is quite common in those with
chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes. Frequent crying, school and social stress, poor concentration, and excessive worry
are often described. Sleep disturbance in children with chronic pain
syndromes may include difficulty falling asleep, multiple night awakenings, disrupted sleep-­wake cycles with increased daytime sleeping,
nonrestorative sleep, and fatigue.
Children who are high achievers, excellent students, mature, and
responsible, with high expectations of themselves have a predisposition
to the development of pain syndromes in general, including chronic
musculoskeletal pain. As a result, headaches and abdominal pain or
other gastrointestinal symptoms are also frequently present in those
with chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes.
The constellation of chronic pain, psychologic distress, and sleep disturbance often leads to a high degree of functional impairment. Poor
school attendance is common, and children may struggle to complete
other daily activities relating to self-­care and participation in household
chores. Decreased physical fitness can also occur, along with changes in
gait and posture, as children avoid the use of the area affected by pain.
Peer relationships may also be disrupted by decreased opportunities
for social interaction because of pain. Loneliness and social isolation
characterized by few friends and lack of participation in extracurricular activities are common.

1567

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of a musculoskeletal pain syndrome is based primarily on history and physical examination. Children with pain require
a thorough clinical history, including a complete social history and
review of systems, and a careful, comprehensive physical examination.
The specific characteristics of the pain should be defined, evidence of
potential systemic disease should be sought, and any additional associated symptoms and signs should be elicited.
The need for laboratory testing and imaging studies should be individualized, depending on the information elicited in the history and
discovered with the physical examination. Possible indicators of an
inflammatory cause for musculoskeletal pain include objective joint
warmth, swelling, limited range of joint motion on physical examination, localized bone tenderness, and muscle weakness; potential indicators of a systemic disease include poor linear growth, weight loss, and
constitutional symptoms. The lack of these symptoms and objective
abnormalities on physical examination is more suggestive of a noninflammatory cause for pain (Table 211.1). The complete blood count
(CBC) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) are often abnormal
in children whose pain is secondary to a bone or joint infection, rheumatic disease, or a malignancy. Bone tumors, fractures, and other focal
pathology resulting from infection, malignancy, or trauma can often
be identified through imaging studies, including plain radiographs or
MRI.
The presence of chronic, persistent pain, accompanied by psychologic distress, sleep disturbance, and/or functional impairment, in the
absence of objective laboratory or physical examination abnormalities, suggests the diagnosis of an idiopathic musculoskeletal pain
syndrome. Table 211.2 outlines common causes of pediatric musculoskeletal pain according to anatomic location, including growing
pains (see Chapter 211.1), diffuse amplified pain syndromes and
chronic widespread pain (see Chapter 211.3), complex regional pain
syndrome (see Chapter 211.4), localized pain syndromes, low back
pain, and chronic overuse-­related pain (e.g., Osgood-­Schlatter disease). A differential diagnosis of more serious conditions is noted in
Table 211.3.

TREATMENT

The primary goal of treatment for acute and subacute musculoskeletal pain related to trauma, hypermobility, overuse, or other mechanical factors is to minimize the discomfort as much as possible and to
promote normal activities. Rest, topical analgesics, mechanical joint
support to be worn with activities, ice, oral analgesics, and physical
therapy may all be used. Education of children and families regarding pain related to these mechanical factors is critical in helping
them to understand what to expect. Although it is common for the
discomfort related to hypermobility and overuse to be recurrent, the
prognosis for these mechanical pains is excellent, and most children
learn to manage their discomfort with few, if any, restrictions on
activities.
The primary goal of treatment of chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes is to improve function and relieve pain; these
outcomes may not occur simultaneously or quickly. Pain may persist
even as children resume normal function (e.g., increased school attendance and participation in extracurricular activities). For all children
and adolescents with pediatric musculoskeletal pain syndromes whose
school attendance has been affected by their symptoms, regular school
attendance is a primary initial goal. The dual nature of treatment, targeting both function and pain, needs to be clearly explained. Children
and families need to be supported in disengaging from the sole pursuit
of pain relief and embracing the equally imperative goal of improved
functioning.
Recommended treatment modalities include physical and/or occupational therapy, pharmacologic interventions, and cognitive-­behavioral
and/or other psychotherapeutic interventions. The overarching goal of
physical therapy is to improve children’s physical function and should
emphasize participation in aggressive but graduated aerobic exercise.
Pharmacologic interventions should be used judiciously. Low-­dose

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1568 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 211.1  Potential Indicators of Inflammatory vs Noninflammatory Causes of Musculoskeletal Pain
CLINICAL FINDING

NONINFLAMMATORY

INFLAMMATORY

Effects of rest vs activity on pain

Relieved by rest and worsened by activity

Present at rest and may be relieved by activity

Time of day pain and/or stiffness occurs

End of the day and nights

Morning*

Objective joint swelling

No

Yes

Joint characteristics

Hypermobile/normal

Stiffness, limited range of motion

Bone tenderness

No

Possible

Muscle strength

Normal

Possible weakness

Gait

Normal

Limp

Growth

Normal growth pattern or weight gain

Poor growth and/or weight loss

Constitutional symptoms

Fatigue without other constitutional symptoms

Possible

Laboratory findings

Normal CBC, ESR, CRP

Abnormal CBC, raised ESR and CRP

Imaging findings

Normal

Effusion, osteopenia, radiolucent metaphyseal
lines, joint space loss, bone destruction

*Cancer pain is often severe and worst at night.
CBC, Complete blood count; CRP, C-­reactive protein level; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Data from Malleson PN, Beauchamp RD. Diagnosing musculoskeletal pain in children. CMAJ 2001;165:183–188.

Table 211.2  Common Musculoskeletal Pain Syndromes in
Children by Anatomic Region
ANATOMIC REGION

PAIN SYNDROMES

Shoulder

Impingement syndrome

Elbow

“Little League elbow”
Avulsion fractures
Osteochondritis dissecans
Tennis elbow
Panner disease

Arm

Localized hypermobility syndrome
Complex regional pain syndrome

Pelvis and hip

Avulsion injuries
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes syndrome
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Congenital hip dysplasia

Knee

Osteochondritis dissecans
Osgood-­Schlatter disease
Sinding-­Larsen syndrome
Patellofemoral syndrome
Malalignment syndromes

Leg

Growing pains
Complex regional pain syndrome
Localized hypermobility syndrome
Shin splints
Stress fractures
Compartment syndromes

Foot

Plantar fasciitis
Tarsal coalition
Stress fractures
Achilles tendonitis
Juvenile bunion

Spine

Musculoskeletal strain
Spondylolisthesis
Spondylolysis
Scoliosis
Scheuermann disease (kyphosis)
Low back pain

Generalized

Hypermobility syndrome
Diffuse amplified pain syndrome
Chronic widespread pain

tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline 0.1 mg/kg at bedtime; can
increase to 0.5 to 2 mg/kg as tolerated) may improve sleep; selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (sertraline 25-­100 mg daily) may help
to alleviate symptoms of depression and anxiety if present. Cognitive-­
behavioral therapy (CBT) and/or other psychotherapeutic interventions are designed to teach children and adolescents coping skills for
controlling the behavioral, cognitive, and physiologic responses to
pain. Specific components often include cognitive restructuring, relaxation, distraction, and problem-­solving skills. Parent education and
involvement in the psychologic intervention are important to ensure
maintenance of progress. More intensive family-­based approaches are
warranted if barriers to treatment success are identified at the family
level. These could include parenting strategies or family dynamics that
serve to maintain children’s pain complaints, such as overly solicitous
responses to the child’s pain and maladaptive models for coping with
pain.

COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

Musculoskeletal pain related to hypermobility and/or overuse may be
recurrent and related to specific activities, but is typically mild, does
not usually significantly limit activities, and is most often managed
symptomatically. Conversely, chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain
syndromes have a much greater potential to negatively affect development and future role functioning. Worsening pain and the symptoms
of depression and anxiety associated with chronic pain can lead to
substantial school absences, peer isolation, and developmental delays
later in adolescence and early adulthood. Specifically, adolescents with
chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes may fail to achieve
the level of autonomy and independence necessary for age-­appropriate
activities, such as attending college, living away from home, and maintaining a job. Fortunately, not all children and adolescents with these
syndromes experience this degree of impairment. Factors that contribute to the persistence of pain are increasingly understood and include
female gender, pubertal stage at pain onset, older age of pain onset,
increased psychologic distress associated with the pain, and greater
functional impairment. The likelihood of positive health outcomes is
increased with multidisciplinary treatment addressing the pain, the
functional disabilities, and the psychologic comorbidities associated
with pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Adapted from Anthony KK, Schanberg LE. Assessment and management of pain syndromes and
arthritis pain in children and adolescents. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2007;33:625–660, Box 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 211 u Musculoskeletal Pain Syndromes
Table 211.3  Differential Diagnosis of Idiopathic
Musculoskeletal Pain Syndrome
CHANNELOPATHIES
Erythromelalgia: primary (associated with the SCN9A gene) or
secondary
Paroxysmal extreme pain disorder (SCN9A gene)
Small fiber neuropathy (SCN9A, SCN1OA genes)
Familial episodic pain syndrome (SCN11A, TRPA1 genes)
CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Marfan syndrome
IMMUNE/AUTOIMMUNE
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sarcoidosis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Sjögren syndrome
Familial Mediterranean fever and other autoinflammatory recurrent
fever syndromes
Hereditary angioedema
Chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis
Mononeuritis multiplex associated with vasculitis
METABOLIC/NUTRITION
Fabry disease
Gaucher disease
Porphyria
Mitochondrial neuropathies
Vitamin deficiency (thiamine, B12, C, D)
X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy
OTHER
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Multiple sclerosis
Toxic: lead, arsenic, chemotherapy
HIV
Familial amyloid neuropathy
Complex regional pain syndrome types 1 and 2
Sickle cell anemia
Thalamic stroke
Primary, metastatic, or recurrent malignancy (acute lymphocytic
leukemia, neuroblastoma)
Neurofibromatosis
Radiculopathy
Nerve entrapment syndromes
1.	Peroneal
2.	Suprascapular
3.	Anterior, posterior hip
4.	Anterior cutaneous nerve (abdominal)
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 33.2, p. 547.

211.1 Growing Pains (Benign Limb Pain of
Childhood)
James J. Nocton
The cause of benign limb pain of childhood, historically referred to
as growing pains, is unknown. Low pain threshold, overuse, and
behavioral causes have been postulated, and it is possible that there are
multiple causes for these pains. This pain affects 10–20% of children,
with peak incidence between age 4 and 12 years. Benign limb pains of
childhood are intermittent and usually bilateral, poorly localized, and
predominantly affecting the anterior thigh, shin, and calf. Occasionally,
bilateral upper extremity pain may be associated with leg pain. Children typically describe cramping or aching that occurs most often in
the late afternoon or evening. Pain may wake the child from sleep, may
be severe, and may last a few minutes to hours, but typically resolves
quickly with massage or analgesics; pain is nearly always resolved by
the following morning (Table 211.4). Pain may often follow a day with
increased or excessive physical activity. Physical examination is normal, and gait is not impaired.

1569

Treatment should focus on reassurance, education, and healthy
sleep hygiene while preparing parents and children for the possibility
that the pain may occur intermittently for years, with eventual resolution. Massage, acetaminophen, or NSAIDs during the episode are
nearly always effective.
Restless legs syndrome (RLS), seen more frequently among adolescents and adults, is a sensorimotor disturbance that may be confused with growing pains (see Chapter 31). Often familial, RLS is a
difficult-­to-­control urge to move the leg that is exacerbated during
rest and at night and is relieved by movement (see Table 211.4). There
is significant overlap in the diagnostic features of growing pains and
RLS. Moreover, these conditions can be comorbid, and there is a high
incidence of RLS in the parents of children with growing pains. RLS
appears to be best distinguished from growing pains by the urge to
move the legs, associated uncomfortable leg sensations that may not
be described as painful; worsening with periods of rest; and relief
through movement. Iron supplementation may benefit pediatric
patients with RLS.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

211.2 Small Fiber Polyneuropathy
James J. Nocton
Some patients with juvenile-­onset widespread pain syndromes have
evidence of a small fiber polyneuropathy causing dysfunctional or
degeneration of small-­
diameter unmyelinated C fibers and thinly
myelinated A delta fibers that mediate nociception and the autonomic
nervous system. In addition to pain, these children may have dizziness,
postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), constipation and/
or gastrointestinal dysmotility, and other symptoms suggestive of dysautonomia (Fig. 211.1).
The diagnosis of small fiber polyneuropathy requires distal leg
immunolabeled skin biopsy to identify epidermal nociceptive fibers
and autonomic function testing to examine cardiovagal, adrenergic,
and sudomotor small fiber function. Genetic testing for pathogenic
variants in genes coding for sodium channels may reveal SCN9A,
SCN10A, or SCN11A variants. Some small studies have reported the
presence of autoantibodies to trisulfated disaccharide and fibroblast
growth factor receptor 3, suggestive of immune-­mediated pathogenesis. Other potential etiologies for small fiber neuropathy are noted in
Table 211.5; most cases are idiopathic. In addition, other genetic painful neuropathies should be considered (Table 211.6).
Optimal treatment of patients with small fiber polyneuropathy is
unknown. Corticosteroids and intravenous immune globulin have
been effective in very small numbers of patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

211.3 Diffuse Amplified Pain Syndromes
James J. Nocton
Diffuse amplified pain syndrome is more common in children than
localized amplified pain. In addition to widespread pain, children frequently have associated chronic fatigue, sleep disturbance, headaches,
chronic abdominal pain and gastrointestinal symptoms, stress, anxiety, and/or symptoms of depression (see also Chapter 212). The terms
diffuse amplified pain syndrome, chronic widespread pain syndrome,
chronic myofascial pain syndrome, and juvenile primary fibromyalgia
syndrome are often used to describe the same constellation of symptoms. Some of these children have findings that fulfill the criteria that
have been developed for adult patients with fibromyalgia by either
the American College of Rheumatology (Table 211.7) or the Analgesic, Anesthetic, and Addiction Clinical Trial Translations Innovations
Opportunities and Networks-­American Pain Society (Table 211.8 and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1570 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 211.4  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Growing Pains Including Features of Restless Legs Syndromes (RLS)
INCLUSIONS

EXCLUSIONS

RLS FEATURES

Nature of pain

Intermittent; some pain-­free
days and nights, deep aching,
cramping

Persistent; increasing intensity, pain
during the day

Urge to move legs often accompanied
by unpleasant sensations in legs, but
may not be painful

Unilateral or bilateral

Bilateral

Unilateral

Location of pain

Anterior thigh, calf, posterior
knee—in muscles not the joints

Articular, back, or groin pain

Urge to move and discomfort
throughout leg

Onset of pain

Late afternoon or evening

Pain still present next morning

Worse later in day or night but also
present at periods of rest or inactivity
throughout the day

Physical findings

Normal

Swelling, erythema, tenderness; local
trauma or infection; reduced joint range
of motion; limping, fever, weight loss,
mass

Laboratory findings

Normal

Objective evidence of abnormalities;
increased erythrocyte sedimentation
rate or C-­reactive protein; abnormal
complete blood count, radiography,
bone scan, or MRI

Adapted from Evans AM, Scutter SD. Prevalence of “growing pains” in young children. J Pediatr. 2004;145:255–258; and Walters AS, Gabelia D, Frauscher B. Restless legs syndrome
(Willis-­Ekbom disease) and growing pains: are they the same thing? A side-­by-­side comparison of the diagnostic criteria for both and recommendations for future research. Sleep
Med. 2013;14:1247–1252.

Small fiber neuropathy

Pain

Small fiber sodium
channel dysfunction

Autonomic symptoms

Small fiber mediated
painful neuropathy

Erythromelalgia
and
paroxysmal extreme
pain syndrome

Small fiber mediated
widespread pain

Muscle cramps

• Cramps
• Muscle
pain
• Burning
• Tingling
• Stabbing
• Numbness

Small fiber mediated
autonomic dysfunction

Fibromyalgia

• Gl symptoms
• Heart rate
dysregulation
• Temperature
• Fatigue
sensitivities
• Irritable bowel
syndrome

• Widespread
pain
• Cognitive
dysfunction
• Sleep disturbances

Fig. 211.1 Small fiber neuropathy symptom clusters and neuropathy classifications. (From Levine TD. Small fiber neuropathy: disease classification
beyond pain and burning. J Central Nervous Sys Dis. 2018;10:1–6, Fig. 1, p. 3).

Fig. 211.2). Separate criteria for the diagnosis of juvenile primary fibromyalgia syndrome in children have been proposed, but these have not
been validated (Table 211.9). The evaluation of fibromyalgia tender
points has not been useful or diagnostic.
Although the precise cause of diffuse amplified pain is unknown,
there is an emerging understanding that the development and maintenance of chronic pain are related both to biologic and psychologic
factors. Diffuse amplified pain likely has multifactorial causes and is
hypothesized to be an abnormality of central pain processing associated

with disordered sleep physiology, enhanced pain perception, disordered mood, and dysregulation of hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­
adrenal
and other neuroendocrine axes, resulting in lower pain thresholds
and increased pain sensitivity. Children and adolescents with diffuse
amplified pain often find themselves in a vicious cycle of pain, where
symptoms build on one another and contribute to the onset and maintenance of new symptoms.
Diffuse amplified pain has a chronic course that can detrimentally affect child health and development. Adolescents who do not

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 211 u Musculoskeletal Pain Syndromes
Table 211.5  Causes of Small Fiber Neuropathy
PRIMARY

SECONDARY

IDIOPATHIC
Idiopathic small fiber neuropathy
Burning mouth syndrome

METABOLIC
Impaired glucose tolerance
Diabetes mellitus
Rapid glycemic control
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Dyslipidemia
Hypothyroidism
Chronic kidney disease

HEREDITARY/GENETIC
Familial amyloid polyneuropathy
Fabry disease
Tangier disease
Sodium channelopathies (see
text)

INFECTIONS
HIV
Hepatitis C
Influenza
TOXINS AND DRUGS
Antiretrovirals
Antibiotics—metronidazole,
nitrofurantoin, linezolid
Chemotherapy—bortezomib
Flecainide
Statin
Alcohol
Vitamin B6 toxicity
IMMUNE MEDIATED
Celiac disease
Sarcoidosis
Sjögren syndrome
Rheumatoid arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Paraneoplastic
Monoclonal gammopathy/
amyloid

Note that a number of these conditions may present as a small fiber neuropathy and
then evolve to include large fibers.
Modified from Themistocleous AC, Ramirez JD, Serra J, Bennett DLH. The clinical approach
to small fibre neuropathy and painful channelopathy. Pract Neurol. 2014;14:368–379, Table 1.

receive treatment or who are inadequately treated may withdraw
from school and the social milieu, complicating their transition to
adulthood. Treatment of diffuse amplified pain is ideally multidisciplinary. The major goals are to restore function and alleviate pain
and to improve comorbid mood and sleep disorders. Treatment strategies include parent/child education, pharmacologic interventions,
exercise-­based interventions, and psychologic interventions. Graduated aerobic exercise is the recommended exercise-­based intervention, whereas psychologic interventions should include training in
pain coping skills, stress management skills, emotional support, and
sleep hygiene. CBT is particularly effective in reducing symptoms of
depression in children and adolescents with chronic pain and helps
to reduce functional disability.
Drug therapies, although largely unsuccessful in isolation, may
include tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline 0.1 mg/kg at bedtime;
can increase to 0.5 to 2 mg/kg as tolerated), selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (sertraline 25-­100 mg daily), and anticonvulsants. Pregabalin and duloxetine hydrochloride are approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of fibromyalgia in
adults (≥18 years of age); however, data regarding the efficacy of these
medications in children are limited.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1571

211.4 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
James J. Nocton
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is characterized by chronic,
persistent limb pain, often burning in character. CRPS type 1, also
termed reflex sympathetic dystrophy, has no evidence of nerve injury,
whereas the less common CRPS type 2 is associated with a known
mechanism of nerve injury. The pain of CRPS is typically extreme and
disproportionate to the inciting event. Associated features include allodynia (a heightened pain response to normally non-­noxious stimuli),
hyperalgesia (exaggerated pain reactivity to noxious stimuli), swelling of the affected extremity, and indicators of autonomic dysfunction
(cyanosis, mottling, hyperhidrosis).
There are no diagnostic criteria specifically for pediatric CRPS; in
adults, several sets of criteria have been developed (Table 211.10); the
clinical utility of these criteria is controversial. The diagnosis of CRPS
is clinical and can be made when continuous pain is present that is disproportionate to any potential inciting event with associated allodynia,
or hyperalgesia, evidence of edema, skin blood flow abnormalities, or
excessive sweating activity, and exclusion of other disorders. Other features that may be present include atrophy of hair or nails, loss of joint
mobility, weakness, tremor, and dystonia.
Although many pediatric patients with CRPS present with a history
of minor trauma or repeated stress injury (e.g., caused by competitive
sports), a significant proportion are unable to identify a precipitating
event. Usual age of onset is between 8 and 16 years, and females outnumber males with the disease by as much as 6:1. Childhood CRPS
differs from the adult form in that lower extremities, rather than
upper extremities, are most often affected. The incidence of CRPS in
children is unknown, largely because it is often undiagnosed or diagnosed late. Left untreated, CRPS can have severe consequences for
children, including bone demineralization, muscle wasting, and joint
contractures.
The treatment of CRPS, like that of more diffuse pain syndromes, is
ideally multidisciplinary. Aggressive physical therapy (PT) should be
initiated as soon as the diagnosis is made, and CBT added as needed.
PT is recommended three to four times a week, and children may need
analgesic premedication at the onset, particularly before PT sessions.
PT is initially limited to desensitization and then moves to weight bearing, range of motion, and other functional activities. CBT used as an
adjunctive therapy targets psychosocial obstacles to fully participating
in PT and provides pain-­coping skills training. The goal of both pharmacologic and adjunctive treatments for CRPS is to provide sufficient
pain relief to allow the child to participate in aggressive physical rehabilitation. Multiple studies have shown that noninvasive treatments,
particularly PT and CBT, are at least as efficacious as nerve blocks in
helping children with CRPS achieve resolution of their symptoms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

211.5 Erythromelalgia
James J. Nocton
Children with erythromelalgia experience episodes of intense burning
pain, erythema, edema, and heat, most often in the hands and feet (Fig.
211.3) and less frequently in other locations. Symptoms are most often
triggered by exposure to heat or exercise and typically last for hours to
days. Erythromelalgia is more common in females during adolescence,
and the diagnosis is often delayed for many years. Although many cases
are sporadic, an autosomal dominant hereditary form results most
often from gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants of the SCN9A gene,
which encodes the alpha subunit of the sodium channel NaV1.7 found
in nociceptive neurons that transmit pain signals. Age of onset for the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1572 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 211.6  Clinical Features of Human Disorders Caused by Pathogenic Gene Variants in Ion-­Channel Genes that Lead to
Altered Pain Perception and Are Inherited in a Mendelian Manner
GENE (PROTEIN)

TYPE AND EFFECT
OF GENE VARIANT

MAIN PHENOTYPE

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

Inherited
erythromelalgia

SCN9A (Nav1.7)

Heterozygous,
activating

Onset by age 20 yr; episodic pain triggered
by warmth; feet affected more frequently
than hands

Erythema of feet

Paroxysmal extreme
pain disorder

SCN9A (Nav1.7)

Heterozygous,
activating

Onset at birth; episodic pain; sacral region
is affected most frequently; face is affected
more often than the limbs; physical triggers
include defecation

Erythema of the sacrum;
tonic attacks

Small-­fiber
neuropathy

SCN9A (Nav1.7)

Heterozygous,
activating

Onset at any age but more common in early
adulthood; persistent burning pain; feet
affected more frequently than hands

Could be autonomic
features

Small-­fiber
neuropathy

SCN10A (Nav1.8)

Heterozygous,
activating

Persistent burning pain

Could be autonomic
features

Familial episodic
pain syndrome
type I

TRPA1 (TRPA1)

Heterozygous,
activating

Onset at birth or in infancy; episodic chest or
arm pain; triggers are hunger and cold

Familial episodic
pain syndrome
type III

SCN11A (Nav1.9)

Heterozygous,
activating

Onset in first decade; episodic hand and
foot pain; triggers are intercurrent illness or
exercise

Nav, Sodium ion channel.
Modified from Bennett DLH, Woods CG. Painful and painless channelopathies. Lancet Neurol. 2014;13:587–599, Table 1.

Table 211.7  American College of Rheumatology Fibromyalgia
Diagnostic Criteria (2016 Revision)
The following three conditions must be met:
1.	Widespread Pain Index (WPI) ≥7 and Symptom Severity Scale
(SSS) score ≥5 or WPI 4-­6 and SSS score ≥9.
2.	Generalized pain, defined as pain in at least four of five regions,
must be present. Jaw, chest, and abdominal pain are not included
in generalized pain definition.

Table 211.8  Analgesic, Anesthetic, and Addiction Clinical
Trial Translations Innovations Opportunities
and Networks-­American Pain Society Pain
Taxonomy (AAPT) Fibromyalgia Diagnostic
Criteria
Core diagnostic criteria:
1.	Musculoskeletal pain defined as 6 or more pain sites from a total
of 19 possible sites (see Fig. 211.2)

3.	Symptoms have been generally present for at least 3 mo.

2.	Moderate to severe sleep problems OR fatigue

ASCERTAINMENT OF WPI
The WPI is the number of areas in which a patient has had pain over
the last week. The score will be between 0 and 19: Left Upper
Region: left jaw, left shoulder girdle, left upper arm, left lower
arm; Right Upper Region: right jaw, right shoulder girdle, right
upper arm, right lower arm; Left Lower Region: left hip (buttock,
trochanter), left upper leg, left lower leg; Right Lower Region: right
hip (buttock, trochanter), right upper leg, right lower leg; Axial
Region: chest, abdomen, upper back, lower back, and neck.

3.	Musculoskeletal pain plus fatigue or sleep problems must have
been present for at least 3 mo

ASCERTAINMENT OF SSS SCORE
The SSS score is the sum of the severity of three symptoms (fatigue,
waking unrefreshed, and cognitive symptoms) over the past week
(each given a score from 0 to 3) plus the sum of the number of
the following symptoms the patient has been bothered by that
occurred during the previous 6 mo: headaches, pain or cramps in
the lower abdomen, and depression (each given a score from 0 to
1). The final score will be between 0 and 12. For fatigue, waking
unrefreshed, and cognitive symptoms, the level of severity over the
past week is rated using the following scale:
0 = No problem
1 = Slight or mild problems, generally mild or intermittent
2 = Moderate, considerable problems, often present and/or at a
moderate level
3 = Severe: pervasive, continuous, life-­disturbing problems
• For headaches, pain or cramps in the lower abdomen, and depression,
the severity for each is scored as 0 or 1.

NOTE: The presence of another pain disorder or related symptoms does not rule
out a diagnosis of fibromyalgia. However, a clinical assessment is recommended
to evaluate for any condition that could fully account for the patient’s symptoms or
contribute to the severity of the symptoms.
Adapted from Arnold LM, Bennett RM, Crofford LJ, et al. AAPT Diagnostic Criteria for
Fibromyalgia. J Pain. 2019;20:611–628.

familial form ranges from 1 to 16 years. Secondary erythromelalgia
is associated with many disorders, including myeloproliferative diseases, peripheral neuropathies, frostbite, and rheumatic diseases. The
differential diagnosis includes Fabry disease, Raynaud phenomenon
or disease, reflex sympathetic dystrophy, and peripheral neuropathies.
In contrast to Raynaud phenomenon, the pain in erythromelalgia is
relieved by cooling the affected area. Treatment includes avoidance of
heat exposure and other precipitating situations and the use of cooling techniques that do not cause tissue damage during attacks. There
is no proven reliably efficacious treatment, and NSAIDs, narcotics,
anesthetic agents (lidocaine patch), anticonvulsants (oxcarbazepine,
carbamazepine, gabapentin), antidepressants, sodium nitroprusside,
magnesium, mexiletine, and misoprostol, as well as biofeedback, medical and surgical nerve blocks, and hypnosis have had variable efficacy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Adapted from Wolfe F, Clauw DJ, Fitzcharles MA, et al. 2016 Revisions to the 2010/2011
fibromyalgia diagnostic criteria. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2016;46(3):319–329.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 211 u Musculoskeletal Pain Syndromes
Widespread Pain Index
(1 point per circle; score range: 0–19 points)

1573

Table 211.10  Budapest Clinical Diagnostic Criteria for
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome

Please indicate if you have had pain or tenderness during the
past 7 days in the areas shown below.
Fill in the circles on the diagram for each area in which you have
had pain or tenderness.

All of the following criteria must be met:
1.	Continuing pain, which is disproportionate to any inciting event
2.	Must report at least one symptom in each of the following four
categories:
• Sensory: Hyperesthesia and/or allodynia

Right jaw

Neck
Chest or Left
shoulder
breast

Right shoulder
Right
upper arm
Right
lower arm

Left jaw

Abdomen

Left
upper
Left
shoulder
arm
Left
lower arm

Right hip or
buttocks
Right upper leg

• Vasomotor: Temperature asymmetry, skin color changes, and/or
skin color asymmetry
Upper
back
Lower
back
Left hip or
buttocks

Left upper leg

• Sudomotor/edema: Edema, sweating changes, and/or
sweating asymmetry
• Motor/trophic: Decreased range of motion, motor dysfunction
(tremor, weakness, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail,
skin)
3.	Must display at least one sign at time of evaluation in two or more
of the following four categories:
• Sensory: Evidence of hyperesthesia (to pin prick) and/or
allodynia (to light touch, temperature sensation, deep somatic
pressure, and/or joint movement)
• Vasomotor: Evidence of temperature asymmetry (>1°C), skin
color changes, and/or skin color asymmetry

Right lower leg

Left lower leg

• Sudomotor/edema: Edema, sweating changes, and/or
sweating asymmetry
• Motor/trophic: Decreased range of motion, motor dysfunction
(tremor, weakness, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail,
skin)

Fig. 211.2 Widespread pain index. (Modified from Fraix M. Fibro-

myalgia. In Tallia AF, Scherger JE, Dickey NW (eds). Swanson’s Family
Medicine Review, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022. Fig 47.1.)

4.	There is no other diagnosis that better explains the signs and
symptoms.
Adapted from Harden RN, Bruel S, Stanton-­Hicks, et al. Proposed new diagnostic
criteria for complex regional pain syndrome. Pain Med. 2007;8:326–331.

Table 211.9  Suggested Diagnostic Criteria for Juvenile
Primary Fibromyalgia Syndrome (JPFS)
MAJOR CRITERIA
1.	Generalized musculoskeletal aching at three or more sites for
≥3 mo
2.	Absence of an underlying condition/cause
3.	Normal laboratory tests
4.	Five or more typical tender points*
MINOR CRITERIA
1.	Chronic anxiety or tension
2.	Fatigue
3.	Poor sleep
4.	Chronic headaches
5.	Irritable bowel syndrome
6.	Subjective soft tissue swelling
7.	Numbness

Fig. 211.3 Characteristic redness and edema of the foot associated

with erythromelalgia. (From Pfund Z, Stankovics J, Decsi T, Illes Z. Childhood steroid-­responsive acute erythromelalgia with axonal neuropathy of
large myelinated fibers: a dysimmune neuropathy? Neuromuscul Disord.
2009;19:49–52, Fig. 1A, p. 50.)

8.	Pain modulated by physical activities
9.	Pain modulated by changes in weather
10.	Pain modulated by anxiety/stress
*Thirty-­one potential tender points were listed for these criteria when proposed in 1985.
JPFS is diagnosed when all major criteria are met, plus three of the minor criteria or
when there are four tender points and five minor criteria.
Adapted from Coles M, Weissmann R, Uziel Y. Juvenile primary fibromyalgia syndrome:
Epidemiology, etiology, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations and diagnosis. Pediatr
Rheumatol Online J. 2021;19(1):22.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1574 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 212

Chronic Overlapping Pain
Conditions
Thomas C. Chelimsky and
Gisela G. Chelimsky
In chronic overlapping pain conditions (COPCs), several painful symptoms affecting different body systems coexist without clear
underlying pathophysiology. Other terms for COPCs include medically unexplained symptoms, functional somatic syndromes (FSS),
and central sensitivity syndromes. These disorders are probably
highly prevalent; for example, two COPCs, irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS) and migraine, each affect 10–20% of the population. Pediatric
COPC studies usually focus on populations with one painful condition
(headaches) and their psychiatric comorbidities, rather than somatic
comorbidities. The overlap of these disorders with psychiatric conditions has led both the public and the medical specialists to dichotomize these disorders artificially into “physical,” by implication, “real”
disorders and “psychologic,” by implication, “not real” disorders. This
classification ignores the unity of brain and body and hinders progress
in understanding these disorders. COPC connotes a nonassumptive
neutral position, appropriately attributing no assumed pathophysiology to the disorder, in contrast to other terms, such as “medically
unexplained syndrome,” subtly suggesting a psychologic process, more
strongly implied in the term “functional.”

PREVALENCE

The prevalence of COPCs is unknown depending on which symptom is being assessed and how much overlap exists across disorders.
A large study from 28 countries (about 400,000 participants) found a
prevalence of headache of 54%, stomachache 50%, and backache 37%,
occurring at least once a month for at least 6 months. Females had a
higher prevalence of having all three complaints when compared with
males; the prevalence increased with age. These three pain syndromes,
headache, stomachache, and backache, frequently coexist.
IBS and chronic abdominal pain affect 6–20% of children and
adolescents. Idiopathic musculoskeletal pain affects about 16% of
schoolchildren age 5-­16 years and is often associated with sleep disturbances, headache, abdominal pain, daytime tiredness, and feeling
sad. Migraines present >6 months occur in about 8% of the population (children and adolescents <20 years). Fibromyalgia is present in
1.2–6%. The prevalence of chronic disabling fatigue increases during
adolescence from about 1.9% at age 13 to 3% at 18 years. As with most
COPCs, fibromyalgia has many comorbid disorders, such as sleep disturbance, fatigue, headache, sore throat, joint pain, and abdominal
pain. The American College of Rheumatology definition of fibromyalgia incorporates some of these comorbid conditions.

SYMPTOM/DISORDER OVERLAP

Diagnostic criteria of many of these disorders overlap with one another,
making differentiation between two disorders more of a semantic issue
rather than a clinical differentiation. Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS),
clinically the most concerning symptom, shares many of the diagnostic
criteria with fibromyalgia. Patients with a single pain condition, such
as fibromyalgia, CFS, IBS, multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS), headaches, or temporomandibular joint disorder (TMJD), will typically
have another disorder. This overlap of symptoms may reflect a shared
pathophysiology, possibly a central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction, as was implied in the prior term “central sensitization syndrome.”
A CNS pathophysiology would also explain the “invisibility” of these
disorders to usual screening tools that most often target an end organ.

COPCs also harbor many symptoms that are not strictly “pain,”
although they may be equally or more disabling. Adolescents seen in
a tertiary referral center with a functional gastrointestinal disorder
(FGID) also manifest dizziness, chronic nausea, chronic fatigue, and
sleep disturbance, as well as migraines. Up to 50% of adolescents complain of weekly fatigue, and 15%, daily fatigue. COPCs are studied in
their discipline-specific silos rather than collectively as a group.
Migraine headaches are frequently associated with anxiety and
depression. Anxiety also predicts the persistence of migraine headaches. Sleep disturbance and migraine also interact closely. Poor sleep
can trigger a migraine or a migraine cluster; migraine headache itself
disturbs sleep. Juvenile fibromyalgia is associated with sleep disturbances
such as prolonged sleep latency, frequent awakening, less total sleep
time, and periodic limb movements. Adult patients with IBS also have
sleep disturbances, correlating with anxiety, depression, and stress.
The comorbidities of hypermobility Ehlers-­Danlos (hEDS) and
postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) with COPC have
been significant. Patients with hEDS may complain of widespread and
sometimes debilitating pain with or after activity, severe fatigue, handwriting difficulties, “cracking” of joints, joint swelling, joint dislocation,
subluxation, or back pain. The chronic pain reduces exercise tolerance,
with poorer quality of life and an ever-­worsening cycle because exercise is a key piece of management. Patients with FGID may also have
hEDS, fibromyalgia, chronic pain, and higher somatizations scores
than those with organic gastrointestinal (GI) disorders.
The diagnosis of pediatric POTS requires an increase in heart rate
>40 beats/min in the first 10 minutes of upright tilt test associated
with orthostatic symptoms. POTS is also associated with multiple
comorbidities, including sleep disruption, chronic pain, Raynaud-­like
symptoms, GI abnormalities, and less frequently, headaches, syncope,
and urinary complaints. Patients with both POTS and hEDS usually
have more migraines and syncope than those with POTS alone. The
prevalence of comorbid disorders in children with COPC is identical
whether they have POTS or hEDS.

PSYCHIATRIC COMORBIDITIES

Many of these disorders have significant psychiatric comorbidities.
Juvenile fibromyalgia is associated with anxiety disorders and major
mood disorders. Children with medically unexplained symptoms
generally have more anxiety and depression than children with other
chronic disorders. Other associations include disruptive behaviors,
symptom internalization, fearfulness, greater dependency, hyperactivity, and concern about sickness.

PREDISPOSING FACTORS

Female gender and older age (adolescence) increase the risk of COPCs.
Certain conditions (e.g., headache) are more common in males or have
similar prevalence across genders during childhood, but the prevalence
in females increases after puberty. Trauma or posttraumatic stress disorder increases psychologic comorbidities in juvenile fibromyalgia.
Some studies suggest that anxiety predisposes to chronic pain. A
population-­based study following children from 18 months to 14 years
of age suggested that maternal psychologic distress in early childhood
and depressive and pain complaints in preadolescence increase the risk
of recurrent abdominal pain at age 14. Postinfectious IBS is an identifiable risk factor for new-­onset anxiety, depression, and sleep disruption
in adults. Children with recurrent abdominal pain often have parents
with abdominal pain. It is unclear if this association is caused by a common environmental/genetic factor or a learned behavior of the child
imitating the parent.

NATURAL HISTORY

The natural history of COPC is not well known. Chronic disabling
fatigue in the general adolescent population persists 2-­3 years in about
25% of patients, but only 8% of youth affected at age 13 still had the
complaints at ages 16 and 18. A meta-­analysis suggests that the prognosis of CFS in children is usually good, with a small minority having
persistent disabling symptoms. The patient’s belief in an underlying

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 212 u Chronic Overlapping Pain Conditions

-43

Fig. 212.1 Brain areas demonstrating

more (red) or less (blue) activation in irritable bowel syndrome compared with
healthy control in a meta-­analysis of rectal
distention. (From Tillisch K, Mayer EA, Labus JS. Quantitative meta-­analysis identifies brain regions activated during rectal
distension in irritable bowel syndrome.
Gastroenterology. 2011;140:91–100, Fig.
3.).

-38

-32

-14

-10

0

28

36

physical disorder and the presence of psychiatric comorbidities predict
a poorer outcome.
In a study of children with FGID, the outcome depended on specific
variables. Those who perceived their abdominal pain as more threatening, with high levels of pain catastrophization and little capacity to cope
with pain because of reduced activity levels, had a poorer outcome. This
“high pain dysfunctional profile” subgroup was predominantly female
(70%) with a mean age of 12.2 years. Two thirds of this subgroup still
complained of FGID at follow-­up vs about one third of those in the other
groups. These groups included a “high pain adaptive profile” group with
similar pain levels but better adaptive skills and less catastrophization,
predominantly slightly younger (11.8 years) females, and a “low pain
adaptive profile” group, slightly younger (11.1 years), with equal males
and females but less abdominal pain, better coping mechanisms, and
less impairment of daily activities. In the high pain dysfunctional profile
group, 41% had both FGID and nonabdominal chronic pain at follow­up vs 11% in the high pain adaptive and 17% in the low pain adaptive
group. Another study following children ages 4-­16.6 years with IBS demonstrated resolution of symptoms in 58%, usually without medication. The
differences between these studies may result from the age of the groups,
with better outcome in the younger patients, as well as the number of
comorbidities and psychologic profile. Similarly, in juvenile fibromyalgia, symptoms are still present 2-6 years later in about 60% of affected
children. The psychiatric comorbidities, mainly depression, and controlling family environments are associated with a poor prognosis.

PROPOSED PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

3

0

-4

There may be dysfunction in the hypothalamic-­hypophyseal-­adrenal
axis, circadian patterns, autonomic responses, some aspects of CNS
processing, the inflammatory immune response, and the musculoskeletal system. Vagal tone measured by heart rate variability is decreased
in some children with FGID symptoms and in children with COPCs.
Alterations in the autonomic nervous system may affect the immune
system and circadian patterns. The stress response may increase muscle tone, which in turn leads to body aches and tension headaches. In
fibromyalgia the cortisol response is altered, with lower cortisol levels

45

1575

38

-20

8

50

on awakening and throughout the day. Orthostatic intolerance from
autonomic abnormalities may also contribute to poor concentration
from brain hypoperfusion and blood pooling in the lower extremities.
The pathophysiology has been better studied in myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME)/CFS. ME/CFS has been associated with joint hypermobility, orthostatic intolerance, decreased range of motion, and reduced activity. These
patients demonstrate excessive glial activation resulting in neuroexcitation,
neuroinflammation, and possibly neurodegeneration. These features may
contribute to the cognitive issues and fatigue present in this disorder.
Neuroinflammation and other changes in processing may lead to
abnormal descending inhibitory pain pathways, resulting in distal pain
and “central sensitization.” The malfunction of descending antinociceptive pathways allows pain to spread in the body, associated with increased
activity of the nociceptive facilitator pathways. These facilitator pathways
are further activated by psychologic factors, such as catastrophization,
depression, lack of acceptance, and hypervigilance. Other signals such
as pressure, sound, heat, and cold are also aberrantly processed, with
activation of areas of the brain that are typically activated only by acute
pain stimuli, such as the insula, prefrontal cortex, and anterior cingulate
cortex, as well as some regions usually not involved in pain processing.
The neuromechanisms involved in dysregulated brain-­gut interactions
in patients with FGID include changes in functional connectivity between
brain regions associated with nociceptive processing and the somatosensory cortexes. Enhanced sensory processing of the gut homeostasis
(homeostatic afferent) and attentive responses to salience stimuli (salience
network) as well as changes in certain brain regions are noted in patients
with FGID (Fig. 212.1). These alterations affect the perception of pain and
may affect the endocrine and autonomic nervous systems. What was once
called FGIDs is currently considered disorders of gut-­brain interactions.
Proposed mechanisms are noted in Figure 212.2. Research investigating the role of the microbiome in regulating microglia, astrocytes, and
immune cells may lead to central sensitization and chronic pain.

TREATMENT

In general, chronic pain should never be treated with opioids; cognitive-­
behavioral therapy (CBT) and a gradually progressive exercise program

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1576 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
KEY EFFECTORS

A
B
C

Emotional arousal network
Salience network
Central executive network
Sensorimotor network

ANS
HPA axis

FUNCTIONS

Serotonin (5-HT)
Norepinephrine
Dopamine

Affective responses to pain and aversive stimuli
Stimulus appraisal
Attentional processes
Perception of visceral stimuli

Catecholamines
Acetylcholine

“Fight or flight” arousal response (sympathetic)
“Rest and digest” (parasympathetic)

Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)
Glucocorticoids

Acute and chronic stress responses

Cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, IL-1B, TNF)
Activated mast cells
Monocytes
T lymphocytes

Altered intestinal permeability
Modulation of ENS and ANS signaling

Acetylcholine
Dopamine
Serotonin (5-HT) and
Serotonergic receptors

Bowel sensory and motor function
Regulation of mucosal secretion and blood flow
Local endocrine and immune responses

Short chain fatty acids
Secondary bile acids
Luminal 5-HT release

Altered intestinal permeability
Influence bowel secretion and contractility
Low grade intestinal inflammation
Modify visceral sensation and autonomic tone

Immune cells

D
Enteric Nervous System (ENS)

E
Intestinal microbiota

F

Fig. 212.2 Key effectors and functions of the brain-­gut-­microbiota axis. ANS, autonomic nervous system; HPA, hypothalamic pituitary axis. (From

Tait C, Sayuk GS. The brain-­gut-­microbial axis: A framework for understanding functional GI illness and their therapeutic interventions. Eur J Int Med.
2021;84:1–9, Fig. 2.)

constitute the cornerstones of treatment. The complex comorbid
nature of COPCs typically requires a multidisciplinary approach.
Because neither CBT nor exercise will have any effect in the absence
of full patient engagement and understanding, the team must include
the family and the patient, a pain psychologist with experience in
CBT, a physical therapist, and the primary care physician. Depending
on comorbid conditions, rheumatology, neurology, or gastroenterology may have important roles for symptom management and a possible alternative diagnosis. Depending on the initial symptomatology,
the differential diagnosis should include inflammatory bowel disease,
celiac disease, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, autoinflammatory disorders, Fabry disease,
porphyrias, hereditary sensory-­autonomic neuropathies, and Ehlers-­
Danlos syndrome. Red flags suggesting a medical/organic etiology for
abdominal pain (Table 212.1), headache (Tables 212.2 and 212.3), and
musculoskeletal pain (Table 212.4) must be assessed.
When a thorough evaluation for a structural cause of symptoms is
unrevealing, an important next step is patient and family education. This
should include the common presentation, the expectation that “markers” for these types of disorders would typically be absent, and the presence of solid management tools with high probability of improvement.
Families and patients need to receive encouragement to stop seeking a
“magic diagnosis and cure” and to begin the path to full recovery. Without this step, critical patient engagement in the treatment will not occur.
In our practice, we sometimes call functional disorders a problem of
“software,” in contrast to structural issues that would involve “hardware.”
We explain that successful management must change the software, not
just mask symptoms. Approaches that accomplish such a goal include
CBT and a rehabilitative program that may require physical therapy,
a vigorous exercise program with interval training, meditation, and/
or yoga. Patients are often deconditioned and may need to start with a
very low level of physical activity. In addition, their exercise tolerance
may be significantly hampered by an orthostatic intolerance syndrome
(e.g., POTS). For these reasons, we frequently recommend starting with
a water aerobics program, which provides several benefits: (1) very low
gravitational force, so the patient can be set up for success, working only
on conditioning and not simultaneously fighting an orthostatic challenge; (2) builds both limb and core strength; and (3) gentle on joints
for those with arthralgias or a hypermobility syndrome. When water is
unavailable, we recommend starting with a recumbent exercise program

such as a recumbent stationary bike. In both circumstances, we then
slowly introduce upright aerobic activities on land over 2-­3 months.
Strength exercises are also useful. A Cochrane review in adults with
painful disorders showed exercise to have minimal side effects and to
improve functionality, reduce pain, and improve quality of life. Patients
with fibromyalgia who undergo a 3-­month multidisciplinary program
with twice-­weekly physical therapy and CBT benefited in function and
physical activity level, and most importantly continued to exercise regularly at 1 year follow-­up. Pharmacologic interventions have less impact
than nonmedical treatments.
When children are missing school or are homebound, it is important
to work closely with the school to encourage reentry. This may require
modifying the school schedule initially, starting with fewer hours at
school, and providing extra time for homework on days that the children are not feeling well.
Although medications such as tricyclic antidepressants are often added
to the treatment, the improvement with these medications for chronic
pain is minimal, and the side effects need to be considered. Nonetheless,
amitriptyline and anticonvulsants like gabapentin are often used because
they help in treating headaches and abdominal pain and improve sleep
quality, a critical element to manage any chronic pain condition.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

212.1 Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
Mark R. Magnusson
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), also known as myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME), is a complex, diverse, and debilitating illness characterized by chronic or intermittent fatigue accompanied by select
symptoms and occurring in children, adolescents, and adults. The
combination of fatigue and other symptoms interferes significantly
with daily activities and has no identified medical explanation (Fig.
212.3). The fatigue does not require exertion by the patient, nor does
rest relieve it. Some consider postexertion malaise, or worsening of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 212 u Chronic Overlapping Pain Conditions

1577

Table 212.1  Red Flags and Clues to an Organic Cause of
Abdominal Pain

Table 212.2  History-­Related Red Flags for Secondary
Headaches

Age <4 yr old
Localized pain in nonperiumbilical site
Referred pain
Sudden onset of excruciating pain
Crescendo nature of pain
Sudden worsening of pain
Fever (high fever >39.4°C suggests pneumonia, pyelonephritis,
dysentery, cholangitis, more than perforation or abscess)
Jaundice
Distention*
Dysphagia
Dysuria
Emesis (especially bilious)
Anorexia
Weight loss, failure to thrive
Positive family history (metabolic disorders, peptic ulcer disease)†
Change in urine or stool color (blood, acholic) or frequency
Vaginal discharge
Menstrual abnormalities (amenorrhea)
Sexual activity
Delayed sexual development (chronic pain)
Anemia
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Elevated stool calprotectin
Specific physical findings (hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, absent
bowel sounds, adnexal tenderness, palpable mass, involuntary
guarding, focal or diffuse tenderness, positive rectal examination
results, perianal disease, joint swelling, rashes)

Quality:
“Thunderclap” rapid-­onset headache or the “worst headache of
my life”
Recent worsening in severity or frequency
Change in quality
New-­onset symptoms consistent with cluster headache
Location:
Unilateral without alteration of sides
Chronic or recurrent occipital headache
Timing:
Awakens from sleep
Occurs in morning or causes morning vomiting
Acute or chronic progressive pattern
Positional or activity-­related variations:
Worsened in the recumbent position or when bending over
Headache experienced or worsened with cough or the Valsalva
maneuver
Associated neurologic history:
Neurologic dysfunction other than typical aura
Altered sensorium during headache
Sensory deficits or changes in vision, gait, or coordination
Other focal neurologic deficits
Seizures or syncope
Decreased visual acuity
Mental status changes (e.g., confusion or disorientation)
Regression in fine or gross motor developmental skills
Decline in cognition or school performance
Change in mood, behavior, or personality
Associated general history:
Vomiting without nausea and morning/fasting nausea or vomiting
Polyuria or polydipsia
Preschool or younger age
History of head trauma
Neck pain:
Medical comorbidities
History of ventriculoperitoneal shunt
Certain medications
Signs of systemic or localized head/neck infection
Negative family history of primary headache disorders

*Consider the five Fs: fat, feces, flatus (aerophagia, obstruction), fluid (ascites,
hydronephrosis, cysts), fetus (pregnancy or fetal-­like abnormal growth [e.g., tumors]).
†Family history is also positive for chronic pain syndromes (constipation, irritable bowel,
dysmenorrhea, and lactase or sucrase deficiency).
Modified from Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric
Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 13.8, p. 229.

Table 212.3  Physical Examination Red Flags for Secondary
Headaches
Abnormal vital signs:
Hypertension
Growth failure
Increased head circumference or bulging fontanel
Fever
Meningeal signs with or without fever
Evidence of cranial trauma
Cranial bruit
Frontal bony tenderness
Macrocephaly
Abnormal ophthalmologic findings:
Papilledema
Abnormal ocular movements
Squinting
Pathologic pupillary response
Visual field defects
Abnormal neurologic findings:
Impaired mental status
Cranial nerve palsy
Ataxia
Abnormal gait
Abnormal coordination
Abnormal reflexes
Asymmetric motor or sensory examination
Hemiparesis
Developmental regression
Precocious, delayed, or arrested puberty
Skin findings:
Café-­au-­lait or ash leaf macules
Petechiae or purpura
Facial hemangioma
Malar rash
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 34.6, p. 553.

From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 34.5, p. 553.

Table 212.4  Musculoskeletal/Joint Pain Warning Signals
Requiring Further Workup
• Arthritis: Erythema, warmth, swelling, pain on palpation
• Pain/stiffness in the morning
• Abnormal radiographic findings
• Pain at rest, relieved by activity
• Pain at night: Worsened by massage, analgesics ineffective
• Refusal to walk
• Extremity atrophy
• Bony tenderness
• Poor growth
• Weight loss
• Fever
• Rash
• Abnormal blood results: Including complete blood count (CBC),
C-­reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Modified from Friedrichsdorf SJ, Giordano J, Dakoji KD, et al. Chronic pain in children
and adolescents: Diagnosis and treatment of primary pain disorders in head, abdomen,
muscles and joints. Children. 2016;3:42, Table 3.

the fatigue with additional symptoms after mental or physical exertion
and lasting >24 hours, to be characteristic of CFS. A definitive causal
agent or process has not been identified, although the differential diagnosis includes infectious, inflammatory, metabolic, genetic, and autoimmune diseases. Our understanding of this condition is largely from
studies of adults and adolescents, with limited descriptions of chronic
fatiguing illnesses in younger children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1578 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Outliers

Mean

Bodily
pain

General
health

Median

Mean scores of 213 healthy controls

100

SF-36 scores

80

60

40

20

0
Physical
functioning

Vitality

Mental
health

Role
physical

Role
emotional

Social
functioning

Subscale

Fig. 212.3 Functional status* of 471 patients enrolled in the CDC Multisite Clinical Assessment† of ME/CFS§—United States, September 2015.

*Measured by box plots of scores in the eight subscales of Short-­Form Health Survey (SF-­36) scores (25th and 75th percentile at bottom and
top of box). SF-­36 scores range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating better functioning. †https://www.cdc.gov/cfs/programs/clinical-­
assessment/index.html. §ME/CFS (myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome) patients show significant impairment, particularly in vitality
and physical functioning subscale scores, but with preservation of mental health and emotional role functioning. (From Unger ER, Lin JMS, Brimmer
DJ, et al. CDC Grand Rounds: Chronic fatigue syndrome—advancing research and clinical education. MMWR. 2016;65[50–51]:1434–1438.)

The illness was formally defined in 1988 as chronic fatigue syndrome because persistent unexplained fatigue was considered the
principal and invariable physical symptom. A variety of other
names have been used to describe the illness, including chronic
mononucleosis, chronic Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) infection, postinfection syndrome, and immune dysfunction syndrome. Several case
definitions have been developed and are in use in both clinical care
and research (Table 212.5).
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) 2015 recommendations apply
to all ages and include a special focus on pediatrics. The IOM suggested new diagnostic criteria and a new name, systemic exertion
intolerance disease (SEID), to emphasize the postexertion malaise
criterion and better understand the illness (Table 212.6).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Based on worldwide studies, 0.2–2.3% of adolescents or children
have CFS. Most epidemiology studies use the 1994 definition. CFS
is more prevalent in adolescents than in younger children. The variation in CFS prevalence estimates may result from variations in case
definition, study methodology and application, study population
composition (specialty vs general practice or general population),
and data collection (parent, self-­reporting vs clinician evaluation).
Gender distribution in children differs from that in adults, with a

more equal distribution in children <15 years old, while remaining
two-­fold to three-­fold higher in females 15-­18 years old. Few studies have reported the incidence of CFS among children <10 years
old. In adolescents in the Netherlands, the pediatrician-­diagnosed
incidence of CFS/ME was 0.01%, and in the United Kingdom, 0.5%.

PATHOGENESIS

Although the etiology and pathophysiology of CFS are unknown,
some patients and clinicians correlate the onset with a recent episode of a viral illness such as infectious mononucleosis (10–12%)
(EBV; see Chapter 301). A pathophysiologic relationship of CFS to
infection is suggested because the symptoms and biologic markers
elicited by the nonspecific innate host responses to infections in
general are present in CFS. CFS-­like illness after infectious mononucleosis is not predicted by viremia or altered host response to
EBV infection, but is associated with the severity of the primary
infection. A wide variety of other candidate viral infections have
been associated with postinfectious fatigue syndromes, particularly in adolescents and adults. SARS CoV-­2/COVID-­19 infection
has also been implicated, as patients with a history of COVID-­19
infection have presented with symptoms similar to patients with
ME/CFS, labeled long COVID, post-­acute sequalae of SARS CoV-­2
infection (PASC), or post–COVID-­19 conditions (Table 212.7) (see

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 212 u Chronic Overlapping Pain Conditions

1579

Table 212.5  Overview of Current Case Definitions for Systemic Exertion Intolerance Disease (SEID) and Past Definitions of
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome or Myalgic Encephalomyelitis
SYMPTOM

SEID

CFS

ME

Fatigue and impairment of daily
function

≥6 mo

≥6 mo

≥6 mo

Sudden onset

Yes

Yes

Muscle weakness

Yes

Muscle pain

Yes

Postexertional symptoms

Yes

Yes

Sleep disturbance

Yes

Yes

Memory or cognitive disturbances

Yes

Yes

Autonomic symptoms

Yes

Sore throat

Yes

Lymph node involvement

Yes

Cardiovascular symptoms

Yes

Yes

Headaches

Yes

Arthralgias

Yes

Yes

CFS, Chronic fatigue syndrome; ME, myalgic encephalomyelitis.
Data from Institute of Medicine. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Redefining an Illness. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2015; Jason L,
Evans M, Porter N, et al. The development of a revised Canadian myalgic encephalomyelitis chronic fatigue syndrome case definition. Am J Biochem Biotechnol. 2010;6:120–135;
Reeves WC, Wagner D, Nisenbaum R, et al. Chronic fatigue syndrome—a clinically empirical approach to its definition and study. BMC Med. 2005;3:19.

Table 212.6  Criteria for Diagnosis of Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome (ME/CFS)
Patient has each of the following three symptoms at least half the
time to at least a moderately severe degree:
• A substantial reduction or impairment in the ability to engage in
preillness levels of occupational, educational, social, or personal
activities that persists for >6 mo and is accompanied by fatigue,
which is often profound, is of new or definite onset (not lifelong),
is not the result of ongoing excessive exertion, and is not
substantially alleviated by rest.
• Postexertional malaise*
• Unrefreshing sleep*
Plus at least one of the two following manifestations (chronic, severe):
• Cognitive impairment*
• Orthostatic intolerance
*Frequency and severity of symptoms should be assessed. The diagnosis of ME/CFS
should be questioned if patients do not have these symptoms at least half of the time
with moderate, substantial, or severe intensity.
From Institute of Medicine. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2015.

Chapter 449.1). Similar features have been described in post–intensive care syndrome.
Similarities between CFS symptoms and those experienced by
patients with autoimmune and other inflammatory disorders suggests primary perturbation of immune function in the pathogenesis
of CFS. Hypogammaglobulinemia and hypergammaglobulinemia,
immunoglobulin subclass deficiencies, elevated levels of circulating
immune complexes, altered helper/suppressor lymphocyte ratios,
natural killer cell dysfunction, elevated cytokines, and monocyte
dysfunction have been inconsistently reported in adult patients
with CFS. These findings have not been consistent among studies.
CFS patients as a group differ from healthy controls, but most laboratory values of the immune parameters are not outside the normal
range.

Table 212.7  WHO Definition of Long (Post)–COVID-­19
Condition
• Post–COVID-­19 condition occurs in individuals with a history of
probable or confirmed SARS-­CoV-­2 infection, usually 3 mo from
the onset of COVID-­19, with symptoms that last for at least 2 mo
and cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis.
• Common symptoms include fatigue, shortness of breath, and
cognitive dysfunction and generally have an impact on everyday
functioning.
• Symptoms might be new onset after initial recovery from an acute
COVID-­19 episode or persist from the initial illness.
• Symptoms might also fluctuate or relapse over time; a separate
definition might be applicable for children.
Modified from Munblit D, O’Hara ME, Akrami A, et al. Long COVID: Aiming for a
consensus. Lancet Respir Med. 2022;10(7):632–634.

Autonomic nervous system (ANS) changes are suggested by the
orthostatic intolerance (OI) experienced by some patients with
CFS. OI syndromes with circulatory dysfunction include neutrally
mediated hypotension and POTS and have been observed in some
patients with CFS and could contribute to the syndrome. The pathophysiology of these manifestations among adolescents with CFS is
unclear, but in postinfectious states could be associated with unreplenished fluid and electrolyte losses associated with acute infection
or immune-­mediated injury (autoantibodies directed against ANS).
Because the widespread musculoskeletal pain in CFS is similar to fibromyalgia, and because some consider these to be overlapping syndromes,
fibromyalgia and CFS may share similarities in pathogenesis. Other
hypotheses under investigation for the biologic basis of CFS involve alterations in energy metabolism (e.g., mitochondrion, particularly as related
to exercise intolerance and postexertion malaise), alterations in sleep,
the stress response, and the hypothalamic-­pituitary axis. Understanding
CFS has proved so challenging because it likely represents more than one
underlying pathophysiology. Current studies and guidelines are attempting to stratify or subgroup patients to address this possibility.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1580 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The dominant symptom expressed by adolescents and adults is a
substantial reduction or impairment in the ability to engage in preillness levels of activity, accompanied by fatigue (see Fig. 212.2).
In younger children, who often do not spontaneously report symptoms, exertion induces behavioral changes, manifested by a lack of
their usual energy and reduced participation in activities. In adolescents, fatigue and postexertion malaise may lead to decreased participation in school, family activities, and social exchange.
Cognitive impairment includes reported difficulties in concentrating, which are common and indicated by reduced participation in school, difficulty keeping up with homework, and a drop
in grades. Sleep may be impaired, and nonrestorative sleep is common. Other sleep complaints include difficulty falling asleep and
staying asleep, whereas diagnosed sleep disorders, including restless legs syndrome, parasomnias, and sleep apnea, are less common. Myalgia and arthralgia may accompany fatigue and altered
sleep. Sore throat and cervical lymph node tenderness can occur but
may be part of an inciting illness. Adolescents also have increased
reports of headache, abdominal pain, nausea, and sensitivity to light
and sound with amplified pain.
Patients diagnosed with CFS in primary care practices are more
likely to report abrupt onset of their symptoms, often as part of an
initial virus-­like illness, whereas gradual onset is more common in
those identified in population-­based studies. School absenteeism is
a major social issue. In one study, two thirds of adolescents missed
>2 weeks over a 6-­week observation period, and one third required
home tutoring. Unlike school phobia, inactivity due to CFS persists
on the weekends and during holidays the same as it does during the
school week.
Although fatigue and accompanying symptoms are subjective, the
magnitude of impairment of each component can be measured by
questionnaires addressing pain and function or, in the case of suspected orthostatic instability, by recording routine supine and standing heart rate and blood pressure measurements. Fatigue cannot be
dismissed as a minor ailment. It generally manifests as lassitude,
profound tiredness, intolerance of exertion with easy fatigability, and
general malaise.
Abnormal physical examination findings are conspicuously absent,
providing both reassurance and consternation for the patient, family,
and physician. The presence of “alarm symptoms” such as weight loss,
chest pain with exertion, paresthesia, dry mouth and eyes, fevers, diarrhea, cough, night sweats, and rash is uncommon and warrants consideration of a diagnosis other than CFS.

DIAGNOSIS

There are no pathognomonic signs or diagnostic tests for CFS. The
diagnosis is clinically defined based on inclusion and exclusion criteria (Fig. 212.4). The diagnostic criteria are applicable to adults and
adolescents >11 years old because of the current requirement for a
self-­generated history. Whereas duration of symptoms is 3-­6 months
depending on age, symptom management should not wait until this
criterion is met.
CFS is difficult to diagnose in children, who may have difficulty
describing their symptoms and articulating their concerns. Sole
reliance on parental history can be fraught with confusion because
parents may also struggle to interpret their children’s symptoms and
feelings in providing accurate historical information. A combination of child and parent reporting is most effective. It is important
to document the child’s activity levels and worsening of symptoms
after physical or mental endeavors. Changes in participation in
hobbies and family or other social activities can help identify the
impact of CFS on function.
The diagnosis of CFS can be established only after other medical and psychiatric causes of fatigue and other symptoms, many of
which are treatable, have been excluded. These include medical conditions presenting with chronic symptoms, such as hypothyroidism,

Patient presents with profound fatigue

Substantial
decrease in
function

No

• Symptom management
• Consider another diagnosis

No

• Symptom management
• Reassess for 6 months
• Consider another diagnosis

Yes

Persists ≥
6 months

Yes

Post exertional
malaise and
unrefreshing
sleep

No

• Consider another diagnosis

Yes

Cognitive
impairment
and/or
orthostatic
intolerance

No

• Consider another diagnosis

Yes
Patient diagnosed with ME/CFS

Fig. 212.4 Diagnostic algorithm for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). ANS, autonomic nervous system; HPA,
hypothalamic-­pituitary axis. (From Institute of Medicine. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an Illness.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2015.)
adrenal insufficiency, respiratory and food allergies, sleep apnea,
narcolepsy, substance abuse, posttraumatic stress disorder, adverse
drug reactions, and obesity. A previously diagnosed medical condition with incomplete or uncertain resolution that may explain
fatigue needs be considered.
Certain illnesses (e.g., fibromyalgia), amplified pain syndrome,
post–COVID-­
19 condition, post–intensive care syndrome, and
depression share similar symptoms with CFS but are not exclusionary diagnoses. These should be considered in the differential diagnosis in select cases. There is concern that CFS might be mistaken
for readily identifiable psychiatric disorders such as anxiety and
mood disorders, but evidence supports differences in their clinical
presentation from CFS. CFS should not be diagnosed in persons
with a prior diagnosis of major depressive disorder with psychotic
or melancholic features, bipolar affective disorders, schizophrenia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 213 u Miscellaneous Conditions Associated with Arthritis
of any subtype, delusional disorders of any subtype, dementia of any
subtype, eating disorder of any type, or alcohol or other substance
abuse within 2 years before the onset of the chronic fatigue or any
time thereafter.
Although evaluation of each patient should be individualized,
initial laboratory evaluation should be limited to screening laboratory testing sufficient to provide reassurance of the lack of significant medical illness. Further evaluation should be directed
primarily toward excluding treatable illnesses that may be suggested
by the history, symptoms, signs, or physical exam findings present
in specific patients.

MANAGEMENT

Management of CFS is based on relief of the core and most disruptive symptoms in the individual patient. The diagnostic criterion of
6 months duration of illness should not delay evaluation and symptom management, because these may be initiated as soon as the
child or adolescent presents with a CFS-­like picture. Problems with
sleep can be addressed by encouraging patients to adopt good sleep
habits using standard sleep hygiene techniques. It may be beneficial
to refer the patient to a sleep medicine specialist for the identification and treatment of sleep disorders and disturbances. Once pain is
found not to be related to other specific disease or illness, nonpharmacologic treatment is indicated.
One of the nonpharmacologic approaches to pain management,
CBT, may also assist the patient in managing and coping with CFS.
Through explanation and changes in perception of the illness, CBT
may help patients and their families develop coping skills and provide emotional support. Improved methods of coping may allow some
improved function while living with the illness. Comorbid psychiatric
conditions such as anxiety require appropriate evaluation and intervention. Guided graded-­exercise therapy may be beneficial and added
to CBT.
Although the overall goal is to help patients with CFS tolerate
activity, children and adolescents with CFS should limit physical or
mental efforts that result in aggravated symptoms. Return to school
should be initiated gradually and systematically with the goal to
return to full-­time attendance. Home tutoring, cyber-­school, and
partial attendance can be interim steps. Parents and clinicians can
work with teachers and school administrators to define appropriate
expectations for attendance and performance for children with CFS.
Because of the crucial importance of learning socialization skills,
even brief attendance in school or participation in school activities
should be encouraged, remembering that too rapid remobilization
usually exacerbates symptoms and should be avoided.
Continued empathy and support by the treating physician are crucial in maintaining a physician-­parent-­patient relationship that is conducive to managing this illness. Careful attention must be directed to
family dynamics to identify and resolve family problems or psychopathology that may be contributing to children’s perception of their
symptoms.

PROGNOSIS

The natural history of CFS is highly variable, and patients and families understand that the symptoms will wax and wane. Children and
adolescents with CFS appear to have a more optimistic outcome than
adults, typically with an undulating course of gradual improvement
over several years. Overall, a good functional outcome has been
reported in up to 80% of patients. Poor prognostic factors include
gradual onset, increased school absenteeism, lower socioeconomic
status, chronic maternal health problems, and untreated comorbid
individual and family psychiatric disorders. Favorable prognostic
factors include patient control of the rehabilitation program, with
continuing support from health professionals and family members,
and improvement in orthostatic intolerance.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1581

Chapter 213

Miscellaneous Conditions
Associated with Arthritis
Angela Byun Robinson and
C. Egla Rabinovich
RELAPSING POLYCHONDRITIS

Relapsing polychondritis (RP) is a rare condition characterized by episodic
chondritis causing cartilage destruction and deformation of the ears (sparing the earlobes), nose, larynx, and tracheobronchial tree. Antibodies to
matrillin-­1 and collagen (types II, IX, and XI) are present in approximately
60% of patients with RP, suggesting an autoimmune pathogenesis. Patients
may experience arthritis, uveitis, and hearing loss resulting from inflammation near the auditory and vestibular nerves. Children may initially
relate episodes of intense erythema over the outer ears. Other dermatologic
manifestations may include erythema nodosum, maculopapular rash, and
purpura. Cardiac involvement, including conduction defects and coronary
vasculitis, has been reported. Severe, progressive, and potentially fatal disease resulting from destruction of the tracheobronchial tree and airway
obstruction is unusual in childhood. Diagnostic criteria established for
adults are useful guidelines for evaluating children with suggestive symptoms (Table 213.1). The clinical course of RP is variable; flares of disease
are often associated with elevations of acute-­phase reactants and may
remit spontaneously. Although seen more often in the adult population,
RP may coexist with other rheumatic disease (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren syndrome, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura) in up to 30% of
patients. The differential diagnosis includes ANCA-­associated vasculitis
(granulomatosis with polyangiitis) (see Chapter 210.4) and Cogan syndrome, which is characterized by auditory nerve inflammation and keratitis but not chondritis. MAGIC (mouth and genital ulcers with inflamed
cartilage) syndrome has many similarities to Behçet disease (see Chapter
202). A genetic syndrome named vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-­linked, autoinflammatory, somatic (VEXAS) syndrome is caused by somatic pathogenic
variants affecting the UBA1 gene. Adolescent and adult patients (most are
male) with this syndrome may have fevers, myalgia, arthralgia, auricular
chondritis, and erythema nodosum. Approximately 50% of patients with
VEXAS meet criteria for relapsing polychondritis. Between 5% and 10% of
patients originally thought to have RP have pathogenic variants in UBA1.
Affected patients have a high CRP and ESR in addition to lower platelet
counts when compared with patients with only RP.
Many children respond to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs,
but some require corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive agents
Table 213.1  Suggested Criteria for Relapsing
Polychondritis*
MAJOR
Typical inflammatory episodes of ear cartilage
Typical inflammatory episodes of nose cartilage
Typical inflammatory episodes of laryngotracheal cartilage
MINOR
Eye inflammation (conjunctivitis, keratitis, episcleritis, uveitis)
Hearing loss
Vestibular dysfunction
Seronegative inflammatory arthritis
*The diagnosis is established by the presence of two major or one major and two
minor criteria. Histologic examination of affected cartilage is required when the
presentation is atypical.
Data from Michet CJ Jr, McKenna CH, Luthra HS, et al. Relapsing polychondritis: Survival
and predictive role of early disease manifestations. Ann Intern Med. 1986;104:74–78.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1582 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 213.2  Diagnostic Criteria for Classic Sweet
Syndrome*
MAJOR CRITERIA
Abrupt onset of painful erythematous plaques or nodules
Histopathologic evidence of dense neutrophilic infiltrate without
evidence of leukocytoclastic vasculitis
MINOR CRITERIA
Pyrexia >38°C
Association with underlying hematologic or visceral malignancy,
inflammatory disease, or pregnancy or preceded by an upper
respiratory or gastrointestinal infection or vaccination
Excellent response to systemic corticosteroids or potassium iodide

Fig. 213.1 Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA). Symmet-

ric, oval and round, reddish brown macular, papular, necrotic, and crusted
lesions on the chest of 9-­yr-­old boy. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:
Fig. 4-­33, p. 87.)

Abnormal laboratory values at presentation (three of four):
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate >20 mm/hr
Positive C-­reactive protein test result
>8,000 leukocytes/mm3

(azathioprine, methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, colchicine, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, and anti–tumor necrosis factor [TNF]
agents), as reported in small series and case reports.

MUCHA-­HABERMANN DISEASE/PITYRIASIS
LICHENOIDES ET VARIOLIFORMIS ACUTA

Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) is a benign, self-­
limited cutaneous vasculitis characterized by episodes of macules, papules,
and papulovesicular lesions that can develop central ulceration, necrosis,
and crusting (Fig. 213.1). Different stages of development are usually seen
at once. PLEVA fulminans or febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-­Habermann
disease (FUMHD) is the severe, life-­threatening form of PLEVA. Large,
coalescing, ulceronecrotic lesions are seen, accompanied by high fever and
elevated ESR. Systemic manifestations can include interstitial pneumonitis,
abdominal pain, malabsorption, arthritis, and neurologic manifestations.
PLEVA has a male predominance and occurs more frequently in childhood.
The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of skin lesions, which reveals perivascular and intramural lymphocytic inflammation affecting capillaries and
venules in the upper dermis that may lead to keratinocyte necrosis. Phototherapy has been used in some cases of PLEVA. When disease is severe,
corticosteroids have been used with questionable effect, and methotrexate
has been reported to induce rapid remission in resistant cases. Cyclosporine and anti-­TNF agents have also been efficacious in case reports.

SWEET SYNDROME

Sweet syndrome, or acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis, is a rare
entity in children. It is characterized by fever, elevated neutrophil
count, and raised, tender erythematous plaques and nodules over the
face, extremities, and trunk. Skin biopsy reveals neutrophilic perivascular infiltration in the upper dermis. Female predominance is seen in
the adult population, whereas gender distribution is equal in children.
Established criteria are useful for diagnosis (Table 213.2). Children can
also have arthritis, multifocal nonbacterial osteomyelitis, myositis, and
other extracutaneous manifestations. Sweet syndrome may be idiopathic
or secondary to malignancy (particularly acute myelogenous leukemia),
drugs (granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor, tretinoin, azathioprine, or
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole), or rheumatic diseases (Behçet disease,
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus).
It has also been reported in association with COVID-­19, VEXAS, CANDLE (chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and
elevated temperature), Majeed syndrome, and deficiency of interleukin-1
receptor antagonist (DIRA) and pyrin associated autoinflammation with
neutrophilic dermatosis (PAAND) syndromes (see Chapter 204). The
condition usually responds to treatment with corticosteroids, treatment of underlying disease, or removal of the associated medication.

HYPERTROPHIC OSTEOARTHROPATHY

Children with chronic disease, especially pulmonary or cardiac disease,
can demonstrate clubbing of the terminal phalanges and have associated

>70% neutrophils/mm3
*The diagnosis is established by the presence of two major criteria plus two of the four
minor criteria.
Adapted from Walker DC, Cohen PR. Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole-­associated
acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis: Case report and review of drug induced Sweet’s
syndrome. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1996;34:918–923.

periosteal reaction and arthritis. These findings characterize the classic
presentation of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (HOA). HOA can be primary (idiopathic) or secondary. Although rare, secondary HOA is more
common in children and is seen in those with chronic pulmonary disease
(cystic fibrosis), congenital heart disease, gastrointestinal disease (malabsorption syndromes, biliary atresia, inflammatory bowel disease), and
malignancy (nasopharyngeal sarcoma, osteosarcoma, Hodgkin disease). It
may precede a diagnosis of cardiopulmonary disease or malignancy. The
pathogenesis of secondary HOA is unknown; symptoms often improve if
the underlying condition is treated successfully. HOA-­related pain can be
disabling; in adults, management with bisphosphonates has been reported.
Evaluation of children presenting with HOA should include a chest radiograph to evaluate for pulmonary disease or intrathoracic mass. Autosomal
recessive pathogenic variants in prostaglandin pathway genes have been
described in primary HOA, also described as pachydermoperiostosis.

PLANT THORN SYNOVITIS

A diagnosis of plant thorn synovitis should be considered in children with
monoarticular arthritis nonresponsive to antiinflammatory therapy. Acute
or chronic arthritis can occur after a plant thorn or other foreign object
penetrates a joint. Unlike septic arthritis, children with plant thorn synovitis are usually afebrile. The most common organism seen with plant thorn
synovitis is Pantoea agglomerans, although cultures are often negative. The
initial injury may be unknown or forgotten, making the diagnosis difficult.
Ultrasound or MRI can be useful in identifying the foreign body. Removal
of the foreign body using arthroscopy, followed by an antibiotic course,
is the accepted therapy.

PIGMENTED VILLONODULAR SYNOVITIS

Proliferation of synovial tissue is seen in pigmented villonodular synovitis
(PVNS). This proliferation is localized or diffuse and can affect the joint,
tendon sheath, or bursa. Macrophages and multinucleated giant cells with
brownish hemosiderin are present histologically. It is unclear if the etiology
of PVNS is inflammatory or neoplastic in nature. Although findings are
not pathognomonic, MRI with contrast is a useful diagnostic tool by which
PVNS can be seen as a mass or bone erosion. Brown or bloody synovial
fluid is seen with arthrocentesis, but the diagnosis is made by tissue biopsy.
Surgical removal of the affected tissue is the therapeutic modality, and
with diffuse disease, a total synovectomy is recommended.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Infectious Diseases
Section 1

General Considerations
Chapter 214

Public Health Approach to
Pandemics
Kevin P. O’Callaghan
INTRODUCTION

Public health as a field aims to promote healthy lifestyles and communities and to protect the public at large from health threats from
known and emerging diseases, chronic noncommunicable diseases,
and environmental risks and vulnerabilities. In this context, public
health authorities have a core role in prevention, preparedness, and
response to epidemic and pandemic infectious diseases. The field of
public health has a long and storied history in investigating and ending
outbreaks of infectious diseases, extending back to one of the founders
of modern epidemiology, John Snow, and the Broad Street pump cholera outbreak. Modern epidemiology and public health practices have
an integral role in the management of outbreaks, epidemics, and pandemics, using both traditional methodologies that look like the “shoe
leather epidemiology” of John Snow’s time, meshed with modern best
practices that leverage genomic sequencing, data analytics, and medical innovations in therapeutics and vaccination.

DEFINITIONS

Infectious disease outbreak response hinges on an understanding of
current and ongoing incidence and prevalence of the disease in the
affected community. The transmission dynamics of a disease will look
different in a population that is entirely susceptible (e.g., a novel or
emerging disease) than in a population in which some members are
recovered/immune (e.g., a disease has been present for some time).
Sporadic diseases occur infrequently and irregularly in a population.
Endemic diseases are continually circulating, often at low levels, maintaining a constant presence among members of the community. Epidemic disease occurs when there is a substantial increase above the baseline amount
of a disease. This may occur as an increase in a disease that is already
endemic at low levels or by the introduction of a novel disease that has not
been seen in the affected population. A pandemic refers to an epidemic
that has spread over several countries and continents, affecting large numbers of people. This is frequently defined and declared by international
public health authorities, for example, the World Health Organization.

Public Health Authorities and Partners

Although describing “public health” as a specialty may sound somewhat monolithic, the majority of public health work is done collaboratively across a variety of partners, including local, city, state, and
national public health authorities, city and state governments, healthcare systems, individual clinical providers, and members of the affected
communities. The most important aspect of public health work is often
community involvement, whether as part of outbreak investigations,
public-­facing communications, or education around prevention and
response measures.

PART

XV

At an international level, the World Health Organization operates
as an international collaborative agency set up in 1948 under the auspices of the United Nations. One of its core responsibilities is to direct
and coordinate the world’s response to health emergencies, working
with national governments, international organizations, researchers,
and health systems. At a national level, responsibility for public health
management typically devolves to national and federal government
departments (e.g., the Department of Health and Human Services in
the United States) and their constituent agencies, such as the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The CDC coordinates
national surveillance systems for a variety of health conditions, including endemic and newly emergent diseases.
The bulk of regional and local public health surveillance, preparedness, and response work falls under the purview of city, county, and
state public health departments. These agencies liaise closely with
healthcare systems, specialty and primary care practices, and individual clinicians within their region to help facilitate their public health
goals, as well as with nonmedical partners, including school districts,
other government agencies, and community groups.

Aims of Public Health Response to Infectious Diseases

Broadly, the aims of a public health response are to prevent the emergence of novel diseases in human hosts, prevent the spread of new diseases or the increase in prevalence of a known endemic disease, and
mitigate the health effects of any spread that may occur. Based on these
goals, the arms of public health response for epidemic and pandemic
infectious diseases fall into four groupings: mitigation/prevention,
preparedness, response, and recovery. These areas stem from a common approach to emergency management in general but have specific
meanings and impact in the context of pandemic response. Some active
public health measures, such as education and public-­facing communication, occur across all four arms.

Arms of Intervention
Mitigation/Prevention

A primary approach to pandemic management includes proactive activities to prevent new human infections with target diseases, both to prevent
endemic diseases from becoming epidemic and to arrest emergence of novel
diseases. Some recent epidemics and pandemics likely represent “spillover”
events from animal populations, with these zoonoses then becoming prevalent in human populations through human-­to-­human transmission (e.g.,
Zika, SARS-­CoV-­2). There is a complex interplay between human and
animal populations related to farming, deforestation, changes in land use,
water management, and climate change that makes the emergence of new
zoonotic diseases intermittently more likely and unfortunately somewhat
unpredictable. Prevention of emergence of these diseases is best approached
through a One Health approach, which is an international project using a
“collaborative, multisectoral, and transdisciplinary approach” at local,
national, and international levels to optimize health outcomes, recognizing
the interconnectedness of people, animals, plants, and their environment.
Individual approaches to prevent disease outbreaks of this type may require
the involvement of agricultural regulators and inspectors, veterinarians,
and environmental health specialists, among others.
A more concrete example of a salient mitigation effort involving
human healthcare providers is antimicrobial stewardship. The emergence of multidrug-­resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-­resistant
(XDR) organisms in response to the selection pressure of antimicrobial
usage is a critical vulnerability in epidemic and pandemic preparedness. Stewardship efforts at a grassroots, individual patient level provide a necessary bulwark against the proliferation of further MDR and
XDR strains of currently endemic diseases.

1583
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1584 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Preparedness

Separate from mitigation and prevention, a preparedness stance plans
for the potentially inevitable outcome of the emergence of a novel
epidemic or pandemic disease. Preparedness efforts can be targeted
against specific disease threats (e.g., seasonal and pandemic influenza,
which has predictable seasonality) or against previously unknown
or less predictable threats (e.g., SARS-­CoV-­2, Ebola virus disease).
Given the broad range of potential pathogens that may pose a threat
over time, much preparedness planning takes place in an “all hazards”
stance, where the preparation is necessarily agnostic as to the specific
pathogen, with surveillance and resources that can be quickly pivoted
to cover a broad variety of potential risks.
A core element of preparedness involves case-­based surveillance or
the active observation and documentation of incidence and prevalence
of a specific disease or syndrome at local, regional, and national levels. Robust surveillance infrastructure requires both regulatory and
material support, including both voluntary and mandatory reporting
requirements, as well as a reporting infrastructure that includes clear
and consistent case definitions that are reproducible across venues of
care. In the United States, the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance
System (NNDSS) coordinates case definitions and reporting requirements for approximately 120 nationally notifiable diseases. A coherent and centralized reporting infrastructure such as that provided by
NNDSS allows for a more global understanding of burden of disease
and disease trends over time. However, case surveillance as described
here remains dependent on close partnership with healthcare systems,
clinical laboratories, and individual providers at a local level to ensure
that these systems are both sensitive and specific. Case-­based surveillance is also predicated on a good understanding of both the pathophysiology and available diagnostics for a specific disease. For newly
emergent diseases, where a coherent case definition is less readily available, early warning systems seek to detect syndromic clusters that elude
identification on routine diagnostics. Expansion of such programs in
the wake of the 2019 SARS-­CoV-­2 pandemic have received governmental support and may use novel approaches such as wastewater
screening and genomic sequencing within syndromic clusters.
In terms of tangible supplies that may be required for an acute
response, personal protective equipment (PPE) and medical countermeasures (MCMs, e.g., vaccines, therapeutics) may be needed in high
volume on short notice, at which point a “just in time” supply chain
approach may prove lacking. Stockpiling of critical supply needs is a
necessary part of pandemic preparedness, particularly with regard to
high-­risk, low-­frequency, unpredictable events such as international
travel of a patient with undiagnosed Ebola virus disease. For a longer-­
term outbreak or epidemic, such as that seen with the 2020 response
to COVID-­19, even the most aggressive stockpiling cannot support a
protracted pandemic response, and close collaboration with manufacturers of durable medical supplies, therapeutics, and vaccines may be
necessary to ensure sustained availability and a flexible supply chain.
Lastly, healthcare capacity is a separate but critically important
resource with concrete limits (e.g., total bed spaces, provider person-­
days, and critical care and ventilator availability). In responding to
the exponential growth of a rapidly reproducing pathogen, hospital
capacity may be rapidly overwhelmed, as seen in some early surges of
COVID-­19 in 2020. Infrastructure planning for healthcare systems can
help alleviate some of these pressures through rapidly accessible, flexible patient care space normally kept in reserve and through thoughtful
capacity management, such as plans that allow for restriction of elective or nonemergent care for short periods. Ultimately, such efforts
need to be matched with public-­facing interventions described later,
which can “flatten the curve” of epidemic transmission.

Response

Pandemic response begins with identification of the emergence of
a specific risk (through surveillance systems described previously),
followed by activation of applicable plans developed during the preparedness phase. Early pandemic response may be, by necessity, nonspecific to a known disease, particularly if the identification of risk
is predicated on a syndromic cluster or a novel, not-­yet-­identified
pathogen.

For novel pathogens, short-­term goals will include rapid identification of
the pathogen at a genus and species level, sequencing of its genome, development of accurate and readily available diagnostic tests, and development
of targeted therapeutics and vaccines. As these individual targets may take
weeks to months to come to fruition, early response will focus on mitigation of disease transmission through the application of standard public
health measures, including social distancing, transmission-­based precautions, isolation of cases, contact tracing, and quarantine of known contacts.
All of these approaches occur simultaneously and require extensive public
communication and education to ensure their effectiveness. Social distancing involves the temporary application of new social norms and social
constructs designed to keep individuals, particularly those from separate
households, physically distanced so that the likelihood of disease transmission between individuals is substantially reduced or eliminated. This may
include infrastructural changes that promote contactless payment options
at stores, physical barriers in offices and at public-­facing service desks, and
others. This distancing is assisted by application of transmission-­based
precautions, which are PPE recommendations based on the transmission modality of a specific pathogen. In non-­healthcare settings, the most
common application of PPE is facial masking designed to protect oral and
nasal mucosa from diseases spread by droplets (e.g., influenza). Isolation
of cases is a public health measure that strongly encourages or, depending
on regulatory support, legally requires diagnosed cases of a specific disease
to isolate for the duration of their period of infectivity, usually at home, in
a healthcare setting, or at a designated isolation facility. After identification of a case, contact tracing should occur, during which identification
of potential contacts of the known case (during the period of infectivity) is
made. Completion of contact tracing involves notification of the affected
contacts and a recommendation that they quarantine, typically for the
duration of the upper bound of the incubation period for the disease. All
of these responses require a large commitment in terms of time, personnel,
and resources, and in a rapidly accelerating epidemic, these resources may
ultimately be overwhelmed.
While these core public health responses are ongoing, rapid development of diagnostics, therapeutics, and vaccine candidates will continue. Of these, the earliest steps involve genomic sequencing and
targeted diagnostics, the latter of which ultimately will greatly assist
with consistent case definitions and subsequent contact tracing, isolation, and quarantine. The timeline for development of suitable vaccine
candidates has greatly decreased in recent decades, with development
of messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine candidates during the COVID-­19
pandemic being a hallmark example. Regulatory changes in timelines
for vaccine assessment and approval for emergency use have assisted in
these efforts, while not altering safety and efficacy oversight.

Recovery

Termination of pandemic response is rarely clear-­cut, as elimination
or eradication of specific pathogens from human population is rare.
Most epidemic or pandemic responses end with a slow decrease in case
counts and ultimate quiescence for a period (e.g., Ebola virus disease
outbreaks) or the attainment of endemicity—the low-­level constant
circulation of a pathogen within remaining susceptible human hosts.
Ultimately, transition from response to recovery is predicated on ongoing case counts, pressure on healthcare infrastructure, and an amalgamation of other metrics that may include test positivity, case severity,
vaccine uptake, and hospitalization rates.
A core aspect of the recovery phase is an analysis of pandemic
response measures as a whole, including their relative success, their
tolerability, and their tangible and intangible costs. Future pandemic
response, for the same and other pathogens, can be informed and
improved by this analysis, typically developed in an after-­action report
or similar post hoc analytic framework.

Communication and Education

A core element of public health response to epidemic and pandemic
disease, which spans across all four stances, is public communication
and education. At each stage of pandemic preparedness and response,
public engagement is key. This is particularly true in a response phase,
where data become available rapidly and contradictory findings in early
reports can cause confusion and mistrust. Clear, concise messaging

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices
that focuses on core concepts of preparedness and response is key. A
large portion of public health response may be spent in developing and
promulgating this messaging, but it can be extremely worthwhile insofar as it can lead to dramatic increases in tolerability and uptake of
other public health interventions, including social distancing, isolation
and quarantine, and vaccines.
Viruses, bacteria, fungi, and other microbes are a fact of life on this
earth and are an integral part of the biodiversity upon which we as
humans depend. Although infectious diseases may also be a dependable fact of life, their broader societal impact can be shifted, reduced,
and controlled in the ways described here. Pandemic preparedness
and response can be difficult and time-­consuming, but done well, with
engaged partners at all levels, can be lifesaving on a societal level.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 2

Preventive Measures
Chapter 215

Immunization Practices
Alexandra Kilinsky, Henry H. Bernstein, and
Walter A. Orenstein
Immunization is one of the most beneficial and cost-­effective disease
prevention measures available. As a result of effective and safe vaccines,
smallpox has been eradicated, polio is close to worldwide eradication,
and measles and rubella are no longer endemic in the United States.
However, cases of vaccine-­
preventable diseases, including measles,
mumps, and pertussis, continue to occur in the United States. Incidence
of most vaccine-­preventable diseases of childhood has been reduced by
≥99% from representative 20th-­century annual morbidity, usually before
development of the corresponding vaccines (Table 215.1), with most of
the newer vaccines not achieving quite the same percentage decrease
(Table 215.2). An analysis of effective prevention measures recommended
for widespread use by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
reported that childhood immunization received a perfect score based on
clinically preventable disease burden and cost-­effectiveness.
Immunization is the process of inducing immunity against a specific disease. Immunity can be induced either passively or actively.
Passive immunity is generated through administration of an antibody-­
containing preparation. Active immunity is achieved by administering
a vaccine or toxoid to stimulate the immune system to produce a prolonged humoral and/or cellular immune response. As of 2023, infants,
children, and adolescents in the United States are recommended to be
routinely immunized against 19 pathogens: Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Clostridium tetani, Bordetella pertussis, polio virus, Haemophilus
influenzae type b (Hib), hepatitis A, hepatitis B, measles virus, mumps
virus, rubella virus, rotavirus, varicella-­
zoster virus, SARS-­
CoV-­
2,
pneumococcus, meningococcus, influenza virus, human papillomavirus (HPV), and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).

PASSIVE IMMUNITY

Rather than producing antibodies through the body’s own immune
system, passive immunity is achieved by administration of preformed
antibodies. Protection is immediate, yet transient, lasting weeks to
months. Products used include:
• Immunoglobulin administered intramuscularly (IMIG), intravenously (IVIG), or subcutaneously (SCIG)
• Specific or hyperimmune immunoglobulin preparations administered IM or IV

1585

Table 215.1  Comparison of 20th-­Century Annual
Morbidity and Current Morbidity:
Vaccine-­Preventable Diseases

DISEASE

20TH-­CENTURY
ANNUAL
MORBIDITY*

2019
REPORTED
CASES†

Smallpox

29,005

0

100

Diphtheria

21,053

2

>99

Measles

530,217

1275

>99

Mumps

162,344

3780

98

Pertussis

200,752

18,617

91

Polio (paralytic)

16,316

0

100

Rubella

PERCENT
DECREASE

47,745

6

>99

Congenital rubella
syndrome

152

1

>99

Tetanus

580

26

95

20,000

18‡

>99

Haemophilus
influenzae type
b (Hib)

*Data from Roush SW, Murphy TV; Vaccine-­Preventable Disease Table Working Group.
Historical comparisons of morbidity and mortality for vaccine-­preventable diseases in
the United States. JAMA. 2007;298(18):2155–2163.
†Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Notifiable Diseases
Surveillance System, Weekly Tables of Infectious Disease Data. Atlanta, GA: CDC
Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance Available at https://wonder.cdc.gov/
nndss/static/2019/annual/2019-­table1.html.
‡Hib <5 yr of age. An additional 667 cases of Haemophilus influenzae invasive disease
(<5 yr of age)—non-­b serotype (213 cases), nontypeable (200 cases), and unknown
serotype (254 cases)—are estimated to have occurred.

Table 215.2  Comparison of Pre–Vaccine Era Estimated
Annual Morbidity with Current Estimate:
Vaccine-­Preventable Diseases

DISEASE

PRE–VACCINE
ERA ANNUAL
ESTIMATE*

2019
ESTIMATE
(UNLESS
OTHERWISE
SPECIFIED)

PERCENT
DECREASE

Hepatitis A

117,333*

18,846†

86

66,232*

3544†

95

All ages

63,067*

19,689†

69

<5 yr of age

16,069*

1091†

93

Rotavirus
(hospitalizations,
<3 yr of age)

62,500‡

30,625‖

51

4,085,120*

8297†

>99

Hepatitis B (acute)
Pneumococcus
(invasive)

Varicella

*Data from Roush SW, Murphy TV; Vaccine-­Preventable Disease Table Working Group.
Historical comparisons of morbidity and mortality for vaccine-­preventable diseases in
the United States. JAMA. 2007;298(18):2155–2163.
†Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Notifiable Diseases
Surveillance System, Weekly Tables of Infectious Disease Data. Atlanta, GA: CDC
Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance Available at: https://wonder.cdc.gov/n
ndss/static/2019/annual/2019-­table1.html
‡Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention of rotavirus
gastroenteritis among infants and children: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2009;58(RR-­2):1–25.
‖Data from New Vaccine Surveillance Network 2017 data: U.S. rotavirus disease now has
biennial pattern (unpublished).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices
that focuses on core concepts of preparedness and response is key. A
large portion of public health response may be spent in developing and
promulgating this messaging, but it can be extremely worthwhile insofar as it can lead to dramatic increases in tolerability and uptake of
other public health interventions, including social distancing, isolation
and quarantine, and vaccines.
Viruses, bacteria, fungi, and other microbes are a fact of life on this
earth and are an integral part of the biodiversity upon which we as
humans depend. Although infectious diseases may also be a dependable fact of life, their broader societal impact can be shifted, reduced,
and controlled in the ways described here. Pandemic preparedness
and response can be difficult and time-­consuming, but done well, with
engaged partners at all levels, can be lifesaving on a societal level.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 2

Preventive Measures
Chapter 215

Immunization Practices
Alexandra Kilinsky, Henry H. Bernstein, and
Walter A. Orenstein
Immunization is one of the most beneficial and cost-­effective disease
prevention measures available. As a result of effective and safe vaccines,
smallpox has been eradicated, polio is close to worldwide eradication,
and measles and rubella are no longer endemic in the United States.
However, cases of vaccine-­
preventable diseases, including measles,
mumps, and pertussis, continue to occur in the United States. Incidence
of most vaccine-­preventable diseases of childhood has been reduced by
≥99% from representative 20th-­century annual morbidity, usually before
development of the corresponding vaccines (Table 215.1), with most of
the newer vaccines not achieving quite the same percentage decrease
(Table 215.2). An analysis of effective prevention measures recommended
for widespread use by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
reported that childhood immunization received a perfect score based on
clinically preventable disease burden and cost-­effectiveness.
Immunization is the process of inducing immunity against a specific disease. Immunity can be induced either passively or actively.
Passive immunity is generated through administration of an antibody-­
containing preparation. Active immunity is achieved by administering
a vaccine or toxoid to stimulate the immune system to produce a prolonged humoral and/or cellular immune response. As of 2023, infants,
children, and adolescents in the United States are recommended to be
routinely immunized against 19 pathogens: Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Clostridium tetani, Bordetella pertussis, polio virus, Haemophilus
influenzae type b (Hib), hepatitis A, hepatitis B, measles virus, mumps
virus, rubella virus, rotavirus, varicella-­
zoster virus, SARS-­
CoV-­
2,
pneumococcus, meningococcus, influenza virus, human papillomavirus (HPV), and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).

PASSIVE IMMUNITY

Rather than producing antibodies through the body’s own immune
system, passive immunity is achieved by administration of preformed
antibodies. Protection is immediate, yet transient, lasting weeks to
months. Products used include:
• Immunoglobulin administered intramuscularly (IMIG), intravenously (IVIG), or subcutaneously (SCIG)
• Specific or hyperimmune immunoglobulin preparations administered IM or IV

1585

Table 215.1  Comparison of 20th-­Century Annual
Morbidity and Current Morbidity:
Vaccine-­Preventable Diseases

DISEASE

20TH-­CENTURY
ANNUAL
MORBIDITY*

2019
REPORTED
CASES†

Smallpox

29,005

0

100

Diphtheria

21,053

2

>99

Measles

530,217

1275

>99

Mumps

162,344

3780

98

Pertussis

200,752

18,617

91

Polio (paralytic)

16,316

0

100

Rubella

PERCENT
DECREASE

47,745

6

>99

Congenital rubella
syndrome

152

1

>99

Tetanus

580

26

95

20,000

18‡

>99

Haemophilus
influenzae type
b (Hib)

*Data from Roush SW, Murphy TV; Vaccine-­Preventable Disease Table Working Group.
Historical comparisons of morbidity and mortality for vaccine-­preventable diseases in
the United States. JAMA. 2007;298(18):2155–2163.
†Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Notifiable Diseases
Surveillance System, Weekly Tables of Infectious Disease Data. Atlanta, GA: CDC
Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance Available at https://wonder.cdc.gov/
nndss/static/2019/annual/2019-­table1.html.
‡Hib <5 yr of age. An additional 667 cases of Haemophilus influenzae invasive disease
(<5 yr of age)—non-­b serotype (213 cases), nontypeable (200 cases), and unknown
serotype (254 cases)—are estimated to have occurred.

Table 215.2  Comparison of Pre–Vaccine Era Estimated
Annual Morbidity with Current Estimate:
Vaccine-­Preventable Diseases

DISEASE

PRE–VACCINE
ERA ANNUAL
ESTIMATE*

2019
ESTIMATE
(UNLESS
OTHERWISE
SPECIFIED)

PERCENT
DECREASE

Hepatitis A

117,333*

18,846†

86

66,232*

3544†

95

All ages

63,067*

19,689†

69

<5 yr of age

16,069*

1091†

93

Rotavirus
(hospitalizations,
<3 yr of age)

62,500‡

30,625‖

51

4,085,120*

8297†

>99

Hepatitis B (acute)
Pneumococcus
(invasive)

Varicella

*Data from Roush SW, Murphy TV; Vaccine-­Preventable Disease Table Working Group.
Historical comparisons of morbidity and mortality for vaccine-­preventable diseases in
the United States. JAMA. 2007;298(18):2155–2163.
†Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Notifiable Diseases
Surveillance System, Weekly Tables of Infectious Disease Data. Atlanta, GA: CDC
Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance Available at: https://wonder.cdc.gov/n
ndss/static/2019/annual/2019-­table1.html
‡Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention of rotavirus
gastroenteritis among infants and children: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2009;58(RR-­2):1–25.
‖Data from New Vaccine Surveillance Network 2017 data: U.S. rotavirus disease now has
biennial pattern (unpublished).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1586 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
• Antibodies of animal origin
• Monoclonal antibodies
Passive immunity also can be induced naturally through transplacental transfer of maternal antibodies (IgG) during gestation. This
transfer can provide protection during an infant’s first few months of
life; other antibodies (IgA) are transferred to the infant during breastfeeding. Protection for some diseases can persist for as long as 1 year
after birth, depending on the quantity of antibody transferred and the
time until levels fall below those considered protective.
The major indications for inducing passive immunity are immunodeficiencies in children with B-­lymphocyte defects who have difficulty making antibodies (e.g., hypogammaglobulinemia, secondary
immunodeficiencies), who have exposure to infectious diseases or to
imminent risk of exposure when there is inadequate time for them to
develop an active immune response to a vaccine (e.g., newborn exposed
to maternal hepatitis B), and who have infectious diseases that require
antibody administration as part of the specific therapy (Table 215.3).

Table 215.3  Immunoglobulin and Animal Antisera
Preparations
PRODUCT

Replacement therapy in
antibody-­deficiency disorders
Hepatitis A prophylaxis
Measles prophylaxis
Rubella prophylaxis (pregnant women)

Intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG)

Replacement therapy in
antibody-­deficiency disorders
Kawasaki disease
Pediatric HIV infection
Hypogammaglobulinemia in
chronic B-­lymphocyte lymphocytic
leukemia
Varicella postexposure prophylaxis
Guillain-­Barré syndrome and chronic
inflammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy and multifocal
motor neuropathy
Toxic shock syndrome
Postexposure measles prophylaxis
for immunocompromised contacts
May be useful in a variety of other
conditions

Subcutaneous
immunoglobulin (SCIG)

Treatment of patients with primary
immunodeficiencies

Hepatitis B immunoglobulin
(IM)

Postexposure prophylaxis
Prevention of perinatal infection in
infants born to hepatitis B surface
antigen–positive mothers

Rabies immunoglobulin (IM)

Postexposure prophylaxis

Tetanus immunoglobulin
(IM)

Wound prophylaxis
Treatment of tetanus

Varicella-­zoster
immunoglobulin (VariZIG,
IM)

Postexposure prophylaxis of
susceptible people at high risk for
complications from varicella

Cytomegalovirus (IV)

Prophylaxis of disease in seronegative
transplant recipients

Vaccinia immunoglobulin
(IV)

Reserved for certain complications of
smallpox immunization and has no
role in treatment of smallpox

Human botulism (IV),
BabyBIG

Treatment of infant botulism

Diphtheria antitoxin, equine

Treatment of diphtheria

Heptavalent botulinum
antitoxin against all seven
(A-­G) botulinum toxin
types (BAT)

Treatment of noninfant food and
wound botulism

Palivizumab (monoclonal
antibody), humanized
mouse (IM)

Prophylaxis for infants against
respiratory syncytial virus (see
Chapter 307)

Nirsevimab (monoclonal
antibody) produced
in Chinese hamster
ovary (CHO) cells by
recombinant DNA
technology. (IM)

Passive immunization to prevent
RSV-associated lower respiratory
tract infection among infants and
younger children (see Chapter 307)

Crotalidae immune F(ab′)2
(equine)

Effective for viper and pit viper bites,
including rattlesnakes, copperheads,
moccasins

Intramuscular Immunoglobulin

Immunoglobulin is a sterile antibody-­containing solution, usually derived
through cold ethanol fractionation of large pools of human plasma from
adults. Antibody concentrations reflect the infectious disease exposure and
immunization experience of plasma donors. IMIG contains 15–18% protein
and is predominantly IgG. Intravenous use of human IMIG is contraindicated. Immunoglobulin is not known to transmit infectious agents, including viral hepatitis and HIV. The major indications for immunoglobulin are:
• Replacement therapy for children with antibody deficiency disorders
• Measles prophylaxis
• Hepatitis A prophylaxis
For replacement therapy, the usual dose of IMIG is 100 mg/kg
(equivalent to 0.66 mL/kg) monthly. The usual interval between doses is
2-­4 weeks depending on trough IgG serum concentrations and clinical
response. In practice, IVIG has replaced IMIG for replacement therapy.
IMIG can be used to prevent or modify measles if administered to
susceptible children within 6 days of exposure (usual dose: 0.5 mL/
kg body weight; maximum dose: 15 mL). The recommended dose of
IVIG is 400 mL/kg. Data suggest that measles vaccine, if given within
72 hours of measles exposure, will provide protection in some cases to
infants ≥6 months of age. Measles vaccine and immunoglobulin should
not be administered at the same time.
Two methods are available for postexposure prophylaxis against hepatitis A depending on the patient’s age: Children 6-­11 months old should
receive a dose of hepatitis A vaccine before international travel. However,
the dose of hepatitis A vaccine received before 12 months should not be
counted in determining compliance with the recommended two-­dose
schedule. In those 12 months to 40 years of age, hepatitis A immunization is preferred over immunoglobulin for postexposure prophylaxis and
for protection of people traveling to areas where hepatitis A is endemic.
Persons age >40 years, persons with immunocompromising conditions,
and persons with chronic liver disease planning on traveling to an area
with high or intermediate hepatitis A virus (HAV) endemicity should
receive a single dose of hepatitis A vaccine as soon as travel is considered.
Persons traveling in <2 weeks should receive the initial dose of hepatitis A vaccine and simultaneously may be administered immunoglobulin in a different anatomic injection site (e.g., separate limbs). A second
dose of hepatitis A vaccine is not required for postexposure prophylaxis;
however, for long-­term immunity, the vaccination series should be completed with a second dose at least 6 months after the first dose.
The most common adverse reactions to immunoglobulin are pain and
discomfort at the injection site and, less commonly, flushing, headache,
chills, and nausea. Serious adverse events are rare and include chest pain,
dyspnea, anaphylaxis, and systemic collapse. Immunoglobulin should not
be administered to people with selective IgA deficiency who can produce
antibodies against the trace amounts of IgA in immunoglobulin preparations and can develop reactions after repeat doses. These reactions can
include fever, chills, and a shocklike syndrome. Because these reactions
are rare, testing for selective IgA deficiencies is not recommended.

Intravenous Immunoglobulin

IVIG is a highly purified preparation of immunoglobulin antibodies
prepared from adult plasma donors using alcohol fractionation and is

MAJOR INDICATIONS

Intramuscular
immunoglobulin (IMIG)

Data from Passive Immunization. In Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH,
eds. Red Book: 2021–2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd
ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2021. (Recommendations for use of
specific immunoglobulins are located in the sections for specific diseases in Section 3
of Red Book.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices
modified to allow IV use. IVIG is more than 95% IgG and is tested to
ensure minimum antibody titers to C. diphtheriae, hepatitis B virus,
measles virus, and poliovirus. Antibody concentrations against other
pathogens vary widely among products and even among lots from the
same manufacturer. Liquid and lyophilized powder preparations are
available. IVIG does not contain thimerosal.
Not all IVIG products are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for all indications. The major recommended
FDA-­approved indications for IVIG are:
• Replacement therapy for primary immunodeficiency disorders
• Kawasaki disease to prevent coronary artery abnormalities and
shorten the clinical course
• Replacement therapy for prevention of serious bacterial infections in
children infected with HIV
• Prevention of serious bacterial infections in people with hypogammaglobulinemia in chronic B-­lymphocyte leukemia
• Immune-­mediated thrombocytopenia to increase platelet count
IVIG may be helpful for patients with severe toxic shock syndrome,
Guillain-­Barré syndrome, and anemia caused by parvovirus B19. IVIG
is also used for many other conditions based on clinical experience,
such as multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C)
associated with COVID-­19. IVIG may be used for varicella after exposure when varicella-­zoster immunoglobulin is not available.
Reactions to IVIG may occur in up to 25% of patients. Some of these
reactions appear to be related to the rate of infusion and can be mitigated
by decreasing the rate. Such reactions include fever, headache, myalgia,
chills, nausea, and vomiting. More serious reactions, including anaphylactoid events, thromboembolic disorders, aseptic meningitis, hemolytic
anemia, and renal insufficiency, have rarely been reported. Renal failure
occurs mainly in patients with preexisting renal dysfunction.
Specific or hyperimmune immunoglobulin preparations are derived
from donors with high titers of antibodies to specific agents and are
designed to provide protection against those agents (see Table 215.3).

Subcutaneous Immunoglobulin

(SCIG) is safe and effective in children and adults with primary immune
deficiency disorders. Smaller doses administered weekly result in less
fluctuation of serum IgG concentrations over time. Systemic reactions
are less frequent than with IVIG, and the most common adverse effects
of SCIG are injection site reactions. There are no data on administration of IMIG by the subcutaneous route.

Hyperimmune Animal Antisera Preparations

Animal antisera preparations are derived from horses. The immunoglobulin fraction is concentrated using ammonium sulfate, and some
products are further treated with enzymes to decrease reactions to foreign proteins. The following two equine antisera preparations are available for humans (as of 2018):
• Diphtheria antitoxin, which can be obtained from the U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (http://www.cdc.gov/dip
htheria/dat.html) and is used to treat diphtheria.
• Heptavalent botulinum antitoxin, available from the CDC for use
in adults with botulism. To request it, one can call the CDC’s 24-­
hour line at 770-­488-­7100. This product contains antitoxin against
all seven (A-­G) botulinum toxin types.
Great care must be exercised before administering animal-­derived
antisera because of the potential for severe allergic reactions. Due caution includes testing for sensitivity before administration, desensitization if necessary, and treating potential reactions, including febrile
events, serum sickness, and anaphylaxis. For infant botulism, IVIG
(BabyBIG), a human-­derived antitoxin, is licensed and should be used.

Monoclonal Antibodies

Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are antibody preparations produced
against a single antigen. They are mass-­produced from a hybridoma, a
hybrid cell used as the basis for production of large amounts of antibodies.
A hybridoma is created by fusing an antibody-­producing B lymphocyte
with a fast-­growing immortal cell such as a cancer cell. There are two injectable monoclonal antibody products that help protect infants and young
children from lower respiratory tract infection caused by RSV: nirsevimab
and palivizumab. Palivizumab is used for prevention of severe disease

1587

from respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) among children ≤24 months old
with bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD, a form of chronic lung disease),
a history of premature birth, or congenital heart lesions or neuromuscular
diseases. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has developed specific recommendations for the use of palivizumab. Nirsevimab is recommended for infants younger than 8 months of age who were born shortly
before or are entering their first RSV season if the mother did not receive
RSV vaccine (Abrysvo) during pregnancy, if the mother’s RSV vaccination
status is unknown, or the infant was born within 14 days of maternal RSV
vaccination. Additionally, a dose of nirsevimab is recommended for some
children 8 to 19 months of age who are at increased risk for severe RSV
disease and entering their second RSV season. Given the atypical interseasonal change in RSV epidemiology in 2021-2023, the AAP strongly supports the use of palivizumab and nirsevimab in patients who would be
candidates per the current eligibility recommendations. See https://publ
ications.aap.org/redbook/resources/25379/ for details (see Chapter 307).
mAbs also are used to prevent transplant rejection and to treat
some types of cancer, autoimmune diseases, and asthma. Use of mAbs
against interleukin (IL)-­2 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α are being
used as part of the therapeutic approach to patients with a variety of
malignant and autoimmune diseases.
Serious adverse events associated with palivizumab are rare, primarily including cases of anaphylaxis and hypersensitivity reactions.
Adverse reactions to nirsevimab are rare and mild to moderate in
severity, including rash and injection site reactions. Adverse reactions to mAbs directed at modifying the immune response, such as
antibodies against IL-­2 or TNF-­α, can be more serious and include
cytokine release syndrome, fever, chills, tremors, chest pain, immunosuppression, and infection with various organisms, including
mycobacteria.

ACTIVE IMMUNIZATION

Vaccines are defined as whole or parts of microorganisms administered
to prevent an infectious disease. Vaccines can consist of whole inactivated microorganisms (e.g., polio, hepatitis A), parts of the organism
(e.g., acellular pertussis, HPV, hepatitis B), polysaccharide capsules (e.g.,
pneumococcal and meningococcal polysaccharide vaccines), polysaccharide capsules conjugated to protein carriers (e.g., Hib, pneumococcal,
and meningococcal conjugate vaccines), live-­attenuated microorganisms
(e.g., measles, mumps, rubella, varicella, rotavirus, and live-­attenuated
influenza vaccines), and toxoids (e.g., tetanus, diphtheria) (Table 215.4).
In addition, vaccines against SARS-­CoV-­2 are messenger RNA (mRNA)
vaccines, viral vector vaccines, or protein subunit vaccines. A toxoid is
a bacterial toxin modified to be nontoxic but still capable of inducing an
active immune response against the toxin.
Vaccines can contain a variety of other constituents besides the
immunizing antigen. Suspending fluids may be sterile water or saline
but can be a complex fluid containing small amounts of proteins or
other constituents used to grow the immunobiologic culture. Preservatives, stabilizers, and antimicrobial agents are used to inhibit bacterial
growth and prevent degradation of the antigen. Such components can
include gelatin, 2-­phenoxyethanol, and specific antimicrobial agents.
Preservatives are added to multidose vials of vaccines, primarily to prevent bacterial contamination on repeated entry of the vial. In the past,
many vaccines for children contained thimerosal, a preservative containing ethyl mercury. Removal of thimerosal as a preservative from
vaccines for children began as a precautionary measure in 1999 in the
absence of any data on harm from the preservative. This objective was
accomplished by switching to single-­dose packaging. Of the vaccines
recommended for young children, only some preparations of influenza
vaccine contain thimerosal as a preservative.*
Adjuvants are used in some vaccines to enhance the immune
response. In the United States, the only adjuvants currently licensed by
the FDA to be part of vaccines are aluminum salts: AsO4, composed
of 3-­O-­desacyl-­4′-­monophosphoryl 301 lipid A (MPL) adsorbed on to
aluminum (as hydroxide salt) and MF59 and 1018 adjuvant. AsO4 is
* The thimerosal content in U.S.-­licensed vaccines currently being manufactured is listed
at http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/SafetyAvailability/VaccineSafety/ucm0962
28.htm#pres.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1588 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 215.4  Currently Available* Vaccines and Immunizing Agents in the United States by Type
PRODUCT

TYPE

Adenovirus

Live, oral vaccine indicated for active
immunization for the prevention of
febrile acute respiratory disease caused
by adenovirus types 4 and 7 for use in
military populations 17-­50 yr of age

Anthrax vaccine adsorbed

Cell-­free filtrate of components including
protective antigen

Bacille Calmette-­Guérin
(BCG) vaccine

Live-­attenuated mycobacterial strain used
to prevent tuberculosis in very limited
circumstances

Cholera vaccine

Oral vaccine containing live-­attenuated
Vibrio cholerae CVD 103-­HgR strain
for protection against serogroup O1 in
adults age 18-­64 traveling to
cholera-­affected areas

COVID-­19 vaccines

Two messenger mRNA-based: Comirnaty
(Pfizer-BioNTech) and Spikevax
(Moderna). A single adjuvanted, protein
subunit-based vaccine, is a Novavax
product.

Dengue vaccine

Tetravalent live-­attenuated dengue virus
(DENV) manufactured by Sanofi Pasteur
Use in children age 9-­16 yr, with
laboratory-­confirmed previous dengue
virus infection and living in an area where
dengue is endemic

Diphtheria and tetanus
toxoids and acellular
pertussis (DTaP) vaccine

Toxoids of diphtheria and tetanus and
purified and detoxified components from
Bordetella pertussis

DTaP–hepatitis B–
inactivated polio
vaccine (DTaP-­HepB-­
IPV)

DTaP with hepatitis B surface antigen
(HBsAg) produced through recombinant
techniques in yeast with inactivated
whole polioviruses

DTaP with IPV and
Haemophilus influenzae
type b (Hib) (DTaP-­IPV/
Hib)

DTaP with inactivated whole polioviruses
and Hib polysaccharide conjugated to
tetanus toxoid

DTaP with inactivated
polio vaccine,
Haemophilus influenzae
type b, and hepatitis B
(DTaP-­IPV-­Hib-­HepB)

DTaP with inactivated whole polioviruses,
Hib conjugate, and hepatitis B vaccine

DTaP and inactivated
polio vaccine (DTaP-­IPV)

DTaP with inactivated whole polioviruses

Ebola

Live, recombinant viral vector vaccine:
backbone: vesicular stomatitis virus
(VSV), with gene encoding for envelope
glycoprotein of Zaire ebolavirus. Approved
for individuals 18 yr of age and older as a
single-­dose administration.

Hib conjugate vaccine
(Hib)

Polysaccharide conjugated to either
tetanus toxoid or meningococcal group
B outer membrane protein

Hepatitis A vaccine (HepA)

Inactivated whole virus

Hepatitis A–hepatitis B
vaccine (HepA-­HepB)

Combined hepatitis A and B vaccine

Hepatitis B vaccine
(HepB)

HBsAg produced through recombinant
techniques in yeast

Human papillomavirus
vaccine 9-­valent (9vHPV)

The L1 capsid proteins of HPV types 6 and
11 to prevent genital warts and types
16 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58 to prevent
cervical cancer (9vHPV)

PRODUCT

TYPE

Influenza virus vaccine
inactivated (IIV†)

Available as quadrivalent inactivated
formulations that contain hemagglutinin-­
derived influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and
influenza A(H3N2) components, along with
two influenza B viruses (one from each
Victoria and Yamagata lineage)
Flucelvax is a cell-­based inactivated
quadrivalent vaccine

Influenza virus vaccine
live-­attenuated,
intranasal (LAIV4)

Live-­attenuated, temperature-­sensitive,
cold-­adapted quadrivalent intranasal
vaccine containing the hemagglutinin
and neuraminidase genes from the wild
strains reassorted to have the six other
genes from the cold-­adapted parent;
recommended for 2-­49 yr of age

Recombinant influenza
vaccine (RIV4)

A quadrivalent formulation of influenza
vaccine approved for persons 18 yr old
and older

Japanese encephalitis
vaccine

Purified, inactivated whole virus

Measles, mumps, rubella
(MMR) vaccine

Live-­attenuated viruses

Measles, mumps, rubella, Live-­attenuated viruses
varicella (MMRV) vaccine
Meningococcal conjugate
vaccine against
serogroups A, C, W135,
and Y (MenACWY)

Polysaccharide from each serogroup
conjugated to diphtheria toxoid CRM197
protein

Meningococcal
polysaccharide vaccine
against serogroups A,
C, W135, and Y (MPSV4)

Polysaccharides from each of the
serogroups conjugated to diphtheria
toxoid protein. No longer available in
the United States.

Meningococcal B (MenB)

Recombinant proteins from serogroup B
developed in Escherichia coli

Mpox vaccine

Live replication-deficient modified vaccinia
Ankara vaccine

Pneumococcal conjugate
vaccine (15, 20 valent
PCV15, PCV20)

Pneumococcal polysaccharides conjugated
to diphtheria toxin CRM197, containing
15 and 20 pneumococcal serotypes,
respectively. These serotypes accounted
for >80% of invasive disease in young
children before vaccine licensure

Pneumococcal
polysaccharide vaccine
(23 valent) (PPSV23)

Pneumococcal polysaccharides of 23
serotypes responsible for 85–90% of
bacteremic disease in the United States

Poliomyelitis (inactivated,
enhanced potency) (IPV)

Inactivated whole virus highly purified from
monkey kidney cells, trivalent types 1, 2,
and 3

Rabies vaccines (human
diploid and purified
chicken fibroblasts)

Inactivated whole virus

Respiratory syncytial virus
vaccines

RSVPreF3 (Arexvy) and RSVpreF (Abrysvo).
Both vaccines are recombinant protein
vaccines and are currently approved
as a single dose in adults ages 60 and
older. Arexvy is adjuvanted. For pregnant
women during RSV season, one dose of
Abrysvo is recommended

RSV immunization

Human immunoglobulin G1 kappa
(IgG1κ) monoclonal antibody produced
in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells
by recombinant DNA technology.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

1589

Table 215.4  Currently Available* Vaccines and Immunizing Agents in the United States by Type—cont’d
PRODUCT

TYPE

Rotavirus vaccines (RV5
and RV1)

Bovine rotavirus pentavalent vaccine (RV5),
live reassortment attenuated virus, and
human live-­attenuated virus (RV1)

Smallpox vaccine

Vaccinia virus, an attenuated poxvirus
that provides cross-­protection against
smallpox (variola)

Tetanus and diphtheria
toxoids, adsorbed (Td,
adult use)

Tetanus toxoid plus a reduced quantity
of diphtheria toxoid compared with
diphtheria toxoid used for children <7 yr
of age

Tetanus and diphtheria
toxoids adsorbed plus
acellular pertussis
(Tdap) vaccine

Tetanus toxoid plus a reduced quantity of
diphtheria toxoid plus acellular pertussis
vaccine to be used in adolescents and
adults and in children 7-­10 yr of age who
have not been appropriately immunized
with DTaP

Tickborne encephalitis
vaccine

Whole tickborne-­encephalitis virus (TBE)
inactivated vaccine. Currently no ACIP/CDC
recommendations available for this vaccine

PRODUCT

TYPE

Typhoid vaccine
(polysaccharide)

Vi capsular polysaccharide of Salmonella
Typhi Ty2 strain

Typhoid vaccine (oral)

Live-­attenuated Ty21a strain of S. typhi

Varicella vaccine

Live-­attenuated Oka/Merck strain

Yellow fever vaccine

Live-­attenuated 17D-­204 strain

Herpes zoster (shingles)
vaccine

Zoster vaccine recombinant, adjuvanted
(Shingrix) for use in adults ≥50 yr and
in adults age 18 yr and older who are
or will be at increased risk of herpes
zoster because of immunodeficiency or
immunosuppression caused by known
disease or therapy

*As of November 2023.
†There are various types of inactivated flu vaccines—IIV4, ccIIV4, and aIIV4.

Data from U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Vaccines licensed for use in the United States. http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm093833.tm.

found in one type of HPV vaccine, no longer available in the United
States but still used in Europe. MF59 is an oil-­in-­water emulsion found
in one type of influenza vaccine approved for people ≥65 years old;
it is also being studied in children. 1018 is an immunostimulatory
sequence adjuvant used in HepB-­CpG, a hepatitis B vaccine approved
for persons >18 years. HepB-­CpG contains yeast-­derived recombinant
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and is prepared by combining
purified HBsAg with small synthetic immunostimulatory cytidine-­
phosphate-­guanosine oligodeoxynucleotide motifs. The 1018 adjuvant
binds to toll-­like receptor 9 to simulate a directed immune response to
HBsAg. Vaccines with adjuvants should be injected deeply into muscle
masses to avoid local irritation, granuloma formation, and necrosis
associated with SC or intracutaneous administration.
Vaccines can induce immunity by stimulating antibody formation, cellular immunity, or both. Protection induced by most vaccines is thought
to be mediated primarily by B lymphocytes, which produce antibodies.
Such antibodies can inactivate toxins, neutralize viruses, and prevent
their attachment to cellular receptors, facilitate phagocytosis and killing
of bacteria, interact with complement to lyse bacteria, and prevent adhesion to mucosal surfaces by interacting with the bacterial cell surface.
Most B-­lymphocyte responses require the assistance of CD4 helper T
lymphocytes. These T-­lymphocyte–dependent responses tend to induce
high levels of functional antibody with high avidity. The T-­dependent
responses mature over time from primarily an IgM response to a persistent, long-­term IgG response and induce immunologic memory that leads
to enhanced responses on boosting. T-­lymphocyte–dependent vaccines,
which include protein moieties, induce good immune responses even in
young infants. In contrast, polysaccharide antigens induce B-­lymphocyte
responses in the absence of T-­lymphocyte help. These T-­lymphocyte–
independent vaccines are associated with poor immune responses in
children <2 years old and with short-­term immunity and absence of an
enhanced or booster response on repeat exposure to the antigen. With
some polysaccharide vaccines, repeat doses actually are associated with
reduced responses, as measured by antibody concentrations, compared
with first doses (i.e., hyporesponsive). To overcome problems with plain
polysaccharide vaccines, polysaccharides have been conjugated, or covalently linked, to protein carriers, converting the vaccine to a T-­lymphocyte–
dependent vaccine. In contrast to plain polysaccharide vaccines, conjugate
vaccines induce higher-­avidity antibody, immunologic memory leading
to booster responses on repeat exposure to the antigen, long-­term immunity, and community protection by decreasing carriage of the organism
(Table 215.5). As of 2023 in the United States, licensed conjugate vaccines
are available to prevent Hib, pneumococcal, and meningococcal diseases.

Table 215.5  Characteristics of Polysaccharide and
Conjugate Vaccines
CHARACTERISTIC

CONJUGATE

POLYSACCHARIDE

T-­lymphocyte–dependent
immune response

Yes

No

Immune memory

Yes

No

Persistence of protection

Yes

No

Booster effect

Yes

No

Reduction of carriage

Yes

No

Community protection

Yes

No

Lack of
hyporesponsiveness

Yes

No

Serum antibodies may be detected as soon as 7-­10 days after initial
injection of antigen. Early antibodies are usually of the IgM class that
can fix complement. IgM antibodies tend to decline as IgG antibodies
increase. The IgG antibodies tend to peak approximately 1 month after
vaccination and with most vaccines persist for some time after a primary
vaccine course. Secondary or booster responses occur more rapidly and
result from rapid proliferation of memory B and T lymphocytes.
Assessment of the immune response to most vaccines is performed
by measuring serum antibodies. Although detection of serum antibody at levels considered protective after vaccination can indicate
immunity, loss of detectable antibody over time does not necessarily
mean susceptibility to disease. Some vaccines induce immunologic
memory, leading to a booster or anamnestic response on exposure to
the microorganism, with resultant protection from disease. In some
cases, cellular immune response is used to evaluate the status of the
immune system. Certain vaccines (e.g., acellular pertussis) do not have
an accepted serologic correlate of protection.
Live-­
attenuated vaccines routinely recommended for children and
adolescents include measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR); MMR and
varicella (MMRV); rotavirus; and varicella. In addition, a cold-­adapted, live-­
attenuated quadrivalent influenza vaccine (LAIV4) is available for influenza.
Live-­attenuated vaccines tend to induce long-­
term immune
responses. They replicate, often similarly to natural infections, until
an immune response inhibits reproduction. Most live vaccines are
administered in one-­
dose or two-­
dose schedules. The purpose of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1590 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
repeat doses, such as a second dose of the MMR or MMRV vaccine, is
to induce an initial immune response in those who failed to respond to
the first dose. Because influenza viruses tend to mutate to evade preexisting immunity to prior strains, at least one of the strains in influenza
vaccines each year is often different than in the previous year. Thus
influenza vaccines are recommended to be administered yearly.
The remaining vaccines in the recommended schedule for children
and adolescents are inactivated vaccines. Inactivated vaccines tend to
require multiple doses to induce an adequate immune response and
are more likely than live-­attenuated vaccines to need booster doses to
maintain that immunity. However, some inactivated vaccines appear to
induce long-­term or perhaps lifelong immunity after a primary series,
including hepatitis B vaccine and inactivated polio vaccine.

VACCINATION SYSTEM IN THE UNITED STATES
Vaccine Production

Vaccine production is primarily a responsibility of private industry. Many
of the vaccines recommended routinely for children are produced by only
one vaccine manufacturer. Vaccines with multiple manufacturers include
Hib, hepatitis B, rotavirus, MCV4 (meningococcal conjugate vaccine against
serogroups A, C, W135, and Y), COVID-19 vaccine, diphtheria and tetanus
toxoids and acellular pertussis (DTaP), and tetanus and diphtheria toxoids
and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccines for adolescents and adults. Inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) as an IPV-­only vaccine has only one manufacturer,
but IPV is also available in combination products (DTaP–hepatitis B–IPV,
DTaP–IPV/Hib, and DTaP–IPV) from different manufacturers. Influenza
vaccine for children 6-­35 months of age is produced by fewer manufacturers. MMR, MMRV, varicella, pneumococcal conjugate vaccines, and tetanus
and diphtheria (Td) vaccines also are produced by single manufacturers. The
FDA has authorized for emergency use the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna
COVID-19 vaccines for the prevention of COVID-19 disease in individuals 6 months of age and older. The FDA has also authorized the Novavax
COVID-19 vaccine for individuals 12 years of age and older.

Vaccine Policy

Two major committees make vaccine policy recommendations for
children: the Committee on Infectious Diseases (COID) of the AAP
(the Red Book Committee) and the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) of the CDC. Annually, the AAP, ACIP,
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), American College of
Nurse-­Midwives (www.midwife.org), American Academy of Physician Assistants (www.aapa.org), and National Association of Pediatric
Nurse Practitioners (www.napnap.org) issue a harmonized childhood
and adolescent immunization schedule. (http://www.cdc.gov/vaccine
s/schedules/index.html). The ACIP recommendations (http://www.c
dc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/index.html) are official only after adoption
by the CDC director, which leads to publication in the Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep). The AAP
recommendations are published in Pediatrics and the Red Book, which
includes its continuously updated online version (aapredbook.org).

Vaccine Financing

Approximately 50% of vaccines routinely administered to children and
adolescents <19 years of age are purchased through a contract negotiated
by the federal government with licensed vaccine manufacturers. Three
major sources of funds are available to purchase vaccines through this contract. The greatest portion comes from the Vaccines for Children (VFC)
program (http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/index.html), a federal entitlement program established in 1993. The VFC program covers
children receiving Medicaid, children without insurance (uninsured),
and Native Americans and Alaska Natives. In addition, underinsured
children whose insurance does not cover immunization can be covered
through VFC, but only if they go to a federally qualified health center
(http://www.cms.gov/center/fqhc.asp). In contrast to other public funding sources that require approval of discretionary funding by legislative
bodies, VFC funds are immediately available for new recommendations.
These funds are only available if the ACIP votes the vaccine and the recommendation for its use into the VFC program, the federal government
negotiates a contract, and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)

apportions funds. The VFC program can provide free vaccines to participating private providers for administration to children eligible for coverage under the program. The second major federal funding source is the
Section 317 Discretionary Federal Grant Program to states and selected
localities. These funds must be appropriated annually by Congress, and
in contrast to VFC, they do not have eligibility requirements for use. The
third major public source of funds is state appropriations.
The VFC program itself does not cover vaccine administration costs.
Medicaid covers the administration fees for children enrolled in the
program. Parents of other children eligible for VFC must pay administration fees out of pocket, although the law stipulates that no one eligible for the program can be denied vaccines because of inability to
pay the administration fee. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) states that
all vaccines recommended by ACIP and those included in the harmonized annual immunization schedules must be provided by qualified
insurance programs with no copay and no deductible. For eligible children and adults, the COVID-19 vaccine is free of charge. (https://www.
cdc.gov/vaccines/programs-­/bridge/index.html).

Vaccine Safety Monitoring

Monitoring vaccine safety is the responsibility of the FDA, CDC, and
vaccine manufacturers. A critical part of that monitoring depends on
reports provided to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System
(VAERS), the country’s early warning system for vaccine safety comanaged by the CDC and the FDA. Adverse events after immunization can
be reported by completing a VAERS form, which can be obtained from
http://www.vaers.hhs.gov, or by calling 800-­822-­7967. VAERS can rapidly detect safety signals and rare adverse events but is not designed to
assess causality. Individual VAERS case reports may be helpful in identifying potential vaccine safety concerns that can generate hypotheses
about whether vaccines are causing certain clinical syndromes. In general,
however, the reports are not helpful in evaluating the causal role of vaccines in the adverse event, because most clinical syndromes that follow
vaccination are similar to syndromes that occur in the absence of vaccination, which constitute background rates. For causality assessment, epidemiologic studies are often necessary, comparing the incidence rate of the
adverse event after vaccination with the rate in unvaccinated individuals.
A statistically significant higher rate in vaccinated individuals would be
consistent with causation. V-­safe is a smartphone-­based tool that uses text
messaging and web surveys to provide personalized health check-­ins for
up to a year after someone receives a COVID-­19 vaccine. Through v-­safe,
COVID-­19 vaccine recipients are able to communicate with the CDC
regarding possible side effects (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-­
ncov/vaccines/safety/pdfs/v-­safe-­information-­sheet-­508c.pdf).
The Vaccine Safety Datalink gathers data from nine participating
integrated healthcare organizations on over 12 million people per year.
It consists of inpatient and outpatient records of some of the largest
managed-­care organizations in the United States and facilitates causality evaluation. In addition, the Clinical Immunization Safety Assessment (CISA) network has been established to advise primary care
physicians on evaluation and management of adverse events (http://
www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/Activities/CISA.html). CISA facilitates the
CDC’s collaboration with a network of vaccine safety experts at seven
leading academic medical centers and strengthens national capacity for
vaccine safety monitoring and clinical research.
The Health and Medicine Division (HMD) of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, previously the Institute of
Medicine (IOM), has independently reviewed a variety of vaccine safety
concerns and published reports summarizing its findings.* From 2001
through 2004, the IOM released eight reports, concluding that the body
of epidemiologic evidence did not show an association between vaccines
and autism. In 2012 the IOM (HMD) report Adverse Effects of Vaccines:
Evidence and Causality** reviewed a list of reported adverse effects associated with eight vaccines to evaluate the scientific evidence, if any, of an
event-­vaccine relationship. The IOM committee had developed 158 causality conclusions and assigned each relationship between a vaccine and
* http://nationalacademies.org/hmd/Reports.aspx?filters=inmeta:activity=Immunization+
Safety+Review.
** https://www.nap.edu/catalog/13164/adverse-­effects-­of-­vaccines-­evidence-­and-­causality

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices
an adverse health problem to one of four causation categories. The committee concluded that available evidence convincingly supported a causal
relationship between anaphylaxis and MMR, varicella-­zoster, influenza,
hepatitis B, meningococcal, and tetanus-­containing vaccines. Additionally,
the evidence favored rejection of five vaccine–adverse event relationships,
including MMR vaccine and autism, inactivated influenza vaccines and
asthma episodes and Bell palsy, and MMR and DTaP and type 1 diabetes
mellitus. For the majority of cases (135 vaccine–adverse event pairs), the
evidence was inadequate to accept or reject a causal relationship because of
the rarity of the events. Overall, the committee concluded that few health
problems are caused by or clearly associated with vaccines.
In 2013, the HMD released the report Childhood Immunization Schedule and Safety: Stakeholder Concerns, Scientific Evidence, and Future
Studies.† The HMD uncovered no evidence of major safety concerns
associated with adherence to the recommended childhood immunization schedule. The HMD specifically found no links between the immunization schedule and autoimmune diseases, asthma, hypersensitivity,
seizures, child developmental disorders, learning or developmental disorders, or attention-­deficit or disruptive disorders. Additionally, use of
nonstandard schedules is harmful, because it increases the period of risk
of acquiring vaccine-­preventable diseases and increases the risk of incomplete immunization.‡ In addition, the Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality (AHRQ) contracted with the Rand Corporation for an independent systematic review of the immunization schedule. That review concluded that although some vaccines are associated with serious adverse
events, these events are extremely rare and must be weighed against the
protective benefits that vaccines provide. The AAP has summarized the
information on a variety of safety issues and different vaccines.§
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is
designed to compensate people injured by vaccines in the childhood and
adolescent immunization schedule. The program is funded through an
excise tax of $0.75 on vaccines recommended by the CDC per disease
prevented per dose (e.g., the quadrivalent influenza vaccine is taxed
$0.75 because it prevents one disease; the MMR vaccine is taxed $2.25
because it prevents three diseases). As of 2023, this program covers all
the routinely recommended vaccines that protect children against 16 diseases. The VICP was established to provide a no-­fault system, with a table
of related injuries and time frames. In April 2018 the table was modified to reflect changes in the 21st Century Cures Act, requiring that the
VICP cover vaccines recommended for routine administration in pregnant women. All people alleging injury from covered vaccines must first
file with the program. If the injury meets the requirements of the table,
compensation is automatic. If not, the claimant has the responsibility to
prove causality. If compensation is accepted, the claimant cannot sue the
manufacturer or physician administering the vaccine. If the claimant
rejects the judgment of the compensation system, the claimant can enter
the tort system, which is uncommon. Information on the VICP is available at http://www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation or by calling 800-­338-­
2382. All vaccines included in the child and adolescent vaccine schedule
are covered by VICP except dengue, PPSV23, and COVID-19 vaccines.
COVID-19 vaccines that are authorized or approved by the FDA are covered by the Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program (CICP).
For more information, see www.hrsa.gov/ vaccinecompensation or
www.hrsa.gov/cicp. All physicians administering a vaccine covered by
the program are required by law to give the approved Vaccine Information Statement (VIS) to the child’s parent or guardian at each visit
before administering vaccines. Information on the VIS can be obtained
from http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/index.html. There is no VIS
for COVID-­19 vaccines authorized under an emergency use authorization (EUA). For each COVID-­19 vaccine approved by the FDA, a Vaccine Information Fact Sheet for recipients and caregivers is available. The
FDA also requires that recipients or their caregivers be provided with
certain vaccine-­specific information for any COVID vaccine authorized
under an EUA to help make an informed decision about vaccination.
† https://www.nap.edu/catalog/13563/the-­childhood-­immunization-­schedule-­and-­safety-­

stakeholder-­concerns-­scientific-­evidence.

‡ For more information on the reports, see http://nationalacademies.org/hmd/Reports.a

spx.

§ https://www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-­prevention/immunizations/Pages/Vaccine-­

Studies-­Examine-­the-­Evidence.aspx.

1591

This is accomplished by providing an EUA Fact Sheet for Recipients and
Caregivers. The fact sheet is similar in purpose and content to VISs for
licensed vaccines but differs in that the EUA fact sheet is specific to each
authorized COVID-­19 vaccine, is developed by the manufacturer of the
vaccine, and is authorized by the FDA. EUA fact sheets are available at htt
ps://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-­19/eua/index.html.

Vaccine Delivery

To ensure potency, vaccines should be stored at recommended temperatures before and after reconstitution. A comprehensive resource for
providers on vaccine storage and handling recommendations and best
practice strategies is available (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/admin
/storage/index.html). Expiration dates should be noted and expired vaccines discarded. Lyophilized vaccines often have long shelf lives. However, the shelf life of reconstituted vaccines generally is short, ranging
from 30 minutes for varicella vaccine to 8 hours for MMR vaccine.
All vaccines have a preferred route of administration, which is specified in package inserts and in AAP and ACIP recommendations. Most
inactivated vaccines, including DTaP, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, Hib,
inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV), HPV, PCV, COVID-19 vaccines,
MCV4, and Tdap, are administered IM. In contrast, the more commonly used live-­attenuated vaccines (MMR, MMRV, and varicella)
should be dispensed by the SC route. Rotavirus vaccine is administered
orally. IPV and PPS23 (pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine) can be
given IM or SC. One influenza vaccine, LAIV4, when recommended,
is administered intranasally. For IM injections, the anterolateral thigh
muscle is the preferred site for infants and young children. The recommended needle length varies depending on age and size: 5⁄8 inch for
newborn infants, 1 inch for infants 2-­12 months old, and ⅝ to 1 inch for
children 3-10 years of age. For adolescents and adults, the deltoid muscle of the arm is the preferred site for IM administration with needle
lengths of 1-­1¼ inches depending on patient size. Most IM injections
can be made with 23-­to 25-­gauge needles. For SC injections, needle
lengths generally range from 5⁄8 to ¾ inch with 23-­to 25-­gauge needles.
Additional aspects of immunization important for pediatricians and
other healthcare providers are detailed on the websites listed in Table
215.6.

RECOMMENDED IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE

All children in the United States should be immunized against 19 diseases (Fig. 215.1 and Table 215.7) (annually updated schedule available
at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/index.html).
Hepatitis B vaccine (HepB) is recommended in a three-­dose schedule
starting at birth. The birth dose, as well as hepatitis B immunoglobulin, is critical for infants born to mothers who are HBsAg-­positive or
whose hepatitis B immune status is unknown. The recommendation is to
administer the first hepatitis B vaccine to all newborns within 24 hours
of birth, the second dose at 1-­2 months, with a minimal interval between
the first and second dose of 4 weeks, and the third dose from 6 to 18
months of age, ensuring that 8 weeks has passed between the second and
third dose. If either the DTaP-­HepB-­IPV combination vaccine or the
DTaP-­IPV-­Hib-­HepB combination vaccine is used, a four-­dose schedule
is permissible, which includes the stand-­alone hepatitis B vaccine at birth
and the combination vaccine for the next three doses. There are multiple
alternatives for catch-­up vaccination with HepB vaccine depending on
the child’s age. See the immunization schedule notes for clarification.
The DTaP series consists of five doses administered at 2, 4, 6, and 15
through 18 months of age and 4 through 6 years of age. The fourth dose
of DTaP may be administered as early as 12 months of age, provided at
least 6 months have elapsed since the third dose. The fifth (booster) dose
of DTaP vaccine is not necessary if the fourth dose was administered at 4
years or older. One dose of an adult preparation of Tdap is recommended
for all adolescents 11 through 12 years of age, even if a dose of Tdap or
DTaP was administered inadvertently or as part of the catch-­up series
at 7-­9 years of age. If Tdap is administered at 10 years of age, an additional booster at 11-12 years of age is not recommended. Adolescents 13
through 18 years who missed the 11 through 12 year Tdap booster dose
should receive a single dose of Tdap if they have completed the diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (DTP)/DTaP series. Tdap may be given at any
interval after the last Td. Table 215.8 lists preparations in which DTaP is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1592 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 215.6  Vaccine Websites and Resources
ORGANIZATION

WEBSITE

HEALTH PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP)
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
American Academy of Physician Assistants (AAPA)
AAP Childhood Immunization Support Program
American Association of Occupational Health Nurses (AAOHN)
American Association of Nurse Practitioners (AANP)
American College Health Association (ACHA)
American College of Nurse-­Midwives (ACNM)
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG)–
Immunization for Women
American Medical Association (AMA)
American Nurses Association (ANA)
American Pharmacists Association (APhA)
American School Health Association (ASHA)
American Travel Health Nurses Association (ATHNA)
Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology (APIC)
Association of State and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO)
Association of Teachers of Preventive Medicine (ATPM)
National Medical Association (NMA)
Society of Teachers of Family Medicine—Group on Immunization Education
NONPROFIT GROUPS AND UNIVERSITIES
Albert B. Sabin Vaccine Institute
Brighton Collaboration
Center for Vaccine Awareness and Research—Texas Children’s Center
Children’s Vaccine Program
Every Child by Two (ECBT)
Families Fighting Flu
GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance
Health on the Net Foundation (HON)
Immunization Action Coalition (IAC)
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA)
Institute for Vaccine Safety (IVS), Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health
National Academies: Health and Medicine Division
National Alliance for Hispanic Health
National Association of Certified Professional Midwives
National Foundation for Infectious Diseases (NFID)
National Foundation for Infectious Diseases (NFID)—Childhood Influenza
Immunization Coalition (CIIC)
National Network for Immunization Information (NNii)
Parents of Kids with Infectious Diseases (PKIDS)
PATH Vaccine Resource Library
Vaccine Education Center at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
Vaccinate Your Baby
GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
ACIP Vaccine Recommendations
Current Vaccine Delays and Shortages
Epidemiology and Prevention of Vaccine-­Preventable Diseases (also known
as the Pink Book)
Manual for the Surveillance of Vaccine-­Preventable Diseases
Public Health Image Library
Travelers’ Health
CDC Health Information for International Travel (also known as the Yellow
Book)
Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System (VAERS)
Vaccine Administration: Recommendations and Guidelines
Vaccines and Immunizations
Vaccines for Children Program
Vaccines for Children—Vaccine Price List
Vaccine Information Statements

http://www.familydoctor.org/online/famdocen/home.html
http://www.aap.org/
https://www.aapa.org
http://www.aap.org/immunization/
http://www.aaohn.org/
https://www.aanp.org
http://www.acha.org/
https://www.midwife.org
http://www.immunizationforwomen.org/
http://www.ama-­assn.org/
http://www.nursingworld.org/
http://www.pharmacist.com/
http://www.ashaweb.org/
http://www.athna.org/
http://www.apic.org/
http://www.astho.org/
http://www.atpm.org/
http://www.nmanet.org/
http://www.immunizationed.org/
http://www.sabin.org/
https://brightoncollaboration.org/public
http://www.texaschildrens.org/departments/immunization-­project
http://www.path.org/vaccineresources/
http://www.ecbt.org/
http://www.familiesfightingflu.org/
http://www.gavialliance.org/
http://www.hon.ch/
http://www.immunize.org/
http://www.idsociety.org/Index.aspx
http://www.vaccinesafety.edu/
http://www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/
http://www.hispanichealth.org/
https://nacpm.org
http://www.nfid.org
http://www.preventchildhoodinfluenza.com/
http://www.immunizationinfo.net/
http://www.pkids.org/
http://www.path.org/resources/vaccine-resource-library-website
http://www.chop.edu/service/vaccine-­education-­center/home.html
http://www.vaccinateyourbaby.org/

http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/index.html
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-­recs/index.html
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vac-­gen/shortages/
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/index.html
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-­manual/index.html
https://phil.cdc.gov/phil/home.asp
http://www.cdc.gov/travel/
https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2016/table-­of-­contents
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/Activities/vaers.html
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/vac-­admin/default.htm
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/index.html
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/awardees/vaccine-­
management/price-­list/index.html
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/index.html

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

1593

Table 215.6  Vaccine Websites and Resources—cont’d
ORGANIZATION

WEBSITE

Vaccine Safety
Vaccine Storage and Handling

http://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/index.html
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/storage/default.htm

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
National Vaccine Program Office (NVPO)

http://www.hhs.gov/nvpo/

Health Resources and Services Administration
National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program

http://www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation/

National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)
Vaccines

https://www.niaid.nih.gov/about/vrc

World Health Organization (WHO)
Immunization, Vaccines, and Biologicals

http://www.who.int/immunization/en/

Fig. 215.1 Recommended immunization schedule for children and adolescents age 18 yr or younger—United States, 2024, including an appen-

dix detailing contraindications and precautions for commonly used vaccines. These recommendations must be read with the notes that follow. For
those who fall behind or start late, provide catch-­up vaccination at the earliest opportunity as indicated by the green bars. A new addendum section has been added to list any ACIP recommendations that occur by majority vote and are approved by CDC Director after the 2024 immunization
schedules are approved and published. To determine minimum intervals between doses, see the Catch-­Up Schedule (see Table 215.7). (Courtesy
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, 2023. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/downloads/child/0-­18yrs-­child-­combined-­
schedule.pdf; Appendix is adapted from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP] General Best Practice Guidelines for Immunization: Contraindication and Precautions, Table 4-­1, available at www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-­recs/general-­recs/contraindications.html and from
the ACIP’s Recommendations for the Prevention and Control of 2023-­24 seasonal influenza with vaccines available at www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/
71/rr/rr7101a1.htm.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1594 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Fig. 215.1, cont’d

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

Fig. 215.1, cont’d

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1595

1596 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Fig. 215.1, cont’d

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

Fig. 215.1, cont’d

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1597

1598 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fig. 215.1, cont’d

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1599

Fig. 215.1, cont’d

VACCINE

MINIMUM AGE FOR
DOSE 1

MINIMUM INTERVAL BETWEEN DOSES
DOSE 1 TO DOSE 2

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

CHILDREN AGE 4 MONTHS THROUGH 6 YEARS
Hepatitis B
Birth
4 weeks

DOSE 2 TO DOSE 3

DOSE 3 TO DOSE 4

DOSE 4 TO DOSE 5

6 months
A fifth dose is not necessary
if the fourth dose was
administered at age 4 years
or older and
at least 6 months after dose 3

8 weeks and at least 16 weeks after first dose
minimum age for the final dose is 24 weeks

Rotavirus

6 weeks
Maximum age for first
dose is 14 weeks, 6
days.

4 weeks

4 weeks
maximum age for final dose is 8 months, 0 days

Diphtheria, tetanus,
and acellular
pertussis

6 weeks

4 weeks

4 weeks

6 months

Haemophilus
influenzae type b

6 weeks

No further doses
needed
if first dose was
administered at age
15 months or older.
4 weeks
if first dose was
administered before
the 1st birthday.
8 weeks (as final
dose)
if first dose was
administered at
age 12 through 14
months.

No further doses needed
if previous dose was administered at age 15 months or older
4 weeks
if current age is younger than 12 months and first dose was
administered at younger than age 7 months and at least 1
previous dose was PRP-­T (ActHib®, Pentacel®, Hiberix®),
Vaxelis® or unknown
8 weeks and age 12 through 59 months (as final dose)
if current age is younger than 12 months and first dose was
administered at age 7 through 11 months; OR
if current age is 12 through 59 months and first dose was
administered before the 1st birthday and second dose was
administered at younger than 15 months; OR
if both doses were PedvaxHIB® and were administered
before the 1st birthday

8 weeks (as final dose)
This dose only necessary
for children age 12
through 59 months
who received 3 doses
before the 1st birthday.

Pneumococcal
conjugate

6 weeks

No further doses
needed
for healthy children
if first dose was
administered at age
24 months or older
4 weeks
if first dose was
administered before
the 1st birthday
8 weeks (as final dose
for healthy children)
if first dose was
administered at the
1st birthday or after

No further doses needed
for healthy children if previous dose was administered at age
24 months or older
4 weeks
if current age is younger than 12 months and
previous dose was administered at <7 months old
8 weeks (as final dose for healthy children)
if previous dose was administered between 7–11 months
(wait until at least 12 months old); OR
if current age is 12 months or older and at least 1 dose was
administered before age 12 months

8 weeks (as final dose)
This dose is only
necessary for children
age 12 through 59
months regardless of
risk, or age 60 through
71 months with any
risk, who received 3
doses before age 12
months.

Inactivated
poliovirus

6 weeks

4 weeks

4 weeks
if current age is <4 years6 months (as final dose)
if current age is 4 years or older

6 months (minimum age
4 years for final dose)

1600 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Table 215.7  Recommended Catch-­Up Immunization Schedule for Children and Adolescents Who Start Late or Who Are More than 1 Month Behind United States,
2024.*

Table 215.7  Recommended Catch-­Up Immunization Schedule for Children and Adolescents Who Start Late or Who Are More than 1 Month Behind United States,
2024.*—cont’d
VACCINE

MINIMUM AGE FOR
DOSE 1

MINIMUM INTERVAL BETWEEN DOSES
DOSE 1 TO DOSE 2

DOSE 3 TO DOSE 4

See Notes

See Notes

4 weeks
if first dose of DTaP/DT was administered before the 1st
birthday6 months (as final dose)
if first dose of DTaP/DT or Tdap/Td was administered at or
after the 1st birthday

6 months
if first dose of DTaP/
DT was administered
before the 1st birthday

DOSE 4 TO DOSE 5

CHILDREN AGE 4 MONTHS THROUGH 6 YEARS
Measles, mumps,
12 months
4 weeks
rubella
Varicella

12 months

3 months

Hepatitis A

12 months

6 months

Meningococcal
ACWY

2 months MenACWY-­
CRM
2 years MenACWY-­TT

8 weeks

CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS AGE 7 THROUGH 18 YEARS
Meningococcal
Not applicable (N/A)
8 weeks
ACWY
Tetanus, diphtheria;
tetanus,
diphtheria, and
acellular pertussis

7 years

4 weeks

Human
papillomavirus

9 years

Routine dosing
intervals are
recommended.

Hepatitis A

N/A

6 months

Hepatitis B

N/A

4 weeks

8 weeks and at least 16 weeks after first dose

Inactivated
poliovirus

N/A

4 weeks

6 months
A fourth dose is not necessary if the third dose was
administered at age 4 years or older and at least 6 months
after the previous dose.

Measles, mumps,
rubella

N/A

4 weeks

Varicella

N/A

3 months if younger
than age 13 years.
4 weeks if age 13
years or older

Dengue

9 years

6 months

A fourth dose of IPV
is indicated if all
previous doses were
administered at <4
years OR if the third
dose was administered
<6 months after the
second dose.

6 months

1601

*Always use this table in conjunction with Figure 215.1 and the notes that follow it.
This table provides catch-­up schedules and minimum intervals between doses for children whose vaccinations have been delayed. A vaccine series does not need to be restarted, regardless of the time that has elapsed between doses. Use
the section appropriate for the child’s age.
For vaccination recommendations for persons ages 19 yr or older, see the Recommended Adult Immunization Schedule, 2024 https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/adult.html.
Courtesy U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia. 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/catchup.html#table-­catchup.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOSE 2 TO DOSE 3

1602 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
combined with other vaccines. Either Td vaccine or Tdap can be used for
the decennial Td booster, for tetanus prophylaxis in wound management,
or for additional required doses in the catch-­up immunization schedule
if a person has received at least one Tdap dose. One dose of Tdap vaccine
is recommended for pregnant adolescents with each pregnancy, preferably between 27 and 36 weeks of gestation, regardless of the time since
the last Tdap or Td. Current available data suggest that vaccinating earlier in the 27-­through 36-­week period will maximize passive antibody
transfer to the infant. This recommendation was made in response to
data predicting lack of infant protection when maternal Tdap had been
received before pregnancy.
There are three licensed preparations of single-­antigen Hib vaccines.
The two monovalent vaccines conjugated to tetanus toxoid (PRP-­T) are
each given in a four-­dose series at 2, 4, 6, and 12 through 15 months of
age. The third Hib vaccine is conjugated to meningococcal outer membrane protein (PRP-­OMP) and is recommended in a three-­dose series
at 2, 4, and 12 through 15 months of age. There also are several vaccines
in which Hib is a component, in addition to single-­antigen Hib conjugate vaccines (see Tables 215.8 and 215.9).
Influenza vaccine is recommended for all children beginning at 6
months of age, with a minimum age of 6 months for IIVs and 24 months
for LAIV4. Various influenza vaccine preparations are FDA-­licensed for
different age-­groups.* Children 6 months through 8 years of age being
vaccinated for the first time should receive two doses at least 4 weeks
apart. If such children only received a single dose of IIV before July 1
of the current season, they need two doses. Children who have received
two doses in a prior season only need one dose annually thereafter. For
additional guidelines, follow dosing instructions in the influenza policy
statements, which are updated annually by both the CDC (https://www
.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/acip/index.htm) and AAP (aapredbook.org).
Influenza vaccine usually is given in October or November, although
there are benefits even when administered as late as February or March
because influenza seasons most frequently peak in February. People ≥9
years old should receive one dose of influenza vaccine annually. LAIV4
is recommended for the 2023-­2024 season. Because of limited use of
LAIV4, there have been no effectiveness estimates in the United States.
Data from other countries have demonstrated similar protection from
LAIV4 to that of standard-­dose, egg-­based IIV in children. Although
there are no reports of additional safety risks for LAIV4 in children with
immunodeficiencies, anatomic or functional asplenia, cochlear implants,
or active cerebrospinal fluid leaks, it is not recommended in these populations because the vaccine is a live attenuated product (see Table 215.7).
For more information see https://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content
/146/4/e2020024588
IPV should be administered at 2, 4, and 6 through 18 months of age
with a booster dose at 4 through 6 years. The final dose in the series
should be administered on or after 4 years of age and at least 6 months
after the previous dose. Four or more doses of IPV can be administered
before age 4 years when a combination vaccine containing IPV is used.
The final dose in the IPV series should still be administered at 4 years
or older regardless of the number of previous doses, and the minimal
interval from dose 3 to dose 4 is 6 months. For series that contain oral
polio vaccine (OPV), the total number of doses needed to complete the
series is the same as that recommended for the U.S. IPV schedule. Only
documentation specifying receipt of trivalent OPV constitutes proof of
vaccination according to the U.S. polio vaccination recommendations.
This is important because since April 2016, trivalent OPV (tOPV) is
no longer available with the type 2 serotype removed. Thus children
vaccinated since that time only received the type 1 and 3 components
and are not immune to type 2. In contrast, IPV contains all three polio
serotypes. Only IPV is available in the United States. One lifetime IPV
booster should be considered for adolescents 18 years old who are at
increased risk of exposure to poliovirus and completed IPV primary
series. For catch-­up vaccine recommendations, see the recommended
childhood immunization schedule at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/sch
edules/hcp/imz/catchup.html (see Table 215.7).
* See http://www.cdc.gov/flu/protect/vaccine/vaccines.htm and http://aapredbook.aappubl
ications.org/site/news/vaccstatus.xhtml#flu.

MMR should be administered at 12 through 15 months of age followed by a second dose at 4 through 6 years. Before all international
travel, infants 6 through 11 months of age should receive one dose
of MMR vaccine. These children should be revaccinated with the
routinely recommended two doses of MMR vaccine beginning at 12
months of age. For children 12 months or older, administer two doses
before international travel; the second dose should be administered at
least 4 weeks after the first dose.
Two doses of varicella vaccine should be given, the first at 12 through
15 months of age and the second at 4 through 6 years. The second dose
may be administered before 4 years of age provided at least 3 months
have elapsed since the first dose. MMR and MMRV preparations are
available. Ensure persons age 7-­18 years without evidence of immunity
have a two-­dose series. The quadrivalent MMRV vaccine is preferred
in place of separate MMR and varicella vaccines at the 4-­to 6-­year-­old
visit. For dose 1 in children age 12-­47 months, it is recommended to
administer MMR and varicella vaccines separately because of the slight
increase in febrile seizures associated with the combined MMRV vaccine compared with simultaneous administration of the separate products. MMRV may be used if parents or caregivers express a preference.
Protection against pneumococcal disease can be provided by either
conjugated or polysaccharide vaccines. Conjugated vaccines offer several benefits over polysaccharide vaccines (see Table 215.5). A fourdose series of either PCV15 or 20 is recommended at 2, 4, 6, and 12
to 15 months of age. In the latest immunization schedule, PCV15 and
20 are referenced. Use of either pneumococcal conjugate vaccines is
recommended for all children age 2–23 months according to currently
recommended PCV dosing and schedules. References to the previously available thirteen-valent (PCV13) have been removed. For children without high risk conditions, PCV20 is not indicated if they have
received four doses of PCV13 or PCV15 or another age-appopriate
complete PCV series. For guidance on determining which pneumococcal vaccines a patient needs and when, a mobile app has been created.
(www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/pneumo/hcp/pneumoapp.html. PPSV23
is recommended for select children with conditions that place them at
risk for pneumococcal disease. When both PCV and PPSV23 are indicated, administer PCV first. PCV and PPSV23 should be administered
during the same visit.
A two-­dose series of MCV4 includes a recommended dose for all
adolescents at 11 through 12 years of age followed by a second dose
at 16 years. If the first dose is administered at 13 through 15 years of
age, a booster dose should be administered at 16-­18 years. No booster
dose is needed if the first dose is administered at 16 years. In addition,
MCV4 should be administered to people 2 months through 55 years of
age with underlying conditions that place them at high risk of meningococcal disease. There are two licensed quadrivalent meningococcal
vaccines and one pentavalent vaccine that additionally provides coverage against serogroup B disease. Each vaccine has a different minimum
age for beginning vaccination with that product. In addition to the
quadrivalent meningoccal vaccine, two other vaccines provide coverage against serogroup B meningoccal disease. Two to three doses of the
meningococcal B (MenB) vaccines are recommended for persons >10
years old at increased risk of meningococcal disease. Further, consideration should be given to adolsecents not at increased risk (16-23 years,
preferred age 16-18 years) based on shared clinical decision making,
which involves patients and families coming together to discuss the
potential benefits of vaccination (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/
admin/downloads/isd-job-aid-scdm-mening-b-shared-clinical-decision-making.pdf).
Children 10 years of age or older may receive a single dose of the
quadrivalent vaccine as an alternative to separate administration of
MenACWY and MenB when both vaccines would be given on the
same clinic day. The two licensed MenB vaccine products are not interchangeable. MCV4 vaccines may be administered simultaneously with
MenB vaccines if indicated, but at a different anatomic site if feasible.
Hepatitis A vaccine, licensed for administration to children ≥12
months old, is recommended for universal administration to all children at 12 through 23 months of age and for certain high-­risk groups.
The two doses in the series should be separated by at least 6 months.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

1603

Table 215.8  Combination Vaccines Licensed and Available in the United States
RECOMMENDED AGES

VACCINE PRODUCT
(MANUFACTURER)*

TRADE NAME (YR
LICENSED)

DTaP-­IPV/Hib (Sanofi
Pasteur)

Pentacel (2008)

DTaP-­IPV + PRP-­T

2, 4, and 6 mo

DTaP-­HepB-­IPV
(GlaxoSmithKline)

Pediarix (2002)

DTaP + HepB + IPV

2, 4, and 6 mo

DTap-­HepB-­IPV-­Hib
(MSP Vaccine Company)

Vaxelis (2020)

DTaP + HepB+ IPV
+ Hib

2, 4, and 6 mo

DTaP-­IPV

Kinrix (2008),
Quadracel (2015)

DTaP + IPV

HepA-­HepB
(GlaxoSmithKline)

Twinrix (2001)

HepA + HepB

>18 yr of age; 0, 1,
and 6 mo schedule

MMRV (Merck & Co)

ProQuad (2005)

MMR + varicella

†

COMPONENTS

PRIMARY SERIES

BOOSTER DOSE
15-­18 mo

Kinrix: For use as the fifth dose of DTaP and
the fourth dose of IPV in children age 4-­6 yr
Quadracel: For use as the fifth dose in the
DTaP series and as the fourth or fifth dose
in the IPV series in children 4-­6 yr of age

4-­6 yr

*Dash (-­) indicates that products are supplied in their final form by the manufacturer and do not require mixing or reconstitution by user; slash (/) indicates that products are mixed or
reconstituted by user.
†Although ProQuad is available for the first dose (at 12-­15 mo of age), the CDC recommends that MMR vaccine and varicella vaccine be administered separately for the first dose in
this age-­group unless the parent or caregiver expresses a preference for MMRV vaccine.
DTaP, Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis vaccine; HepA, hepatitis A vaccine; HepB, hepatitis B vaccine; IPV/Hib, trivalent inactivated polio vaccine and
Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine; MMRV, measles-­mumps-­rubella and varicella vaccine, PRP-­T, H. influenzae type b capsular polysaccharide (polyribosyl-­ribitol279 phosphate
[PRP]) covalently bound to tetanus toxoid (PRP-­T).
Adapted from Cohn AC, MacNeil JR, Clark TA, et al. Prevention and control of meningococcal disease: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.
MMWR. 2013;62(2):1–28.

Table 215.9  Vaccines Recommended for Children and Adolescents with Underlying Conditions or at High Risk
VACCINES

SPECIAL SITUATIONS

Pneumococcal
conjugate
(and PPSV23
in certain
conditions)

Cerebrospinal fluid leak
Chronic heart disease
Chronic kidney disease (excluding maintenance dialysis and nephrotic syndrome, which are included in immunocompromising
conditions)
Chronic liver disease
Chronic lung disease (including moderate persistent or severe persistent asthma)
Cochlear implant
Diabetes mellitus
Immunocompromising conditions (on maintenance dialysis or with nephrotic syndrome; congenital or acquired asplenia or
splenic dysfunction; congenital or acquired immunodeficiencies; diseases and conditions treated with immunosuppressive
drugs or radiation therapy, including malignant neoplasms, leukemias, lymphomas, Hodgkin disease, and solid organ
transplant; HIV infection; and sickle cell disease and other hemoglobinopathies)

MCV4

Anatomic or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease)
Persistent complement component deficiency
Complement inhibitor use
Residents of or travelers to countries in African meningitis belt or pilgrims on the Hajj
During outbreaks caused by a vaccine serogroup
First-­year college students who live in residential housing (if not previously vaccinated at age 16 yr or older) or military recruits
HIV infection

MenB

Anatomic or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease)
Children with persistent complement component deficiency
Complement inhibitor use
During outbreaks caused by a vaccine serogroup

Hib

In addition to routine Hib vaccine recommendations. Persons at increased risk for Hib disease, including chemotherapy
recipients and those with anatomic or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease), HIV infection, immunoglobulin
deficiency, or early component complement deficiency
Recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT)
Elective splenectomy

Hep B

In addition to routine Hep B vaccine recommendations; infants born to HBsAg-­positive mothers or mothers whose HBsAg
status is unknown (administer vaccine within 12 hr of birth)

HPV

In addition to routine HPV vaccine recommendations; immunocompromising conditions, including HIV infection
History of sexual abuse or assault

Tetanus

Wound management recommendations exist based on age, number of prior doses of tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccine, and
type of wound.

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Child and adolescent schedule. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/child-­adolescent.html

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1604 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Persons who previously received one dose at age 12 months or older
should receive dose 2 at least 6 months after dose 1. Unvaccinated
persons through age 18 years should complete a two-­dose series
with a minimum interval of 6 months. Adolescents age 18 years or
older may receive the combined HepA and HepB vaccine. Immunity
against hepatitis A infection is particularly important in people with
chronic liver disease and clotting factor disorders, in men who have
sex with men, in those who use injection or noninjection drugs, in
people who are homeless, exposed to hepatitis A virus at work or
travel, and those in close contact with international adoptees. Before
all international travel, infants 6 through 11 months of age should
receive one dose of hepatitis A vaccine. These children should be
revaccinated with the routinely recommended two doses of hepatitis
A vaccine beginning at 12 months of age. For unvaccinated children
12 months or older, administer dose 1 as soon as travel is considered.
Preferably two doses should be administered before international
travel to countries with high or intermediate endemic hepatitis A;
the second dose should be administered at least 6 months after the
first dose.
The 9vHPV vaccine is recommended at age 11 or 12 years, although
some advocate for routinely administering it as early as 9 years of age.
Catch-­up HPV vaccination is recommended for all persons through
age 18 years if not adequately vaccinated. For those who initiate the
series before their 15th birthday, the recommended schedule is two
doses of 9vHPV vaccine. The minimum interval is 5 months between
the first and second dose. If the second dose is given at a shorter
interval, a third dose should be administered a minimum of 12 weeks
after the second dose and a minimum of 5 months after the first dose.
For those initiating the series on or after their 15th birthday, the recommended schedule is three doses of 9vHPV vaccine. The minimum
intervals are 4 weeks between the first and second dose, 12 weeks
between the second and third dose, and 5 months between the first
and third dose. For children with a history of sexual abuse or assault,
the ACIP recommends routine HPV vaccination beginning at age
9 years. In males and females with primary or secondary immunocompromising conditions such as B-­
lymphocyte deficiencies,
T-­lymphocyte complete or partial defects, HIV, malignancy, transplantation, autoimmune disease, or immunosuppressive therapy, the
ACIP recommends vaccination with three doses of 9vHPV (0, 1-­2,
and 6 months) because immune response to vaccination might be
attenuated. 9vHPV may be used to continue or complete a vaccination series in patients who started with 4vHPV or 2vHPV, though
no additional doses are recommended after completing the series
with recommended dosing intervals using any HPV vaccine. If the
vaccination schedule is interrupted, the series does not need to be
restarted. HPV vaccination is not recommended until after pregnancy, but no intervention is needed if vaccinated while pregnant.
Pregnancy testing is not needed before vaccination.
Two rotavirus vaccines are available: RotaTeq (RV5) and Rotarix
(RV1). With both vaccines, the first dose can be administered as early
as 6 weeks of age. Do not start the series on or after age 15 weeks, 0
days. The RV5 vaccine is administered in three doses at least 4 weeks
apart. The RV1 vaccine is administered in two doses at least 4 weeks
apart. If any dose in the series is either RotaTeq or unknown, default to
a three-­dose series. The maximum age for the final dose is 8 months, 0
days as stated in the immunization schedule.
A dengue vaccine (Dengvaxia) was approved by the FDA in May
2019 for use in children age 9-­16 years living in dengue-­endemic
territories AND having laboratory confirmation of previous dengue infection. It is a three-­dose series administered at 0, 6, and 12
months. Endemic areas include Puerto Rico, American Samoa, U.S.
Virgin Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau. For updated guidance on
dengue-­endemic areas and pre-­vaccination laboratory testing see
https://apps.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs117/en/index.html.
Dengvaxia is not approved for use in U.S. travelers who are visiting but not living in an area where dengue is endemic. See https://
www.aappublications.org/news/2020/05/01/mmwr050120 for more
information.

For those that are 18 years of age or older and at risk for Mpox
infection, 2 doses of the Mpox vaccine are recommended. See https://
www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/interim-considerations/jynneosvaccine.html#:~:text=JYNNEOS%20is%20approved%20for%20
the,22)%3A734%2D742) for more information.
To prevent RSV in infants, one dose of nirsevimab is recommended
for infants younger than 8 months of age who were born shortly before
or are entering their first RSV season (typically fall through spring)
if: (1) the mother did not receive RSV vaccine during pregnancy, (2)
the mother’s RSV vaccination status is unknown, or (3) the infant was
born within 14 days of maternal RSV vaccination. Additionally, a dose
of nirsevimab is recommended for some children 8 to 19 months of
age who are at increased risk for severe RSV disease and entering their
second RSV season (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/wr/
mm7234a4.htm#suggestedcitation).
The present schedule, excluding influenza vaccine, can require as
many as 41 doses. Of the doses, more than half are recommended
before 2 years of age. Influenza vaccination, starting at age 6 months,
can add an additional 20 injections through 18 years. To reduce the
injection burdens, several combination vaccines are available (see
Table 215.8).
The recommended childhood and adolescent immunization schedule establishes a routine adolescent visit at 11 through 12 years of age.
MCV4, a Tdap booster, and 9vHPV vaccine should be administered during this visit in addition to the COVID-­19 vaccine if the child is 12 years
of age or older. Influenza vaccine should be administered annually. In
addition, the 11-­to 12-­year-­old visit is an opportune time to review all
the immunizations the adolescent has received previously, to provide any
doses that were missed, and to review other age-­appropriate preventive
services. The 11-­to 12-­year visit establishes an important platform for
incorporating other vaccines. Information on the current status of new
vaccine licensure and recommendations for use is available.*
For children who are at least 1 month behind in their immunizations, catch-­up immunization schedules are available for children 4
months through 18 years of age (http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/sched
ules/hcp/imz/catchup.html) (see Table 215.7). Interactive immunization schedules are available for children from birth through 18 years
of age at https://www2a.cdc.gov/vaccines/childquiz/. Only written/
electronic, dated, authentic records should be accepted as evidence of
immunization. In general, when in doubt, a person with unknown or
uncertain immunization status should be considered “disease susceptible,” and recommended immunizations should be initiated without
delay on a schedule commensurate with the person’s current age. No
evidence suggests that administration of vaccines to already-­immune
recipients is harmful. A new addendum section has been added to
list any ACIP recommendations that occur by majority vote and are
approved by CDC Director after the 2024 immunization schedules are
approved and published.

VACCINES RECOMMENDED IN SPECIAL
SITUATIONS

Eight vaccines—PCV, PPSV23, MCV4, MenB, Flu, Hib, HepA, and
HepB—are recommended for children and adolescents at increased
risk for complications from vaccine-­preventable diseases or children
who have an increased risk for exposure to these diseases who are
outside the age-­groups for which these vaccines are normally recommended (PPSV23 and MenB are not routinely recommended for any
age-­group of children and are only used for children with high-­risk
conditions; Fig. 215.2 and Table 215.9). Specific recommendations for
use of these vaccines in children with underlying conditions can be
found in the recommended immunization schedule.
PCV15 or PCV20 is recommended for children 24-71 months
of age with specialized risk conditions that place them at high risk
for pneumococcal disease. This recommendation includes children
with sickle cell disease and other hemoglobinopathies, including
hemoglobin SS, hemoglobin S-­C, or hemoglobin S–β-­thalassemia,
* http://aapredbook.aappublications.org/site/news/vaccstatus.xhtml and http://www.fda.go
v/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM093833

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

1605

Fig. 215.2 Recommended child and adolescent immunization schedule by medical indication—United States, 2024. Always use this figure in
conjunction with Figure 215.1 and the notes that follow it. (Courtesy U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia. 2024. https
://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/downloads/child/0-­18yrs-­child-­combined-­schedule.pdf.)

or children who are functionally or anatomically asplenic; children with HIV infection; and children who have chronic disease
(see Table 215.9 and Fig. 215.2). (For further recommendations on
pneumococcal vaccine recommendations, see https://www.cdc.gov/
vaccines/vpd/pneumo/hcp/who-­when-­to-­vaccinate.html.)
Children at high risk for pneumococcal disease also should receive
PPSV23 to provide immunity to serotypes not contained in the 13-­
or 15-valent conjugate vaccine. PPSV23 should be administered on or
after the second birthday and should follow completion of the PCV
series by at least 8 weeks. Two doses of PPSV23 are recommended,
with an interval of 5 years between doses. Immunization of children >5
years old with high-­risk conditions can be performed with PCV15 or
PCV20 and/or PPSV23, depending on the condition and vaccination
history. When both PCV and PPSV23 are indicated, PCV should be
administered first.
MCV4 is recommended for HIV-­infected persons ≥2 months old,
children with anatomic or functional asplenia (including sickle cell
disease), children with persistent complement component deficiency
(includes persons with inherited or chronic deficiencies in C3, C5-­9,
properdin, factor D, or factor H), or children taking a complement
inhibitor (e.g., eculizumab or ravulizumab).
Meningococcal B (MenB) vaccine is recommended for persons ≥10
years old at increased risk of meningococcal disease. This includes people with complement deficiencies or anatomic or functional asplenia,
people at increased risk because of serogroup B meningococcal disease
outbreaks, and microbiologists who routinely are exposed to isolates of
Neisseria meningitidis. Young adults age 16-­23 (preferred range: 16-­18
years) who are not at increased risk for meningococcal disease may be

vaccinated with either of the two MenB vaccines, which are not interchangeable, to provide short-­term protection against most strains of
serogroup B meningococcal disease.
Hib vaccine and HepA vaccine are recommended for children with
certain high-­risk conditions. HepB is recommended for infants born to
HBsAg-­positive mothers or mothers whose HBsAg status is unknown
(administer the vaccine within 12 hours of birth) (see Table 215.9).
In addition to vaccines in the recommended childhood and adolescent schedule, a variety of vaccines are available for children who
will be traveling to areas of the world where certain infectious diseases are common (Table 215.10). Vaccines for travelers include
typhoid fever, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, Japanese encephalitis, MCV4,
cholera, rabies, and yellow fever, depending on the location and circumstances of travel. Measles is endemic in many parts of the world.
Children 6-­11 months old should receive a dose of MMR and hepatitis A vaccines before international travel outside of the United States.
However, doses of MMR and hepatitis A vaccines received before 12
months should not be counted in determining compliance with the
recommended two-­dose MMR schedule. For unvaccinated children
≥12 months old, administer two doses before international travel following the recommended schedule. (Additional information on vaccines for international travel can be found at http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/
travel/.)
Vaccine recommendations for children with immunocompromising conditions, either primary (inherited) or secondary
(acquired), vary according to the underlying condition, the degree
of immune deficit, the risk for exposure to disease, and the vaccine
(Table 215.11 and see Fig. 215.2). Immunization of children who are

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 215.10
Immunizations for International Travel*
1606
Part XV Recommended
u Infectious Diseases
LENGTH OF STAY
IMMUNIZATIONS

Brief, <1 mo

Long-­Term / Residential, >1 mo

Review and complete age-­appropriate childhood and adolescent schedule (see
text for details)
• DTaP, poliovirus, pneumococcal, and Haemophilus influenzae type b
(Hib) vaccines may be given at 4-­wk intervals if necessary to complete
recommended schedule before departure.
• Influenza
• MMR: two additional doses given if <12 mo old at first dose
• Meningococcal disease (MenACWY)†
• Rotavirus
• Varicella
• Human papillomavirus (HPV)
• Hepatitis A: two additional doses given if <12 mo old at 1st dose‡,§
• Hepatitis B§
• Tdap

+

+

Yellow fever#

+

+

Typhoid fever¶

+

+

Rabies**

±

±

Japanese encephalitis‡

±

+

Cholera‡‡

±

±

*See disease-­specific chapters in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Yellow Book for details. For further sources of information, see text.
†Recommended for regions of Africa with endemic infection and during local epidemics and required for travel to Saudi Arabia for the Hajj.
‡For infants age 6-­11 mo, first dose is recommended before departure for all international travel. For unvaccinated children 12 mo and older, this vaccine is indicated for travelers to
areas with intermediate or high endemic rates of hepatitis A virus infection.
§If there is insufficient time to complete 6-­mo primary series, accelerated series can be given.
#For regions with endemic infection, see Health Information for International Travel (http://www.cdc.gov/travel). Because of the risk of serious adverse events after yellow fever
vaccination, clinicians should only vaccinate people who (1) are at risk of exposure to yellow fever virus (YFV) or (2) require proof of vaccination to enter a country.
¶Indicated for travelers who will consume food and liquids in areas of poor sanitation.
**Indicated for people with high risk for animal exposure (especially to dogs) and for travelers to countries with endemic infection.
‡For regions with endemic infection (see Health Information for International Travel). For high-­risk activities in areas experiencing outbreaks, vaccine is recommended, even for brief travel.
‡‡Cholera vaccine (CVD 103-­HgR, Vaxchora) is recommended for adult (18-­64 yr old) travelers to an area of active toxigenic V. cholerae O1 transmission.
+, Recommended; ±, consider; DTaP, diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis.
Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Travelers’ health. https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel.

Table 215.11  Vaccination of Persons with Primary and Secondary Immune Deficiencies
PRIMARY

CATEGORY
B lymphocyte
(humoral)

T lymphocyte
(cell-­mediated
and humoral)

RISK-­SPECIFIC
RECOMMENDED
VACCINES*

SPECIFIC
IMMUNODEFICIENCY

CONTRAINDICATED
VACCINES*

EFFECTIVENESS AND
COMMENTS

Severe antibody
deficiencies (e.g., X-­linked
agammaglobulinemia
and common variable
immunodeficiency)

OPVa
Smallpoxb
LAIV4
BCG
Ty21a
Yellow fever virus (YFV) and
live-­bacteria vaccinesc
No data for rotavirus
vaccines

Annual IIV is the only vaccine
given to patients receiving
IG therapy; routine
inactivated vaccines can be
given if not receiving IVIG.
Pneumococcal Hib (children
12-­59 mo of age)

The effectiveness of any
vaccine will be uncertain
if it depends only on the
humoral response (e.g.,
PPSV23).
IG therapy interferes with
the immune response to
live vaccines MMR and
VAR.

Less severe antibody
deficiencies (e.g., selective
IgA deficiency and IgG
subclass deficiency)

OPVa
BCG
YFV vaccine
Other live vaccinesd appear
to be safe.

Vaccines should be
given as on the annual
immunization schedule for
immunocompetent people.e
PPSV23 should be given
beginning at 2 yr of age.f
Pneumococcal Hib (children
12-­59 mo of age)

All vaccines are probably
effective.
Immune response may be
attenuated.

Complete defects (e.g.,
SCID, complete DiGeorge
syndrome)

All live vaccinesc,d,g

Pneumococcal Hib (children
12-­59 mo of age) and annual
IIV

All inactivated vaccines are
probably ineffective.

Partial defects (e.g., most
patients with DiGeorge
syndrome, hyper-­IgM
syndrome, Wiskott-­
Aldrich syndrome, ataxia-­
telangiectasia)

All live vaccinesc,d,g

Routine inactivated vaccines
should be given.e
PPSV23 should be given
beginning at 2 yr of age.f
Pneumococcal Hib (children
12-­59 mo of age)

Effectiveness of any
vaccine depends on
degree of immune
suppression.

Interferon (IFN)-­γ–interleukin
(IL)-­12 axis deficiencies

All live vaccines for IL-­12/
IL-­12R deficiencies,
IFN-­γ, IFN-­α, or STAT1
deficiencies

None

None

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

1607

Table 215.11  Vaccination of Persons with Primary and Secondary Immune Deficiencies—cont’d
PRIMARY
SPECIFIC
IMMUNODEFICIENCY

CATEGORY

RISK-­SPECIFIC
RECOMMENDED
VACCINES*

CONTRAINDICATED
VACCINES*

EFFECTIVENESS AND
COMMENTS

Complement

Persistent complement,
properdin, MBL, or factor
B deficiency; secondary
deficiency because taking
eculizumab (Solaris)

None

PPSV23 should be given
beginning at 2 yr of age.f
MCV series beginning in
infancy.h
MenB series beginning at 10
yr of age and Hib vaccine
(children 12-­59 mo of age)

All routine vaccines are
probably effective.

Phagocytic
function

Chronic granulomatous disease

Live-­bacteria vaccinesc

None

All inactivated vaccines
are safe and probably
effective.
Live-­virus vaccines are
probably safe and
effective.

Phagocytic deficiencies that are
undefined or accompanied
by defect in T-­cell and
NK-­cell dysfunction (e.g.,
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome,
leukocyte adhesion defects,
myeloperoxidase deficiency)

MMR, MMRV, OPV,a
smallpox, LAIV4, Ty21a, YF,
all bacteria vaccines

PPSV23 should be given
beginning at 2 yr of age.f
MCV series beginning in
infancy.h

All inactivated vaccines
are safe and probably
effective.

SECONDARY
CONTRAINDICATED
­VACCINES*

RISK-­SPECIFIC
­RECOMMENDED VACCINES*

EFFECTIVENESS AND
­COMMENTS

HIV/AIDS

OPVa
Smallpox
BCG
Combined MMRV
LAIV4
Withhold MMR, varicella,
and zoster in severely
immunocompromised persons.
YF vaccine may have a
contraindication or precaution
depending on the indicators of
immune function.j

PPSV23 should be given
beginning at 2 yr of age.f
MCV series beginning in infancy.h
HepB vaccine
Consider Hib (if not administered
in infancy).l

Rotavirus vaccine is recommended
on standard schedule.
MMR and VAR are recommended
for HIV-­infected children who are
asymptomatic or only low-­level
immunocompromised.k
All inactivated vaccines may be
effective.

Generalized malignant neoplasm,
transplantation, autoimmune
disease, immunosuppressive or
radiation therapy

Live-­virus and live-­bacteria
vaccines, depending on immune
status.c,d,m

PPSV23 should be given
beginning at 2 yr of age.f
Annual IIV (unless receiving
intensive chemotherapy or
anti–B-­cell antibodies).
Hib vaccine may be indicated.n

Effectiveness of any vaccine
depends on degree of immune
suppression; inactivated
standard vaccines are indicated
if not highly immunosuppressed,
but doses should be repeated
after chemotherapy ends.

Asplenia (functional, congenital
anatomic, surgical)

LAIV4

PPSV23 should be given
beginning at 2 yr of age.f
MCV series beginning in infancy.h
MenB series beginning at 10 yr
of age.
Hib (if not administered in
infancy)o

All routine vaccines are probably
effective.

Chronic renal disease

None

PPSV23 should be given
beginning at 2 yr of age.f
HepB is indicated if not previously
immunized.

All routine vaccines are probably
effective.

CNS anatomic barrier defect
(cochlear implant, congenital
dysplasia of the inner ear,
persistent CSF communication
with naso-­/oropharynx)

None

PPSV23 should be given
beginning at 2 yr of age.f

All standard vaccines are
indicated.

SPECIFIC IMMUNODEFICIENCY

*Other vaccines that are universally or routinely recommended should be given if not contraindicated.
aOPV is no longer available in the United States.
bThis table refers to contraindications for nonemergency vaccination (i.e., ACIP recommendations).
cLive-­bacteria vaccines: BCG and oral Ty21a Salmonella Typhi vaccine.
dLive-­virus vaccines: MMR, MMRV, VAR, OPV, LAIV, YF, zoster, rotavirus, and vaccinia (smallpox). Smallpox vaccine is not recommended for children or the general public.
eChildren who are delayed or underimmunized should be immunized with routinely recommended vaccines, according to age and catch-­up schedule.
fPPSV23 is begun at 2 yr or older. If PCV13 is required, PCV13 doses should be administered first, followed by PPSV23 at least 8 wk later; a second dose of PPSV23 is given 5 yr after the first.
gRegarding T-­lymphocyte immunodeficiency as a contraindication for rotavirus vaccine, data exist only for SCID.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1608 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 215.11  Vaccination of Persons with Primary and Secondary Immune Deficiencies—cont’d
hAge and schedule of doses depend on the product; repeated doses are required.
i Pneumococcal vaccine is not indicated for children with chronic granulomatous disease beyond age-­based universal recommendations for PCV13. Children with chronic

granulomatous disease are not at increased risk for pneumococcal disease.
jYF vaccine is contraindicated in HIV-­infected children <6 yr old who are highly immunosuppressed. There is a precaution for the use of YF vaccine in asymptomatic HIV-­infected

children <6 yr with total lymphocyte percentage of 15–24%, and >6 yr old with CD4+ T-­lymphocyte counts of 200-­499 cells/mm3. Data from Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Yellow fever vaccine: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010;59(RR-­07); 1–27.
kHIV-­infected children should receive immunoglobulin after exposure to measles and may receive varicella vaccine if CD4+ T-­lymphocyte percentage is ≥15% for those <6 yr old or
CD4+ T-­lymphocyte count ≥200 cells/mm3 for those ≥6 yr old. People with perinatal HIV infection who were vaccinated with measles-­, rubella-­, or mumps-­containing vaccine before
the establishment of combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) should be considered unvaccinated and should receive two appropriately spaced doses of MMR vaccine once
effective cART has been established (at least 6 mo with CD4+ T lymphocytes ≥15% for children <6 yr old, or CD4+ T-­lymphocyte count ≥200 cells/mm3 for children ≥6 yr old).
lFor patients 5-­18 yr old who have not received a Hib primary series and a booster dose or at least one Hib dose after age 14 mo.
mWithholding inactivated vaccines also is recommended with some forms of immunosuppressive therapy, such as anti-­CD20 antibodies, induction or consolidation chemotherapy,
or patients with major antibody deficiencies receiving immunoglobulins. Inactivated influenza vaccine is an exception, but consideration should be given to repeating doses of any
inactivated vaccine administered during these therapies.
nFor persons <60 mo old undergoing chemotherapy or radiation therapy who have not received a Hib primary series plus a booster dose or at least one Hib dose after age 14 mo.
oFor persons >59 mo old who are asplenic and persons ≥15 mo who are undergoing elective splenectomy and who have not received a Hib primary series and a booster dose or at
least one Hib dose after age 14 mo.
BCG, Bacille Calmette-­Guérin vaccine; CNS, central nervous system; Hib, Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine; HIV/AIDS, human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome; IG, immunoglobulin; IIV, inactivated influenza vaccine; LAIV4, live-­attenuated influenza vaccine; MMR, measles, mumps, rubella vaccine; MMRV,
measles-­mumps-­rubella-­varicella; MCV, quadrivalent meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine; MenB, serogroup B meningococcal vaccine; OPV, oral poliovirus vaccine (live);
PPSV23, pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency disease; VAR, varicella; YF, yellow fever.
Adapted from Immunization in Special Circumstances. In: Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021–2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious
Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2021.

immunocompromised poses the following potential concerns: the incidence or severity of some vaccine-­preventable diseases is higher, and
therefore certain vaccines are recommended specifically for certain
conditions; vaccines may be less effective during the period of altered
immunocompetence and may need to be repeated when immune competence is restored; and because of altered immunocompetence, some
children and adolescents may be at increased risk for an adverse event
after receipt of a live-­virus vaccine. Live-­attenuated vaccines generally
are contraindicated in immunocompromised persons. The exceptions
include MMR, which may be given to a child with HIV infection provided the child is asymptomatic or symptomatic without evidence of
severe immunosuppression, and varicella vaccine, which may be given
to HIV-­infected children if the CD4+ lymphocyte count is at least 15%
and the total CD4+ cell count is >200/mm3. MMRV is not recommended in these situations.
Altered immunocompetence is considered a precaution for rotavirus; however, the vaccine is contraindicated in children with severe
combined immunodeficiency disease. Inactivated vaccines may be
administered to immunocompromised children, although their effectiveness might not be optimal depending on the immune deficit. Children with complement deficiency disorders may receive all vaccines,
including live-­attenuated vaccines. In contrast, children with phagocytic disorders may receive both inactivated and live-­attenuated viral
vaccines but not live-­attenuated bacterial vaccines.*
Corticosteroids can suppress the immune system. Children receiving
corticosteroids (≥2 mg/kg/day or ≥20 mg/day of prednisone or equivalent) for ≥14 days should not receive live vaccines until therapy has
been discontinued for at least 1 month. Children on the same dose levels but for <2 weeks may receive live-­virus vaccines as soon as therapy
is discontinued, although some experts recommend waiting 2 weeks
after therapy has been discontinued. Children receiving lower doses of
corticosteroids may be vaccinated while receiving therapy.
Children and adolescents with malignancy and those who have
undergone solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and
immunosuppressive or radiation therapy should not receive live-­virus
and live-­bacteria vaccines depending on their immune status. Children who have undergone chemotherapy for leukemia may need to be
reimmunized with age-­appropriate single doses of previously administered vaccines. Preterm infants generally can be vaccinated at the same
chronological age as full-­term infants according to the recommended
childhood immunization schedule. An exception is the birth dose of
HepB. When mother is HBsAg-­negative, infants weighing ≥2 kg and
who are medically stable should receive a birth dose within the first 24
*https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/downloads/appendices/a/imm
uno-­table.pdf

hours of life. However, HepB should be deferred in infants weighing
<2 kg at birth until chronological age 1 months or hospital discharge
(whichever is earlier and even if weight is still <2 kg). All preterm, low-­
birthweight infants born to HBsAg-­positive mothers should receive
hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) and HepB vaccine (at separate
anatomic sites) within 12 hours of birth. However, such infants should
receive an additional three doses of vaccine starting at 30 days of age
(see Fig. 215.1). Infants born to HBsAg-­positive mothers should be
tested for HBsAg and antibody at 9-­12 months, or 1-­2 months after
completion of the HepB series if the series was delayed. If the test is
negative for antibody against the surface antigen (anti-­HBs), an additional dose of HepB is recommended with testing 1-­2 months after the
dose. If the child is still antibody negative, an additional two doses of
vaccine should be administered.
If the mother’s HBsAg status is unknown within 12 hours of birth,
administer HepB vaccine regardless of birthweight. For infants weighing <2,000 g, administer HBIG in addition to HepB within 12 hours of
birth. Determine the mother’s HBsAg status as soon as possible and, if
the mother is HBsAg-­positive, also administer HBIG to infants weighing ≥2,000 g as soon as possible, but no later than 7 days of age.
Varicella-­zoster immunoglobulin (VariZIG) is recommended for
patients without evidence of immunity to varicella who are at high
risk for severe varicella and complications, who have been exposed to
varicella or herpes zoster, and for whom varicella vaccine is contraindicated. This includes immunocompromised patients without evidence of immunity, newborn infants whose mothers have signs and
symptoms of varicella around the time of delivery (i.e., 5 days before
to 2 days after), hospitalized premature infants born at ≥28 weeks of
gestation whose mothers do not have evidence of immunity to varicella, hospitalized premature infants born at <28 weeks of gestation
or who weigh ≤1,000 g at birth (regardless of their mother’s evidence
of immunity to varicella), and pregnant women without evidence of
immunity.
The ACIP recommends the use of COVID-­19 vaccines within the
scope of the EUA or fully approved by the FDA based on a Biologics License Application for the particular vaccine. Interim ACIP recommendations for the use of COVID-­19 vaccines can be found at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-­recs/vacc-­specific/covid-­
19.html. COVID-­
19 vaccine and other routine vaccines may be
administered on the same day. For more information about COVID­19 vaccines authorized for use in the United States, see https://www
.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-­19/info-­by-­product/index.html. Rare serious adverse events have been reported after COVID-­19 vaccination,
including myocarditis in children older than 5 years of age. The ACIP
continues to conclude that the benefits outweigh the risks for rare serious adverse events after COVID-­19 vaccination.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices
Some children have situations that are not addressed directly in
current immunization schedules. Physicians can use general rules to
guide immunization decisions in some of these instances. General
Best Practice Guidelines for Immunization (including contraindications and precautions) can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccine
s/hcp/acip-­recs/general-­recs/index.html. In general, vaccines may be
given simultaneously on the same day, whether inactivated or live.
Different inactivated vaccines can be administered at any interval
between doses. However, because of theoretical concerns about viral
interference, different live-­attenuated vaccines (MMR, varicella), if
not administered on the same day, should be given at least 1 month
apart. An inactivated and a live vaccine may be spaced at any interval
from each other.
Immunoglobulin does not interfere with inactivated vaccines.
However, immunoglobulin can interfere with the immune response
to measles vaccine and, by inference, to varicella vaccine. In general,
immunoglobulin, if needed, should be administered at least 2 weeks
after the measles vaccine. Depending on the dose of immunoglobulin
received, MMR should be deferred for as long as 3-­11 months. Immunoglobulin is not expected to interfere with the immune response to
LAIV4 or rotavirus vaccines.
Certain adult (including pregnancy) immunizations are recommended to decrease the risk of infection in their children; these include
influenza virus and pertussis (Tdap).

PRECAUTIONS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS

Observation of valid precautions and contraindications is critical to
ensure that vaccines are used in the safest manner possible and to
obtain optimal immunogenicity. When a child presents for immunization with a clinical condition considered a precaution, the physician
must weigh benefits and risks to that individual child. If benefits are
judged to outweigh risks, the vaccine or vaccines in question may be
administered. A contraindication means the vaccine should not be
administered under any circumstances.
A general contraindication for all vaccines is anaphylactic reaction to a prior dose. Anaphylactic hypersensitivity to vaccine constituents is also a contraindication. However, if a vaccine is essential,
there are desensitizing protocols for some vaccines. The major constituents of concern are egg proteins for vaccines grown in eggs;
gelatin, a stabilizer in many vaccines; and antimicrobial agents. The
recommendations for persons with egg allergy were modified as
follows: A previous severe allergic reaction to influenza vaccine is
a contraindication to future receipt of any influenza vaccine. Persons with a history of egg allergy who have experienced only hives
after exposure to egg should receive any flu vaccine appropriate for
age and health status. Persons who had symptoms other than hives
(e.g., angioedema, respiratory distress, need for emergency medical services or epinephrine) should receive any influenza vaccine
appropriate for age and health status annually. If using an influenza
vaccine other than Flublok or Flucelvax, administer in a medical
setting under supervision of a healthcare provider who is able to
recognize and manage severe allergic conditions. LAIV4 should
not be used for persons with a history of severe allergic reaction to
any component of the vaccine (excluding egg) or to a previous dose
of any influenza vaccine. The measles and mumps components of
MMR are grown in chick embryo fibroblast tissue culture. However,
the amount of egg protein in MMR is so small that there are no
special procedures for administering the vaccine to someone with a
history of anaphylaxis after egg ingestion.
Vaccines should usually be deferred in children with moderate to
severe acute illnesses, regardless of the presence of fever, until the child
recovers. However, children with mild illnesses may be vaccinated. Studies
of undervaccinated children have documented opportunities that were
missed because mild illness was used as an invalid contraindication.
Complete tables of contraindications and precautions by vaccine
can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-­recs/general-­
recs/contraindications.html and as an appendix to the 2024 immunization schedule (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/ch
ild-­adolescent.html#appendix).

1609

MEDICAL EXEMPTIONS

All 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico have regulations requiring verification of immunization for childcare and school
attendance. This provides direct protection to the immunized population and indirect protection to those unable to be immunized. It also
functions to improve timely immunization of children. Regulations
also allow for medical exemption from immunization requirements
in all 50 states, and the majority of states also have varied regulations
that allow for nonmedical exemptions. Rare, medically recognized
contraindications are important to observe. Nonmedical exemptions
to immunization requirements include exemptions because of religious or philosophical beliefs. Persons with exemptions are at greater
risk of vaccine-­
preventable diseases than the general population.
When children with exemptions cluster, as can happen with nonmedical exemptions, the community may be at risk for outbreaks, leading
to exposure of children who cannot be protected by vaccination to
vaccine-­preventable diseases, such as children too young for vaccination and those with medical contraindications. (For more information,
see
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/early/2016/08/25/
peds.2016-­2145.)

IMPROVING IMMUNIZATION COVERAGE

Standards for child and adolescent immunization practices have been
developed to support achievement of high levels of immunization coverage while providing vaccines in a safe and effective manner and educating parents about risks and benefits of vaccines (Table 215.12).
Pediatric vaccine uptake has decreased since the start of the COVID­19 pandemic resulting in decreased vaccination coverage. This identified decline may indicate that U.S. children and their communities face
increased risks for outbreaks of vaccine-­preventable diseases (Fig. 215.3).
Despite benefits that vaccines have to offer, many children are underimmunized as a result of not receiving recommended vaccines or not
receiving them at the recommended ages. Much of the underimmunization problem can be solved through physician actions. Most children
have a regular source of healthcare. However, missed opportunities to
provide immunizations at healthcare visits include but are not limited
to failure to provide all recommended vaccines that could be administered at a single visit during that visit, failure to provide immunizations
to children outside of well child care encounters when contraindications are not present, and referral of children to public health clinics
because of inability to pay for vaccines. Simultaneous administration
of multiple vaccines is generally safe and effective. When the benefits
of simultaneous vaccination are explained, many parents prefer such
immunization to making an extra visit. Providing all needed vaccines
simultaneously should be the standard of practice.
Only valid contraindications and precautions to vaccine administration should be observed. Ideally, immunizations should be provided during well child visits; however, if no contraindications exist,
it is important to administer vaccines at other visits, particularly if the
child is behind in the schedule. There is no good evidence that providing immunizations outside of well child care ultimately decreases the
number of well child visits.
Financial barriers to immunization should be minimized. Participation in the VFC program allows physicians to receive vaccines at no
cost for their eligible patients, which helps such patients get immunized in their medical home.
Several interventions have been shown to help physicians increase
immunization coverage in their practices. Reminder systems for children before an appointment or recall systems for children who fail to
keep appointments have repeatedly been demonstrated to improve
coverage. Assessment and feedback are also important interventions.
Many physicians overestimate the immunization coverage among
patients they serve and thus are not motivated to make any changes in
their practices to improve performance. Assessing the immunization
coverage of patients served by an individual physician with feedback of
results can be a major motivator for improvement. Often, public health
departments can be contacted to provide the assessments and feedback. Alternatively, physicians can perform self-­assessment. Review of
approximately 60 consecutive charts of 2-­year-­old children may provide

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1610 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 215.12  Standards for Child and Adolescent Immunization Practices
AVAILABILITY OF VACCINES
Vaccination services are readily available.
Vaccinations are coordinated with other healthcare services and provided in a medical home when possible.
Barriers to vaccination are identified and minimized.
Patient costs are minimized.
ASSESSMENT OF VACCINATION STATUS
Healthcare professionals review the vaccination and health status of patients at every encounter to determine which vaccines are indicated.
Healthcare professionals assess for and follow only medically accepted contraindications.
EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION ABOUT VACCINE BENEFITS AND RISKS
Parents or guardians and patients are educated about the benefits and risks of vaccination in a culturally appropriate manner and in easy-­to-­
understand language.*
Healthcare professionals offer strong and consistent recommendations for all universally recommended vaccines according to the current immunization
schedule. They use presumptive language (e.g., these vaccines are routine) and deliver this recommendation in the same manner for all vaccines.
Healthcare professionals answer parents’ or guardians’ and patients’ questions thoroughly and emphasize an unwavering commitment to the
recommendation. If parents or guardians and patients are hesitant or refuse, healthcare professionals persevere and offer the vaccine again at
the next most appropriate time.
PROPER STORAGE AND ADMINISTRATION OF VACCINES AND DOCUMENTATION OF VACCINATIONS
Healthcare professionals follow appropriate procedures for vaccine storage and handling.
Up-­to-­date, written vaccination protocols are accessible at all locations where vaccines are administered.
Persons who administer vaccines and staff who manage or support vaccine administration are knowledgeable and receive ongoing education.
Healthcare professionals simultaneously administer as many indicated vaccine doses as possible.
Vaccination records for patients are accurate, complete, and easily accessible.
Healthcare professionals report adverse events after vaccination promptly and accurately to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System
(VAERS) and are aware of a separate program, the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP).
Healthcare professionals and personnel review the immunization timeline with parents or guardians and patients and schedule follow-­up
immunization visits before the family leaves the care setting.
All personnel who have contact with patients are appropriately vaccinated and communicate consistent messages about vaccines.
IMPLEMENTATION OF STRATEGIES TO IMPROVE VACCINATION COVERAGE
Systems are used to remind parents or guardians, patients, and healthcare professionals when vaccinations are due and to recall those who are overdue.
Office-­or clinic-­based patient record reviews and vaccination coverage assessments are performed annually.
Healthcare professionals practice community-­based approaches.
Healthcare professionals understand cultural needs and disparities of different populations and use the most effective strategies for these
populations.
Most healthcare visits (including acute care or sick visits) are viewed as opportunities to review immunization records, provide vaccines that are
due, and catch up on missed vaccinations.
*Additional resources to help improve immunization rates include the following:
• Provider Resources for Vaccine Conversations with Parents from CDC, AAP, and American Academy of Family Physicians (www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/conversations/index.html)
• American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Training Guide (https://shar.es/1JRNmJ)
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Pink Book, Chapter 6: Vaccine administration (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/vac-­admin.html) and quality
improvement projects and educational materials (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/ed/index.html)
• Immunization Action Coalition: Suggestions to improve your immunization services (http://www.immunize.org/catg.d/p2045.pdf)
Adapted from National Vaccine Advisory Committee. Standards for child and adolescent immunization practices. Pediatrics. 2003;112:958–963; and Bernstein HH, Bocchini JA;
AAP Committee on Infectious Diseases. The need to optimize adolescent immunization. Pediatrics. 2017;139(3):e20164186, and Practical approaches to optimize adolescent
immunization. Pediatrics. 2017;139(3):e20164187.

Week beginning date

Cumulative change in all noninfluenza doses ordered
Jan 6–Apr 19, 2020 versus Jan 7–Apr 21, 2019

6

13

20

Feb
27

3

10

17

Mar
24

2

9

16

Apr
23

30

6

13
0

0
Noninfluenza doses
Measles-containing doses

−500,000

−50,000
−100,000

−1,000,000
−150,000
−1,500,000

−200,000
−250,000

−2,000,000

−2,500,000

Jan 20: first U.S.
national emergency declared
(Washington)

Mar 13: U.S.
national emergency
declared

−300,000
−350,000

−3,000,000

−3,500,000

−400,000
−450,000

Cumulative change in all measles-containing doses ordered
Jan 6–Apr 19, 2020 versus Jan 7–Apr 21, 2019

Jan

Fig. 215.3 Weekly changes in Vaccines for Children Program (VFC) provider orders* and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD) doses administered† for

routine pediatric vaccines — United States, January 6–April 19, 2020. *VFC data represent the difference in cumulative doses of VFC-­funded noninfluenza and measles-­containing vaccines ordered by healthcare providers at weekly intervals between Jan. 7–Apr. 21, 2019, and Jan. 6–Apr. 19,
2020; †VSD data depict weekly measles-­containing vaccine doses administered by age-­group (age ≤24 mo and >24 mo to 18 yr). (From Santoli JM,
Lindley MC, DeSilva MB, et al. Effects of the COVID-­19 pandemic on routine pediatric vaccine ordering and administration – United States, 2020.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69:591–593.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices
a reasonable estimate of practice coverage. Another approach is to have
a staff member review the chart of every patient coming in for a visit and
placing immunization needs reminders on the chart for the physician.
Electronic medical records can be designed to accomplish this goal.

VACCINE HESITANCY

The World Health Organization (WHO) characterized vaccine hesitancy
as a delay in acceptance or refusal of vaccines despite availability of vaccination services. The COVID-­19 pandemic has also changed the way
outpatient care is being delivered across the United States. Because of
COVID-­19, providers face the additional challenges of maintaining and
strengthening routine vaccinations. As communities are reopening, it is
vitally important for providers to work with parents to ensure their children stay up to date on routine, universally recommended vaccines. The
pandemic is a reminder of the threat of infectious diseases. Providers
are well positioned to counsel parents about the value of vaccination.
Uptake is highest when parents are aware that their child is due for specific vaccines and when they feel safe about their children receiving those
vaccines. Factors implicated in vaccine hesitancy include complacency,
convenience, and confidence. The percentage of children having a parent reporting they were “hesitant about childhood shots” was 25.8% in
2018 and 19.5% in 2019 (https://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/
146/6/e2020007609). Concerns about vaccine safety and questions about
the necessity of vaccines are often cited as reasons for refusal. Vaccine-­
hesitant individuals are a heterogeneous group, and their individual concerns should be respected and addressed. Multiple studies have shown
that the most important factor in persuading parents to accept vaccines
remains the one-­on-­one contact with an informed, caring, and concerned
pediatrician. Parents should be reassured that vaccines are tested thoroughly before licensure, that ongoing mechanisms of monitoring safety
exist after licensure, and that the current vaccine schedule is the only
recommended schedule. It is important to stress that serious disease can
occur if a child and family are not immunized, because unvaccinated
children put medically exempt children who live in that same area at risk,
as well as some children who have been vaccinated (although most vaccines are highly effective, no vaccine is 100% effective). Parental education can be provided through reputable sources for vaccine information
(see Table 215.8). (For more information, see http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/early/2016/08/25/peds.2016-­2146.) Provider
resources for vaccine conversations with parents are available at https:/
/www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/conversations/index.html.
Physician concerns about liability should be addressed by appropriate documentation of discussions in the chart. The Committee on Bioethics of the AAP has published guidelines for dealing with parents’
refusal of immunization. Physicians also might want to consider having parents sign a refusal waiver. A sample refusal-­to-­vaccinate waiver
can be found at http://www2.aap.org/immunization/pediatricians/pdf
/refusaltovaccinate.pdf.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1611

immunizations for children up to 18 years of age, including recommended ages for the initiation of the primary series and dose intervals, as well as recommendations for subsequent booster doses are
listed in Table 215.13.
The WHO policy recommendations are adapted by the Regional and
National Immunization Technical Advisory Groups making recommendations to respective country governments. As a consequence, the
immunization schedules and the types of vaccines, including the specific vaccine products used, vary substantially. Country-­specific immunization schedules have been compiled and are available online (htt
ps://immunizationdata.who.int/listing.html?topic=vaccine-­schedule).
Availability and cost play a major role in the choice of vaccine products
and schedules in many countries.
According to the WHO recommended schedule, all children should
be protected against 12 vaccine-­preventable infectious pathogens: Bordetella pertussis, Clostridium tetani, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Haemophilus influenzae type b, hepatitis B virus, human papillomavirus
(HPV), measles virus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, poliovirus, rotavirus, rubella virus, and Streptococcus pneumoniae (see Table 215.13).

BIRTH DOSE VACCINES

At birth, hepatitis B vaccine is recommended for all children within 24
hours of birth to prevent perinatal transmission. Additionally, Bacille
Calmette-­Guérin (BCG) vaccine is recommended at birth in countries
or settings with a high incidence of tuberculosis (TB) and/or high leprosy burden, and the first dose of bivalent oral polio vaccine containing
poliovirus type 1 and 3 (bOPV) is recommended to be given at birth in
polio-­endemic countries and in countries at high risk for importation
and subsequent spread of poliovirus.

Primary Infant Series

Infant immunization visits are recommended to begin from the age
of 6-­8 weeks, with an interval of 4-­8 weeks between doses to complete
the primary series for protection against hepatitis B, polio, diphtheria,
pertussis, tetanus, rotavirus, and invasive bacterial infections caused
by H. influenzae type b and S. pneumoniae. To reduce the number of
injections, some of these vaccines are provided in combination vaccines. Rotavirus vaccines are provided orally and can be administered
concomitantly with the injectable vaccines and OPV. It should be noted
that for all countries using OPV, two doses of injectable IPV are recommended from 14 weeks of age with an interval of at least 4 months
between doses.
Two doses of measles vaccines are recommended, with the first dose
given at 9-­12 months of age and the second dose in the second year of
life. Only one dose of rubella given at 9 months of age is sufficient to
provide >95% protection. However, when using a rubella-­containing
vaccine that is combined with measles, it is often easier to provide a
second dose using the same MR or MMR vaccine product for both
doses, dependent on availability. HPV vaccine is recommended for
girls from 9-­14 years of age.

Booster Doses

215.1 International Immunization Practices
W. William Schluter, Kari Johansen, and
Tracey Goodman
Given that the epidemiology of infectious diseases varies across countries and continents, it is necessary for vaccination programs to be
adapted accordingly. The WHO’s Strategic Advisory Group of Experts
(SAGE) on immunization evaluates the scientific evidence available
for the various vaccines and products and develops advice on global
policies and strategies ranging from vaccine type, recommendations
for vaccine delivery, links with other health interventions, and suggested vaccine research. Its remit includes all vaccine-­preventable
infectious diseases for all age-­groups. The WHO SAGE recommendations are summarized in the WHO Vaccine Position papers that are
updated regularly. The latest information for recommended routine

In addition to the three doses provided in infancy, three booster doses
of combination diphtheria toxoid– and tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine should be provided during childhood and adolescence, at 12-­23
months (using DTP-­containing vaccine), 4-­7 years (with DT or Td),
and 9-­15 years of age (with Td). Ideally, there should be at least 4 years
between booster doses. Depending on disease epidemiology, booster
doses may also be recommended for Hib and pneumococcal conjugate vaccines. For countries where DTP/DT/Td booster doses are not
provided, maternal vaccination with tetanus-­containing vaccine (TT
or Td) is provided to protect against neonatal and maternal tetanus.

Vaccination Against Outbreak-­Prone Diseases for
Endemic Areas

Cholera, Japanese encephalitis, meningococcal conjugate, typhoid, and
yellow fever vaccines may be recommended for infants, children, and
adolescents living in endemic areas, as shown in Table 215.14.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

For the most recent version of the respective position papers, the summary tables and further details per vaccine, consult the reference provided here*:

AGE OF
FIRST DOSE

VACCINE
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

BCG

NUMBER
OF DOSES
IN PRIMARY
SERIES

INTERVAL BETWEEN DOSES
FIRST TO
SECOND

SECOND TO
THIRD

THIRD TO
FOURTH

BOOSTER
DOSE(S) AFTER
PRIMARY SERIES

CONSIDERATIONS TO BE MADE

As soon as
possible after
birth

1

NA

NA

NA

NA

• Universal vs selective vaccination of high-­risk
groups
• Co-­administration with hepatitis B and OPV
• Birth dose and HIV
• Vaccination of older age-­groups

Option 1

As soon as
possible after
birth (<24 hr)

3

4 wk (min)
with
DTPCV1

4 wk (min) with
DTPCV2

NA

NA

• Premature and low birthweight infants
• Co-­administration with other vaccines
• High-­risk infants

Option 2

As soon as
possible after
birth (<24 hr)

4

4 wk (min)
with
DTPCV1

4 wk (min) with
DTPCV2

4 wk with
DTPCV3

NA

Rotavirus

6 wk (min)

2 or 3
(dependent
on product
used)

4 wk (min)
with
DTPCV2

For the three-­
dose schedule:
4 wk with
DTPCV3

NA

NA

• Not recommended if child >24 mo old

DTP-­containing vaccine
(DTPCV)

6 wk (min)

3

4 wk (min) to
8 wk

4 wk (min) to 8 wk

NA

3 boosters with
DTPCV at 12-­23
mo, 4-­7 yr (Td/
DT), and 9-­15 yr
(Td)

• Co-­administration with other vaccines/
combination vaccines
• Maternal immunization if needed

Hemophilus
influenzae
type b

Option 1

6 wk (min) to
59 mo (max)

3

4 wk (min)
with
DTPCV2

4 wk (min) with
DTPCV3

NA

At least 6 mo after
last dose

Option 2

6 wk (min) to
59 mo (max)

2-­3

8 wk (min) if
only 2 doses
4 wk (min) if 3
doses

4 wk (min) if 3
doses

NA

At least 6 mo (min)
after last dose

• Single dose if >12 mo of age
• Not recommended for children >5 yr
• Co-­administration with other vaccines/
combination vaccines

Option 1
3p + 0

6 wk (min)

3

4 wk (min)

4 wk

NA

Option 2
2p + 1

6 wk (min)

2

8 wk (min)

Option 1
bOPV + IPV

bOPV 6 wk
IPV 14 wk

5 (3 bOPV + 2
IPV)

bOPV 4 wk
(min) with
DTPCV2
IPV 4 mo
(min)

bOPV 4 wk (min)
with DTPCV3

Option 2
IPV/bOPV
sequential

8 wk (IPV first)

1-­2 IPV
2 bOPV

4-­8 wk

4-­8 wk

Option 3
IPV-­only

8 wk

3

4-­8 wk

4-­8 wk

Hepatitis B

Pneumococcal
conjugate

Poliovirus

NA

9-­18 mo

• Schedule options
• HIV+
• Preterm neonate booster

• bOPV birth dose
• Fractional dose
• Transmission and importation criteria

4-­8 wk

Under evaluation

• IPV booster needed for early schedule (i.e., first
dose given <8 wk)

1612 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Table 215.13  Summary of Recommended Routine Immunization for All Children Up to 18 Years Based on WHO Vaccine Position Papers (updated as of September
2020)

Table 215.13  Summary of Recommended Routine Immunization for All Children Up to 18 Years Based on WHO Vaccine Position Papers (updated as of September
2020)—cont’d

Measles

9 or 12 mo

2

Rubella

9 or 12 mo
1
with measles-­
containing
vaccine

HPV

As soon as
possible
from 9 yr of
age (females
only)

2

INTERVAL BETWEEN DOSES
FIRST TO
SECOND
4 wk (min)

6 mo (min 5
mo)

SECOND TO
THIRD

THIRD TO
FOURTH

BOOSTER
DOSE(S) AFTER
PRIMARY SERIES

CONSIDERATIONS TO BE MADE

NA

• Combination vaccines
• HIV early vaccination
• Pregnancy

NA

• Achieve and sustain 80% vaccination coverage
• Combination vaccine
• Pregnancy

NA

• Target 9-­ to 14-­yr-­old girls
• Vaccination during pregnancy to be avoided
• Older age >15 yr, HIV, and immunocompromised
irrespective of age need three doses

DTPCV1, DTP-­containing vaccine dose 1; NA, not applicable.
*https://who.int/teams/immunization-vaccines-and-biologicals/policies/who-recommendations-for-routine-immunization—summary-tables
Courtesy of the World Health Organization, Department of Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals. https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-­source/immunization/immunization_schedules/table_2_feb_2023_english.pdf?sfvrsn=3e27ab48_11

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

VACCINE

AGE OF
FIRST DOSE

NUMBER
OF DOSES
IN PRIMARY
SERIES

1613

NUMBER OF
DOSES IN
PRIMARY
SERIES

AGE OF FIRST
DOSE

VACCINE
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CHILDREN RESIDING IN CERTAIN REGIONS
Japanese
Option 1.
6 mo
2
encephalitis
Inactivated
Vero cell derived
Option 2.
Live attenuated

8 mo

1

Option 3.
Live recombinant

9 mo

1

Yellow fever

9-­12 mo with
measles-­
containing
vaccine

1

Tickborne encephalitis

>1 yr FSME-­
Immun and
Encepur
>3 yr TBE-­
Moscow and
EnceVir

3

INTERVAL BETWEEN DOSES
FIRST TO
SECOND

SECOND
TO THIRD

THIRD TO
FOURTH

BOOSTER
DOSE(S) AFTER
PRIMARY
SERIES

4 wk (generally)

1-­3 mo FSME-­
Immun and
Encepur
1-­7 mo TBE
Moscow and
EnceVir

Vaccine options
Pregnancy
Immunocompromised

5-­12 mo
FSME-­
Immun
and
Encepur
12 mo TBE
Moscow
and
EnceVir

At least 1 every
3 yr

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CHILDREN IN SOME HIGH-­RISK POPULATIONS
Typhoid
Option 1.
>6 mo
1
TCV (Typbar)

Cholera

Meningococcal

Definition of high-­risk
Vaccine options
Timing of booster doses

Definition of high risk

Option 2.
Vi PS

2 yr (min)

1

Option 3.
Ty21a

Capsules 5 yr

3 or 4

1 day

1 day

Dukoral (WC-­rBS)

2 yr

3 for 2-­5 yr
2 >6 yr

>7 days to 6 wk

>7 days to
6 wk

Shancol, Euvichol
and mORCVAX

1 yr

2

14 days

MenA conjugate

9-­18 mo

1

MenC conjugate

>2-­11 mo

2

>12 mo

1

9-­23 mo
>2 yr

2
1

Quadrivalent
(ACWY)

CONSIDERATIONS
(SEE FOOTNOTES FOR DETAILS)

Definition of high risk
1 day

Every 3-­7 yr

Definition of high risk

Every 6 mo
Every 2 yr

Minimum age
Definition of high risk

After 2 yr
Definition of high risk
Vaccine options
2 doses if <9 mo with 8-­wk interval

8 wk

After 1 yr

Definition of high-­risk
Vaccine options
Definition of high risk
Vaccine options

1614 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Table 215.14  Summary of Recommended Routine Immunization for Children Residing in Endemic Areas, Belonging to Identified High-­Risk Populations or in
Countries with More Extensive Vaccination Programs Based on WHO Vaccine Position Papers (updated as of 2020)*

Table 215.14  Summary of Recommended Routine Immunization for Children Residing in Endemic Areas, Belonging to Identified High-­Risk Populations or in
Countries with More Extensive Vaccination Programs Based on WHO Vaccine Position Papers (updated as of 2020)*—cont’d
INTERVAL BETWEEN DOSES

VACCINE

AGE OF FIRST
DOSE

FIRST TO
SECOND

Hepatitis A

1 yr

At least 1

Rabies

As required

2

7 days

Dengue (CYD-­TDV)

9 yr

3

6 mo

SECOND
TO THIRD

THIRD TO
FOURTH

BOOSTER
DOSE(S) AFTER
PRIMARY
SERIES

CONSIDERATIONS
(SEE FOOTNOTES FOR DETAILS)
Level of endemicity
Vaccine options
Definition of high-­risk groups
Preexposure vs postexposure
prophylaxis
Definition of high-­risk groups

6 mo

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CHILDREN RECEIVING VACCINATIONS IN IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMS WITH CERTAIN CHARACTERISTICS
Seasonal
Inactivated
6 mo
2 (<9 yr)
4 wk
Revaccinate
influenza
1 (≥9 yr)
annually, 1
dose

Prevaccination screening
Priority risk groups, especially
pregnant women
Lower dosage for children 6-­35 mo

Mumps

12-­18 mo with
measles-­
containing
vaccine

2

1 mo min to school
entry

Coverage criteria >80%
Combination vaccines

Varicella

12-­18 mo

1-­2

4 wk to 3 mo per
manufacturer
recommendations

Achieve and sustain >80%
coverage necessary
Pregnancy
Co-­administration with other live
vaccines

*https://www.who.int/teams/immunization-­vaccines-­and-­biologicals/policies/who-­rcommendations-­for-­routine-­immunization—summary-­tables
Courtesy the World Health Organization, Department of Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals. https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-­source/immunization/immunization_schedules/table_2_feb_2023_english.pdf?sfvrsn=3e27ab48_11&
download=true

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

NUMBER OF
DOSES IN
PRIMARY
SERIES

1615

1616 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 215.15  International Vaccine Websites and Resources
ORGANIZATION

WEBSITE

PUBLIC HEALTH ORGANIZATIONS
WHO recommendations for routine immunization
WHO Vaccine Position Papers
WHO SAGE
Global NITAG network systematic reviews
WHO Regional Office for Africa
WHO Regional Office for the Americas or Pan American Health
Organization
WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean
WHO Regional Office for Europe
WHO Regional Office for Southeast Asia
WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific
Country-­specific vaccination schedules
Canada provincial and territorial immunization schedule
European Center for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC)
ECDC Vaccine Scheduler
Japan
Mexico National Vaccination Schedule
UK immunization schedule
UK Immunisation against infectious disease – the Green Book
Pan American Health Organization/WHO revolving fund for access to
vaccines
UNICEF Supply Division
NONPROFIT GROUPS
GAVI, the Alliance
COVAX facility
Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI)

Vaccine Supply and Production

Since 2000, the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations
(GAVI, now known as GAVI, The Vaccine Alliance) has helped expand
access to vaccines for infants, children, and adolescents in low-­income
countries by cost-­sharing vaccine introduction and through market-­
sharing activities to expand vaccine production to drive down vaccine
costs. There are other initiatives by the WHO and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) that support pooled vaccine procurement to
help expand access to vaccines in low-­and middle-­income countries.
In many low-­and middle-­income countries, the private vaccine market
is increasing. For relevant international vaccine websites and resources,
see Table 215.15.
Vaccines are currently produced in many countries around the
world, with India hosting the largest vaccine producers that serve many
low-­and middle-­income countries. The number of countries with vaccine production capacity are expected to increase in the coming years
as a result of the COVID-­19 pandemic. Occasionally counterfeit vaccines have been identified, and therefore vigilant surveillance is needed
to ensure safe and effective products reach the end consumer.

Vaccine Hesitancy and Demand

In addition to access, population willingness to accept vaccination is
an important consideration influencing control of vaccine-­preventable
diseases. In 2019, the WHO declared vaccine hesitancy, which is the
reluctance or refusal to accept vaccinations despite availability, as one
of the top 10 threats to global health. Vaccination coverage for recommended vaccines varies between countries, and it is estimated that in

https://www.who.int/teams/immunization-­vaccines-­and-­
biologicals/policies/who-­recommendations-­for-­routine­immunization—summary-­tables
https://www.who.int/teams/immunization-­vaccines-­and-­
biologicals/policies/position-­papers
https://www.who.int/groups/strategic-­advisory-­group-­of-­experts-­on-­
immunization/about
https://www.nitag-­resource.org
https://www.afro.who.int/
https://www.paho.org/en
http://www.emro.who.int/index.html
https://www.euro.who.int/en
https://www.who.int/southeastasia
https://www.who.int/westernpacific
https://apps.who.int/immunization_monitoring/globalsummary
https://www.canada.ca/en/public-­health/services/provincial-­territorial-­
immunization-­information/provincial-­territorial-­routine-­vaccination-­
programs-­infants-­children.html.
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en
https://vaccine-­schedule.ecdc.europa.eu
https://www.jpeds.or.jp/uploads/files/2020%20English%20JPS%20Imm
unization%20Schedule.pdf
https://www.gob.mx/salud/articulos/esquema-­de-­vacunacion.
https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/joint-­committee-­on-­
vaccination-­and-­immunisation
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/immunisation-­against-­
infectious-­disease-­the-­green-­book
https://www.paho.org/en/revolvingfund
https://www.unicef.org/supply/vaccines
http://www.gavialliance.org/
https://www.gavi.org/covax-­facility
https://cepi.net

2022, 20.5 million children worldwide at the age of 1 year were considered unvaccinated or undervaccinated using DTP3 coverage data collected by UNICEF/WHO. Significant attempts to reach the unvaccinated
and undervaccinated are underway, irrespective of the reasons.

Eradication and Elimination

After the success of the global eradication of smallpox, global eradication
or regional disease elimination goals have been adopted for polio, measles,
and rubella. In 1988 the World Health Assembly endorsed the goal of
eradicating polio from the world by the end of 2000. Although that goal
has not yet been reached, endemic wild poliovirus (WPV) transmission
in 2023 is limited to two countries worldwide (Afghanistan and Pakistan).
The principal eradication strategy has been the use of OPV both for routine immunization and mass supplemental immunization campaigns in
endemic or high-­risk areas, targeting all children <5 years of age for immunization, regardless of prior immunization status. In areas with low polio
population immunity, the OPV virus can mutate over time to develop neurovirulence, similar to WPV. These mutated vaccine viruses are known as
vaccine-­derived poliovirus (VDPV). Since 2018, more paralytic cases have
been caused by VDPVs than WPV. Once interruption of WPV transmission is achieved, the goal is to stop the use of OPV.
All six WHO regions have resolved to achieve measles elimination, and five (all but the Eastern Mediterranean region) have rubella
elimination goals. In 2015, the Region of the Americas was the first
region to achieve rubella elimination and has maintained that status
since that time. Regional measles elimination in the Americas was verified in 2016 but was lost in 2018 when measles virus was reintroduced

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 215 u Immunization Practices
and continued circulating for more than 12 months in Venezuela and
Brazil. Though no other WHO region has achieved certification of
regional measles or rubella elimination, national-­level certification
of elimination is continuing in all regions, with the European Region
nearing regional elimination for both measles and rubella.
Goals to eliminate epidemics or to eliminate diseases as a public health problem have been adopted for other vaccine-­preventable
diseases that are not eradicable such as bacterial meningitis (S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis), cervical cancer (HPV), cholera, hepatitis B,
rabies, and tetanus (maternal and neonatal tetanus).

Vaccine Schedules in High-­Income Countries

Immunization schedules in high-­income countries are more variable
than in low-­and low-­middle-­income countries. In general, in high-­
income countries where disease incidence may be lower, doses of many
vaccines are recommended to be given later than with the WHO recommended schedule. The infant primary series doses are usually given
at 2, 3, and 4 months or at 2, 4, and 6 months (as in the United States)
instead of starting early at 6 weeks of age. The first dose of measles-­
containing vaccines are often not administered until 12 months of age
or later, with the second dose provided before school entry. Most middle-­and high-­income countries have moved to sequential IPV/OPV
schedules or an IPV-­only program with five or six recommended doses
using combination vaccines.
Immunization recommendations for Canada are developed by the
Canadian National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) but
vary by province. The Canadian schedule is similar to the U.S. immunization schedule, with a few exceptions. A birth dose of hepatitis B
vaccine is not specifically recommended as it is in the United States,
although some Canadian provinces do provide a birth dose. Conjugate meningococcal C vaccine is recommended in a one-­or two-­dose
series, depending on the age at the time of administration (one dose if
≥12 months). In contrast to the United States, hepatitis A vaccine is not
recommended in Canada as a routine pediatric immunization.
In Europe, there is significant variation in vaccines used and the immunization schedules recommended. The number of infectious diseases for
which vaccines are offered vary between 12 and 17. As an example, an
extensive immunization schedule is offered in the United Kingdom as
recommended by the UK Joint Committee on Vaccine and Immunisation (JCVI). In 2023, it includes visits at 2, 3, and 4 months of age, when
a combination DTaP-­Hib-­IPV-­HepB vaccine is administered. Infants at
high risk of developing hepatitis B infection from infected mothers are
given doses of hepatitis B vaccine at birth, 4 weeks, and 1 year of age.
MMR is recommended in a two-­dose schedule at 12 and 40 months of
age. During the second MMR visit, a booster of dTaP-IPV is provided.
A Td/IPV booster is recommended at age 14 years. PCV13 is recommended at 3 and 12 months of age. Conjugate meningococcal C vaccine
(MenC) is given in combination with a booster dose of Hib at 12 months,
whereas MenB is offered at 2, 4, and 12 months of age, and conjugated
MenACWY-­135 is offered to adolescents at 14 years, with catch-­up available up to 25 years of age. HPV vaccine is recommended for females and
males at 12-­13 years of age, with catch-­up vaccination available up to 25
years of age. Rotavirus vaccination is offered at 2 and 3 months of age.
Live attenuated influenza vaccine is provided to children 2-­10 years of
age. BCG is offered at birth in areas of the country with a TB incidence
>40/100,000 or in families with a parent or grandparent born in a high-­
incidence country. As of June 2021, the UK schedule does not include the
varicella and hepatitis A vaccines for universal childhood immunization.
Varicella vaccination has been initiated in 12 of the European Union
countries, whereas hepatitis A vaccine is only offered routinely in a
handful of these countries. However, hepatitis A is often provided to
European children ahead of traveling to other regions of the world.
The 2020 Japanese immunization schedule differs from the U.S.
schedule, in that a birth dose of hepatitis B vaccine is recommended only
for infants born to mothers who test positive for HbsAg. The Japanese do
not use MMR, instead recommending MR with mumps vaccine available on a voluntary basis. The recommendation for routine HPV vaccination was suspended in 2013 because of concerns about adverse events
but was included for adolescent females in the 2020 schedule.

1617

VACCINATION OF CHILDREN STARTING
IMMUNIZATION OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES

Some children come to the United States having started or completed
international immunization schedules with vaccines produced outside
the United States. In general, doses administered in other countries
should be considered valid if administered at the same ages as recommended in the United States. For missing doses, age-­inappropriate
doses, lost immunization records, or other concerns, pediatricians
have two options: administer or repeat missing or inappropriate doses,
or perform serologic tests and, if they are negative, administer vaccines.
The childhood immunization schedule for China is unique because
it recommends a sequential series for polio with IPV at 2 and 3 months
of age, followed by OPV at 3 and 4 months of age. The infant primary
series with diphtheria-­tetanus-­pertussis–containing vaccines is recommended at 3, 4, and 5 months of age. Similarly, China’s schedule recommends one dose of MR vaccine at 8 months of age followed by one dose
of MMR at 18 months.
India’s childhood immunization schedule follows the WHO recommendations but includes two fractional doses (one fifth) of a full dose
of IPV administered intradermally at 6 and 14 weeks.
Mexico recommends a schedule for pediatric immunization that is
largely similar to the schedule in the United States. Some differences
include that Mexico recommends the use of BCG and recommends
HPV for females, but not males.

Vaccination Against Outbreak-­Prone Diseases

Outbreaks spanning large geographical areas have affected several
countries or continents caused by Ebola virus, influenza virus, circulating VDPV, and coronaviruses, including SARS-­CoV-­2 virus, have
highlighted the need for preparedness to develop and assess in formal
clinical trials and, if successful, rapidly produce vaccines to be used
in outbreak response measures. For the Ebola virus outbreaks first
identified in 2014 in West Africa and later in Democratic Republic of
Congo, two new vaccines based on the recombinant vector-­technology
platform were developed, tested, and then used successfully in ring-­
vaccination outbreak vaccination campaigns.
The 2009 influenza A H1N1 pandemic triggered production of pandemic influenza vaccines (following the strain selection by WHO) by
seasonal influenza vaccine producers worldwide, and adjuvants were
used by several producers with the aim to be dose-­sparing.
The eradication goal for polio and the chosen global strategy using
a combination of OPV and IPV and the associated rare adverse event
vaccine-­induced paralytic polio have triggered development of a new
oral poliovirus (nOPV) vaccine. This virus is more genetically stable
and maintains an attenuation phenotype that will support the Global
Polio Eradication Initiative during the final push to eliminate poliovirus globally, with the most immediate need in ongoing outbreak settings to control and eliminate circulating VDPVs.
The COVID-­19 outbreak that started in late 2019 triggered unprecedented vaccine development, with clinical trials being conducted
during the ongoing outbreak. Favorable short-­term efficacy and safety
data have resulted in the emergency use listing of eleven COVID-­19
vaccines that were recommended by the WHO. The WHO vaccination recommendations had not been vaccine-­product specific until the
COVID-­19 vaccines were made available. Since January 2021, each of
the COVID-­19 vaccine products has been recommended individually,
because they are based on different technology production platforms
and have been assessed in clinical trials including different age-­groups
and using different endpoints. Vaccination of children and adolescents
6 months of age and older is authorized for two mRNA vaccines. In
June 2021, China was the first country globally that approved inactivated COVID-­19 vaccines for children age 3-­17 years. COVID-­19
vaccines are made available globally either through direct contracts
between vaccine producers and each country or through the COVAX
facility, a global risk-­sharing mechanism for pooled procurement and
equitable distribution of COVID-­19 vaccines.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1618 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 216

Infection Prevention and
Control
Kevin P. O’Callaghan and Julia S. Sammons
Infection prevention and control (IPC) programs are a critical and
core component of ensuring patient and employee safety in pediatric healthcare systems. The scope of IPC programs is often large and
requires a coordinated, well-­resourced, multidisciplinary approach.
At their heart, IPC programs are designed to prevent the acquisition
and transmission of potentially pathogenic organisms within a healthcare setting. A robust regulatory and policy focus on the prevention of
healthcare-­associated infections (HAIs) is critical given their frequency.
Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) provides evidence that
on any given day approximately 1 in 31 hospitalized patients experiences at least one HAI. Federal and state-­level infrastructures that support HAI improvement efforts include the CDC NHSN, which operates
a national surveillance system for HAIs, and the Joint Commission’s
2022 National Patient Safety Goals. With improved surveillance and
detection and focused improvement efforts, preventable events of harm
(including HAIs) are now linked by many payors to reduced levels of
reimbursement to offset costs associated with these events.
As our understanding of HAIs has developed over time with better
surveillance metrics, reporting has expanded beyond the walls of hospitals to include HAIs occurring throughout healthcare systems. This
scope includes infections in ambulatory surgical and medical settings,
nursing homes, long-­term acute care facilities, and even in patients’
homes, especially with regard to medical device–associated infections.
We have also expanded our understanding of epidemiologic risk factors, environmental pressures, and specific at-­risk patient populations.
Through a variety of avenues, IPC programs seek to eliminate transmission events and keep patients and employees safe.

TRANSMISSION IN THE HEALTHCARE SETTING

Fundamentally, transmission in the healthcare setting is multifaceted and multimodal. Patients, their family and caregivers, healthcare personnel, and others interact in a complex environment that
is fraught with opportunity for transmission events to occur. Modern understanding of human microbiota informs us that all humans
carry a plethora of microorganisms that could potentially be pathogenic in the right circumstances and in the right host. These colonizing microbiotas can be transmitted from one person to another
in the healthcare setting through contaminated hands or medical
equipment. The majority of infections that arise in healthcare settings occur from endogenous flora representing colonizing organisms. New HAIs require the presence of a number of independent but
linked concepts, including a susceptible host, an infectious agent, a
portal of entry, and modes of transmission.
Modes of transmission are a critical element of HAI prevention work
and include contact, droplet, and airborne. Contact transmission
occurs by direct contact with the patient or indirect contact with environmental surfaces or patient care items in the patient’s environment
that are contaminated with the offending microorganism (e.g., rotavirus). Droplet transmission occurs through large respiratory droplets,
which are generated by coughing, sneezing, or talking and typically
travel approximately 3 feet from an infectious person (e.g., influenza).
These droplets are heavy and do not remain suspended in air for long
periods. Airborne transmission occurs through small particles, which
can remain suspended in air and can be widely dispersed by air currents (e.g., measles, tuberculosis). Although many infections can occur
through transmission directly from an infectious host to a susceptible

host, infections can also occur through contact with contaminated
environments, whether through contaminated surfaces, fomites, or
previously occupied air spaces.

PREVENTION STRATEGIES
Hand Hygiene

One of the most fundamental elements of infection prevention is hand
hygiene; thus one of the most critical elements of an IPC program is
hand hygiene education and auditing. Ignaz Semmelweis first postulated the effects of hand hygiene in 1847 when he noted epidemiologic
differences in maternal mortality rates secondary to puerperal fever
between physician-­and midwife-­delivered pregnancies. The critical
difference was hand hygiene, and this proved to be a seminal finding in
the field of infection prevention. Growing evidence of the importance
of hand hygiene led to the first national hand hygiene guidelines in the
1980s and the development of international guidance on hand hygiene
in healthcare. The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed
an internationally used framework for hand hygiene education, called
the 5 Moments for Hand Hygiene. This program provides a structure
for recognizing critical moments where hand hygiene can influence
a transmission event, including before and after touching a patient,
before a clean or aseptic procedure, after a body fluid exposure risk,
and after touching patient surroundings (Table 216.1). Use of this or
similar frameworks provides a structure for staff education around the
practice of hand hygiene and serves as an auditing tool to assess rates
of compliance with optimal practice.
Hand hygiene itself is the act of either handwashing (placing hands
under running water and using friction with or without a soap product)
or using a waterless hygiene product (e.g., alcohol-­based foams or gels)
to remove the burden of surface flora from the skin and nails of the
hand. Alcohol-­based hand hygiene products are widely available, are
quick and easy to use, and allow for repeated in-­the-­moment use, such
that they are the preferred method for hand hygiene for most healthcare
situations. However, because they do not remove visible dirt or debris,
handwashing with soap and water is recommended over alcohol-­based
products after dirty tasks when visible soiling is likely, such as after
changing a diaper or using the restroom. Alcohol-­based products are
also not the preferred agents for certain hardy microbes such as norovirus or Clostridioides difficile spores, especially in outbreak settings.

Personal Protective Equipment

Personal protective equipment (PPE) is equipment worn to prevent
or reduce exposure to potential hazards in the workplace, including
infectious diseases. In the healthcare setting, PPE is targeted to prevent
exposure of healthcare personnel’s skin, eyes, respiratory tract, and
mucous membranes to potential infectious agents but is also used to
protect patients from the colonizing flora and respiratory secretions
of healthcare personnel. Various types of PPE may be used in different settings, with the specific type of PPE tied to the precautions that
are indicated for a specific patient and/or a specific pathogen. The five
primary components of PPE include gowns, gloves, masks, eye protection, and respirators (e.g., N95 or Powered Air-­Purifying Respirator). Gowns can either be reusable (launderable) or disposable and
are designed to prevent contamination of the provider’s clothing, particularly from those infectious agents that are spread through a contact
mechanism. Depending on the setting, gowns may be required to be
resistant to liquid soaking in order to maximize their effectiveness.
Gloves are used most commonly as a component of standard precautions when performing a task where there is a reasonable expectation
of soiling of the hands (e.g., changing a diaper or examining a wound).
Importantly, glove use is not required for every moment of patient contact (e.g., routine physical exam), and glove use is not a substitute for
effective hand hygiene in breaking the chain of transmission. Therefore
gloves should never be used as the only element of infection prevention.
Hand hygiene before donning of gloves and after removal of gloves is a
critical and necessary step in breaking the chain of transmission.
Face masks and eye protection are intended to prevent exposure of
a provider’s mouth, nose, and eyes from expectorated and aerosolized
pathogens. Protection of the eyes can include clear shields attached

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 216 u Infection Prevention and Control

1619

Table 216.1  Recommendations for Application of Standard Precautions for Care of All Patients in All Healthcare Settings
COMPONENT

RECOMMENDATIONS

Hand hygiene

Before and after each patient contact, regardless of whether gloves are used.
After contact with blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions, or contaminated items; immediately
after removing gloves; before and after entering patient rooms.
Alcohol-­containing antiseptic hand rubs preferred except when hands are visibly soiled with
blood or other proteinaceous material or if exposure to spores (e.g., Clostridium difficile,
Bacillus anthracis) or nonenveloped viruses (norovirus) is likely to have occurred; in these cases,
soap and water is required.

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE)
Gloves

For touching blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions, or contaminated items; for touching
mucous membranes and nonintact skin.
Employ hand hygiene before and after glove use.

Gown

During procedures and patient-­care activities when contact of clothing or exposed skin with
blood, body fluids, secretions, or excretions is anticipated.

Mask, eye protection (goggles), face shield

During procedures and patient-­care activities likely to generate splashes or sprays of blood,
body fluids, or secretions, such as suctioning and endotracheal intubation, to protect
healthcare personnel.
For patient protection, use of a mask by the person inserting an epidural anesthesia needle or
performing myelograms when prolonged exposure of the puncture site is likely to occur.

Soiled patient-­care equipment

Handle in a manner that prevents transfer of microorganisms to others and to the environment.
Wear gloves if equipment is visibly contaminated.
Perform hand hygiene.

ENVIRONMENT
Environmental control

Develop procedures for routine care, cleaning, and disinfection of environmental surfaces,
especially frequently touched surfaces in patient-­care areas.

Textiles (linens) and laundry

Handle in a manner that prevents transfer of microorganisms to others and the environment.

PATIENT CARE
Injection practices (use of needles and other
sharps)

Do not recap, bend, break, or manipulate used needles; if recapping is required, use a one-­handed
scoop technique only.
Use needle-­free safety devices when available, placing used sharps in puncture-­resistant
container.
Use a sterile, single-­use, disposable needle and syringe for each injection.
Single-­dose medication vials preferred when medications may be administered to more than
one patient.

Patient resuscitation

Use mouthpiece, resuscitation bag, or other ventilation devices to prevent contact with mouth
and oral secretions.

Patient placement

Prioritize for single-­patient room if patient is at increased risk for transmission, is likely to
contaminate the environment, is unable to maintain appropriate hygiene, or is at increased risk
for acquiring infection or developing adverse outcome after infection.

Respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette (source
containment of infectious respiratory
secretions in symptomatic patients)
beginning at initial point of encounter, such
as triage or reception areas in emergency
department or physician office

Instruct symptomatic persons to cover nose/mouth when sneezing or coughing; use tissues with
disposal in no-­touch receptacles.
Employ hand hygiene after soiling of hands with respiratory secretions.
Wear surgical mask if tolerated or maintain spatial separation (>3 ft if possible).

Adapted from Kimberlin DW, Brady MT, Jackson MA, et al., eds. Red Book 2018–2021: Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 31st ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American
Academy of Pediatrics; 2018:148–150.

directly to surgical masks, separate face shields, or goggles, but protection of both forward-­facing and lateral aspects of the ocular region is
required.
In the setting of a true aerosolized pathogen, respirator use is indicated. Respirator masks include National Institute of Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH)–approved N95s, so-­called because they filter out up to 95% of particles in the air when used appropriately. Other
respirator options that meet international standards include KN95
masks, but these may not meet NIOSH standards and should not be
used in lieu of an N95. The use of fitted face mask respirators such as
the N95 requires a fit-­testing program to ensure that healthcare personnel are using a correctly sized and fitted mask at all times. Alternatives
to a fitted respiratory mask include the powered air purifying respirator

(PAPR), which uses a motor and fan to provide constant pressurized air
flow from under a loosely fitting hood over the entire head.

Precautions and Isolation

Precautions and isolation are terms to describe in a specific patient-­care
setting which equipment, practices, and procedures should be used to
best prevent against a transmission event related to a known or suspected pathogen.
Standard precautions are used in any setting in which patient care
occurs to prevent transmission of a potential pathogen to or from a
healthcare worker, regardless of suspected or confirmed infection status of the patient. These include consistent hand hygiene and use of
barrier PPE (gown, glove, mask) as required based on risk of exposure

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1620 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
to blood and body fluids, including expectorations and respiratory
secretions (e.g., routine use of mask and eye protection during endotracheal intubation).
Isolation procedures, or transmission-­based precautions, are targeted to prevent transmission of known or suspected pathogens or in
the setting of specific syndromes (e.g., infectious diarrhea, upper respiratory tract symptoms). Contact isolation typically includes gloves
and gown in addition to standard precautions and is used to limit the
spread of pathogens by direct contact with a patient (e.g., patients with
norovirus). Droplet isolation includes protection of mucosal surfaces
from expectorated large droplets and should include face mask and eye
protection. Some pathogens may spread efficiently by both contact and
droplet (e.g., rhinovirus), and thus these two isolation types may be
combined as droplet and contact.
Airborne isolation is used for pathogens that are readily aerosolized and requires the use of eye protection and use of an appropriate
respirator (either N95 or PAPR depending on the employee). Additionally, patients with airborne infections require placement in specialized
airborne infection isolation rooms (AIIRs), which have specialized air
handling that can maintain negative pressure compared with the surrounding environment and have increased air turnovers per unit time.

on best practices for hand hygiene, use of PPE, and promoting understanding of patient isolation categories.

ENVIRONMENT, DISINFECTION, AND
STERILIZATION

Patients with Indwelling Medical Devices

A critical component of preventing transmission of infectious pathogens in healthcare settings includes appropriate environmental
cleaning, elimination of potential reservoirs, and disinfection and sterilization of medical equipment.
Maintaining cleanliness (and, where appropriate, sterility) of all
patient care spaces, equipment, and medical devices requires an institutional focus on the environment of care that highlights accountability
and highly reliable policies and procedures. For each individual healthcare worker, cleanliness of personal medical equipment used in patient
care is key. This includes personal stethoscopes, which should be
cleaned whenever they are visibly soiled and should be disinfected with
an appropriate topical agent (e.g., alcohol) between each use. Similarly,
shared patient devices such as thermometers, otoscopes, and ophthalmoscopes should either have disposable single-­use covers or should
have a cleaning protocol that is adhered to after each patient use.
Higher-­level cleaning and disinfection, known as high-­level disinfection, are required for reusable items that contact mucous membranes or
nonintact skin (e.g., endoscopes), and sterilization is required for critical
items that enter sterile tissue or the vascular system (e.g., surgical tools).

VISITATION AND PATIENT AND CAREGIVER
MANAGEMENT

In pediatric healthcare settings, unlike adult settings, patients frequently
are accompanied by parents, caregivers, and family members throughout
their healthcare experience. Visitor and caregiver management is a critical tool in preventing healthcare transmission events in these settings.
Limitation of total numbers of visitors at a bedside may be indicated
in the setting of local or seasonal outbreaks of disease, such as during
influenza season. Similarly, age-­based limitations are commonly used to
keep siblings of patients away from the healthcare setting, particularly
during the winter respiratory viral season. Visitor screening at points of
entry can be effective in identifying caregivers and siblings who may not
be presenting for care but have evident symptoms of infection and may
need to be excluded from the healthcare setting.

OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND CLINICIAN
EDUCATION

Typically, infection prevention and control programs work closely
with occupational or employee health programs because both departments have a responsibility for keeping healthcare workers safe from
workplace hazards, including infection. Occupational health and IPC
programs may work together to develop on-­boarding requirements
for vaccination for common diseases and programs for seasonal vaccination for influenza. Annual and as-­needed education for healthcare
workers is an important role of IPC programs, including education

SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Immunocompromised Hosts

Immunocompromised hosts include those patients with inborn disorders of immunity and patients with iatrogenically caused immune deficits
(e.g., patients undergoing chemotherapy, solid organ, or bone marrow
transplant or those using immune-­
modulating therapies). Immunocompromised hosts pose a special infection prevention problem, as they
are typically more susceptible to infections that may be common and
benign in other patients and more susceptible to infections that are highly
unusual in hosts with intact immune systems, such as invasive mold.
The environment of care for these patients may have additional considerations over and above the norm. Positive pressure ventilation can
be used to provide a protective environment for such patients during
periods of highest risk (e.g., immediately after bone marrow transplantation). A focus on air handling capability, including high-­efficiency
particulate absorbing (HEPA) filtration, is critically important, especially in settings where construction or renovation is ongoing, as this
increases the risk of aerosolization of fungal and mold spores.
Indwelling medical devices such as pacemakers, orthopedic hardware,
intracranial shunts, and indwelling venous catheters pose a special infection risk because of disruption of normal immunologic barriers (e.g.,
skin) that can allow for communication between sterile and nonsterile
spaces and because of the presence of foreign material, which can present
a nidus for biofilm formation. IPC programs are frequently involved in
quality improvement projects around the optimal insertion and maintenance of such devices, both in the healthcare setting and at home.

Surveillance and Reporting

In addition to the primary prevention work of an IPC program, another
core element includes response to transmission events, which critically includes a surveillance and reporting mechanism. IPC programs
typically monitor for events of infection within the healthcare setting,
such as surgical site infection or new diagnoses of viral respiratory
infection so as to generate data about current trends, detect clusters
and outbreaks, and guide future policy. Most states require reporting
of healthcare-­associated events such as infections to a state-­and/or
federal-­level body such as NHSN.

Preparedness, Bioresponse, and Public Health

An important additional element of IPC work is preparedness and
planning for community-­based outbreaks or epidemics that can affect
healthcare operations. Planning for low-­likelihood, high-­risk pathogens such as Ebola virus requires a multidisciplinary planning team,
including hospital operations, IPC, clinical teams, transport services,
and others. Scheduled periodic retraining of a core group of healthcare workers can increase their comfort in managing the care of these
patients and in decreasing the risk of PPE and isolation breaches that
could lead to an event of transmission.
In addition to internal systemwide planning, interfacing with public
health bodies is an important responsibility of IPC teams. This responsibility includes reporting of notifiable diseases (e.g., sexually transmitted
infections [STIs], tuberculosis, measles), which may require a broader
public health response in the community. In the absence of positive test
results, individual clinician suspicion of a disease is frequently the initial
trigger for public health notification, and so an understanding of reporting requirements is important for each healthcare worker.
IPC is increasingly a complex and specialized area of expertise
within healthcare operations. However, at its heart it requires the active
participation and commitment of every member of the healthcare
team. As such, the best way to keep patients safe is to approach every
moment of patient interaction as an opportunity to create a safe and
clean environment of care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 217 u Childcare and Communicable Diseases

Chapter 217

Childcare and
Communicable Diseases
Gail V. Carter-­Hamilton and Susan E. Coffin
More than 20 million children <5 years old attend a childcare facility.
These facilities can include part-­day or full-­day programs at nursery
schools or preschools and full-­day programs based in either a licensed
childcare center or another person’s home. Regardless of the age at
entry, children entering childcare settings are more prone to infections,
largely from the exposure to greater numbers of children.
Childcare facilities can be classified based on the number of children
enrolled, ages of attendees, health status of the attendees, and type of
setting. As defined in the United States, childcare facilities consist of
childcare centers, small and large family childcare homes, and facilities
for ill children or for children with special needs. Centers are licensed
and regulated by state governments and care for a larger number of
children than are typically cared for in family homes. In contrast, family childcare homes are designated as small (1-­6 children) or large
(7-­12 children), may be full-­day or part-­day, and may be designed for
either daily or sporadic attendance. Family childcare homes generally
are not licensed or registered, depending on state requirements.
Although many children who attend childcare facilities are cared for in
family childcare homes, most studies of infectious diseases in infants and
toddlers have been conducted in childcare centers. Almost any organism
has the potential to be spread and to cause disease in a childcare setting.
Epidemiologic studies have established that children in childcare facilities
are 2-­18 times more likely to acquire a variety of infectious diseases than
children not enrolled in childcare (Table 217.1).
Children who attend childcare facilities are more likely to receive
more courses of antimicrobial agents for longer periods and to acquire
antibiotic-­resistant organisms. Transmission of infectious agents in
group care depends on the age and immune status of the children, season, hygiene practices, crowding, and environmental characteristics of
the facilities. The pathogen characteristics, including infectivity, survivability in the environment, and virulence, also influence transmission in childcare settings. Rates of infection, duration of illness, and
risk for hospitalization tend to decrease among children in childcare
facilities after the first 6 months of attendance and decline to levels
observed among homebound children after 3 years of age. Adult caregivers are also at increased risk for acquiring and transmitting infectious diseases, particularly in the first year of working in these settings.

1621

children not in childcare. The organisms responsible for these illnesses
are similar to those that circulate in the community and include respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), parainfluenza viruses, influenza viruses,
human metapneumoviruses, adenoviruses, rhinoviruses, endemic and
epidemic coronaviruses, parvovirus B19, and Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Upper respiratory tract infections, including otitis media, are
among the most common manifestations of these infections. The risk
for developing otitis media is 2-­3 times greater among children who
attend childcare centers than among children cared for at home. Most
prescriptions for antibiotics for children <3 years old in childcare are to
treat otitis media. These children also are at increased risk for recurrent
Table 217.1  Infectious Diseases in the Childcare Setting

DISEASE

INCREASED
INCIDENCE WITH
CHILDCARE

RESPIRATORY TRACT INFECTIONS
Otitis media

Yes

Sinusitis

Probably

Pharyngitis

Probably

Pneumonia

Yes

GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT INFECTIONS
Diarrhea (rotavirus, norovirus,
calicivirus, astrovirus, enteric
adenovirus, Giardia lamblia,
Cryptosporidium, Shigella,
Escherichia coli O157:H7, and
Clostridium difficile)

Yes

Hepatitis A

Yes

SKIN DISEASES
Impetigo

Probably

Scabies

Probably

Pediculosis

Probably

Tinea (ringworm)

Probably

INVASIVE BACTERIA INFECTIONS
Haemophilus influenzae type b

No*

Neisseria meningitidis

Probably

Streptococcus pneumoniae

Yes

ASEPTIC MENINGITIS
Enteroviruses

Probably

HERPESVIRUS INFECTIONS
Cytomegalovirus

Yes

Varicella-­zoster virus

Yes

Respiratory tract infections and gastroenteritis are the most common
diseases associated with childcare. These infections occur in children
and their household contacts and in childcare workers and can spread
into the community. The severity of illness caused by a given respiratory
and enteric pathogen depends on the person’s underlying health status,
the inoculum, and prior exposures to the pathogen, either by infection
or immunization. Some organisms, such as hepatitis A virus (HAV), can
cause subclinical disease in young children and produce overt and sometimes serious disease in older children and adults. Other diseases, such as
otitis media and varicella, usually affect children rather than adults. Both
infections and infestations of the skin and hair may be acquired through
contact with contaminated linens or through close personal contact,
which is inevitable in childcare settings.

Herpes simplex virus

Probably

BLOOD-­BORNE INFECTIONS
Hepatitis B

Few case reports

HIV

No cases reported

Hepatitis C

No cases reported

VACCINE-­PREVENTABLE DISEASES
Measles, mumps, rubella,
diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus

Not established

Polio

No

H. influenzae type b

No*

Varicella

Yes

RESPIRATORY TRACT INFECTIONS

Rotavirus

Yes

COVID-­19

Yes

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Respiratory tract infections account for the majority of childcare-­related
illnesses. Children <2 years old who attend childcare centers have more
upper and lower respiratory tract infections than do age-­
matched

*Not in the post–vaccine era; yes in the pre–vaccine era.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1622 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
otitis media, further increasing the use of antimicrobial agents in this
population. Studies have demonstrated reductions in both otitis media
and antibiotic use subsequent to pneumococcal vaccination implementation. Pharyngeal carriage of group A Streptococcus occurs earlier among children in childcare; systemic illness may occur including
pneumonia, empyema, septic arthritis, or osteomyelitis. Influenza vaccination of younger infants reduces influenza infection and secondary
sequelae in both the children and the adults who care for them in their
home and in childcare settings. After adoption of the acellular pertussis
vaccine, increases in clusters and outbreaks of infection caused by Bordetella pertussis have led to the recognition of less durable immunity,
with older children and adults serving as reservoirs of infection.
Transmission of these organisms typically occurs through either
direct or indirect contact with the respiratory droplets of an infected
child. In childcare settings, contamination of surfaces occurs frequently
as children mouth toys, drool, and cough or sneeze. Additionally, some
respiratory pathogens are spread through large droplets that typically
can travel 3-­6 feet. However, intimate contact between children is a
routine part of the play and care of young children, thus facilitating
transmission. The most common surfaces from which airborne droplets can be spread are the hands, so the most efficient form of infection
control in the childcare setting is good hand hygiene.

GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT INFECTIONS

Acute infectious diarrhea is 2-­3 times more common among children
in childcare than among children cared for in their homes. Outbreaks
of diarrhea, which occur frequently in childcare centers, are usually
caused by enteric viruses, such as norovirus, caliciviruses, enteric
adenoviruses, and astroviruses, or by enteric parasites such as Giardia
lamblia or Cryptosporidium. A dramatic and sustained decline in the
burden of rotavirus infection has been demonstrated since introduction of the rotavirus vaccination program in 2006, and this trend is
likely reflected in the population of children attending childcare and
early childhood education programs. Bacterial enteropathogens such
as Shigella and Escherichia coli O157:H7 and, less often Campylobacter,
Clostridium difficile, and Bacillus cereus also have caused outbreaks
of diarrhea in childcare settings. Salmonella rarely is associated with
outbreaks of diarrhea in childcare settings because person-­to-­person
spread of this organism is uncommon.
Outbreaks of HAV infection in children enrolled in childcare facilities have resulted in community-­wide outbreaks. HAV infection is typically mild or asymptomatic in young children and often is identified only
after symptomatic illness becomes apparent among either older children
or adult contacts of children in childcare. Enteropathogens and HAV are
transmitted in childcare facilities by the fecal-­oral route and can also be
transmitted through contaminated food or water. Children in diapers
constitute a high risk for the spread of gastrointestinal infections through
the fecal-­oral route. As such, enteric illness and HAV infection are more
common in centers that care for children who are not toilet-­trained and
where proper hygienic practices are not followed. The most common
enteropathogens, such as norovirus and G. lamblia, are characterized by
low infective doses and high rates of asymptomatic excretion among children in childcare, characteristics that facilitate transmission and outbreaks.

SKIN DISEASES

The most recognized skin infections or infestations in children in childcare are impetigo caused by Staphylococcus aureus or group A Streptococcus, pediculosis, scabies, tinea capitis, tinea corporis, and molluscum
contagiosum. Many of these diseases are spread by contact with infected
linens, clothing, hairbrushes, and hats and through direct personal contact; they more often affect children >2 years old. The magnitude of these
infections and infestations in children in childcare is not known.
Parvovirus B19, which causes fifth disease (erythema infectiosum),
is spread through the respiratory route and has been associated with
outbreaks in childcare centers. The rash of fifth disease is a systemic
manifestation of parvovirus B19 infection; the child is no longer
contagious once the rash is present (see Chapter 298). The greatest
health hazard is for pregnant women and immunocompromised hosts
because of their respective risks for fetal loss and aplastic crisis.

INVASIVE ORGANISMS AND SYSTEMIC INFECTIONS

Before universal immunization, Haemophilus influenzae type b invasive
disease was more common among children in childcare than children in
homecare. Although the largest burden of invasive H. influenzae infection
in the pediatric population still occurs in children <5 years old, infection is
now primarily caused by nontypeable H. influenzae or non–type b encapsulated strains of H. influenzae; there have been no reported outbreaks of
nontypeable or type b H. influenzae in >5 years in the United States.
Data suggest that the risk for primary disease caused by Neisseria
meningitidis is higher among children in childcare than among children
in homecare. Childcare attendance is also associated with nasopharyngeal carriage of penicillin-­resistant S. pneumoniae and invasive pneumococcal disease, especially among children with a history of recurrent
otitis media and use of antibiotics. Secondary spread of S. pneumoniae
and N. meningitidis has been reported, indicating the potential for outbreaks to occur in this setting. Routine use of pneumococcal conjugate
vaccine has decreased the incidence of invasive disease and reduced
carriage of serotypes of S. pneumoniae contained in the vaccine both
in the vaccinated child and in younger siblings. A vaccine against serogroup B meningococcus has been introduced for routine use in children <2 years old in the United Kingdom. It is anticipated that infant
vaccination against meningococcus will be adopted in the near future.
Outbreaks of aseptic meningitis have been reported among children in
childcare centers and among their parents and their teachers.

HERPESVIRUSES

As many as 70% of diapered children who become infected with cytomegalovirus (CMV) shed virus in urine and saliva for prolonged periods. CMV-­infected children often transmit the virus to other children
with whom they have contact and to their care providers and their mothers at a rate of 8–20% per year. Transmission occurs as a result of contact
with either saliva or urine. The overwhelming majority of primary infections with and reactivation of CMV in otherwise healthy children results
in asymptomatic shedding of CMV; nonetheless, this shedding can pose
a health risk for previously uninfected pregnant childcare providers or
immunocompromised persons. A licensed CMV vaccine is not yet available, but research is ongoing, with recent trials demonstrating tolerability
and immunogenicity of candidate CMV vaccines (see Chapter 302).
Varicella often is transmitted in childcare centers, but routine use
of varicella vaccine has reduced this risk. Vaccinated children who
become infected with varicella often have mild, atypical symptoms and
signs of disease that can result in delayed recognition and spread of
infection to susceptible contacts. The role of childcare facilities in the
spread of herpes simplex virus, especially during episodes of gingivostomatitis, requires further clarification.

BLOOD-­BORNE PATHOGENS

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) transmission has been reported rarely in
childcare settings, and transmission of hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis D virus (HDV), and HIV has not been reported in a childcare setting. However, it is impossible to identify every child who might have
a blood-­borne infection such as hepatitis B, C, or D, or HIV, and it is
critical that standard precautions be observed routinely to reduce the
risk for transmitting these viruses and other pathogens.
Concerns have been raised about the risk of HIV transmission in
childcare settings and the acquisition of opportunistic infections
by HIV-­infected children who attend childcare, but experience has
revealed that this risk is minimal. Children with HIV infection enrolled
in childcare facilities should be kept up to date on their vaccines and
monitored for exposure to infectious diseases.
Transmission of blood-­
borne pathogens can theoretically occur
when there is contact between blood or body fluids and a mucous
membrane or an open wound. Blood-­borne pathogens are unlikely to
spread by toddler biting in a group setting. Most bites do not break the
skin, and if a bite does break the skin, the mouth of the biter does not
stay on the victim long enough for blood to transfer from the biter to
the victim. If there are concerns about transmission of HBV, HCV, or
HIV infection, it is recommended to check the status of the biter rather
than the bite victim as part of the initial evaluation process.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 217 u Childcare and Communicable Diseases
ANTIBIOTIC USE AND BACTERIAL RESISTANCE

Antibiotic resistance has become a major global problem and threatens
the health of children who attend childcare facilities because the incidence of infection by organisms resistant to frequently used antimicrobial agents has increased dramatically. It is estimated that children
in childcare are 2-­4 times more likely to receive an antibiotic and that
they receive longer courses of antibiotics compared with age-­matched
children in homecare. This frequency of antibiotic use combined
with the propensity for person-­to-­person transmission of pathogens
in a crowded environment has resulted in an increased prevalence of
antibiotic-­resistant bacteria in the respiratory and intestinal tracts,
including S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, E. coli
O157:H7, and Shigella spp.
Methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA) has historically been found
primarily in the healthcare setting but is now prevalent in the community setting. Traditional childcare center attendance is cited as a
risk factor for colonization with MRSA, and carriage is associated with
increased risk of infection and transmission. Population-­based surveillance has demonstrated a rise in both invasive and noninvasive MRSA
infections in community settings over the past 2 decades. Currently,
large-­scale studies investigating the epidemiology of S. aureus in the
childcare setting are limited.

PREVENTION

Written policies designed to prevent or to control the spread of infectious agents in a childcare center should be available and should be
reviewed regularly. All programs should use a health consultant to
help with development and implementation of infection prevention
and control (IPC) policies (see Chapter 216). Standards for environmental and personal hygiene should include maintenance of current
immunization records for both children and staff, appropriate policies
for exclusion of ill children and caretakers, targeting of potentially
contaminated areas for frequent cleaning, adherence to appropriate

1623

procedures for changing diapers, appropriate handling of food, management of pets, and surveillance for and reporting of communicable
diseases. Staff whose primary function is preparing food should not
change diapers. Appropriate and thorough hand hygiene is the most
important factor for reducing infectious diseases in the childcare setting. Strategies for improving adherence to these standards should
be implemented. Children at risk for introducing an infectious disease should not attend childcare until they are no longer contagious
(Tables 217.2 and 217.3).
Routine vaccination is proven to improve the health of children in
childcare settings. In the United States, there are 17 diseases and organisms against which all children should be immunized unless there are
contraindications: diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, measles, mumps, rubella,
polio, hepatitis A and hepatitis B, varicella, H. influenzae type b, S. pneumoniae, rotavirus, N. meningitidis, influenza, COVID-­19, and human
papillomavirus (see Chapter 215). Rates of immunization among children
in licensed childcare facilities are high, in part because of laws in almost
all states that require age-­appropriate immunizations of children who
attend licensed childcare programs. Vaccines against influenza, H. influenzae type b, hepatitis B, rotavirus, varicella, S. pneumoniae, COVID-­19,
and hepatitis A are of particular benefit to children in childcare centers.
Childcare providers should receive all immunizations that are recommended routinely for adults, including tetanus and diphtheria toxoids and acellular pertussis (Tdap) booster, influenza, and COVID-­19
vaccines and should have a preemployment health evaluation, with a
tuberculin skin test or interferon-­γ release blood assay. Local public
health authorities should be notified of cases of reportable communicable disease that occur in children or providers in childcare settings.

STANDARDS

Every state has specific standards for licensing and reviewing childcare
centers and family childcare homes. The American Academy of Pediatrics, American Public Health Association, and National Resource

Table 217.2  Disease-­or Condition-­Specific Recommendations for Exclusion of Children in Out-­of-­Home Childcare
CONDITION

MANAGEMENT OF CASE

MANAGEMENT OF CONTACTS

COVID-­19

Return to class after 10 days from onset and no fever
for at least 24 hr without antipyretics.

Varies and evolving but many include being tested
≥5 days from exposure, wearing a mask, checking for
symptoms, stay at home if symptoms develop (see
latest recommendations at CDC) (see also Chapter
311).

Clostridium difficile

Exclusion until stools are contained in the diaper or
child is continent and stool frequency is no more
than two stools above that child’s normal frequency
for the time the child is in the program. Stool
consistency does not need to return to normal to be
able to return to childcare. Neither test of cure nor
repeat testing should be performed for asymptomatic
children in whom C. difficile was diagnosed previously.

Symptomatic contacts should be excluded until stools
are contained in the diaper or child is continent and
stool frequency is no more than two stools above that
child’s normal frequency for the time the child is in
the program. Testing is not required for asymptomatic
contacts.

Hepatitis A virus (HAV)
infection

Serologic testing to confirm HAV infection in
suspected cases. Exclusion until 1 wk after onset of
illness.

In facilities with diapered children, if one or more cases
confirmed in child or staff attendees or two or more
cases in households of staff or attendees, hepatitis A
vaccine (HepA) or immune globulin intramuscular (IGIM)
should be administered within 14 days of exposure
to all unimmunized staff and attendees. In centers
without diapered children, HepA or IGIM should be
administered to unimmunized classroom contacts of
index case. Asymptomatic IGIM recipients may return
after receipt of IGIM.

Impetigo

No exclusion if treatment has been initiated and as
long as lesions on exposed skin are covered.

No intervention unless additional lesions develop.

Measles

Exclusion until 4 days after beginning of rash and when
the child is able to participate.

Immunize exposed children without evidence of immunity
within 72 hr of exposure. Children who do not receive
vaccine within 72 hr or who remain unimmunized after
exposure should be excluded until at least 2 wk after
onset of rash in the last case of measles.
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1624 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 217.2  Disease-­or Condition-­Specific Recommendations for Exclusion of Children in Out-­of-­Home Childcare—cont’d
CONDITION

MANAGEMENT OF CASE

MANAGEMENT OF CONTACTS

Mumps

Exclusion until 5 days after onset of parotid gland
swelling.

In outbreak setting, people without documentation
of immunity should be immunized or excluded.
Immediate readmission may occur after immunization.
Unimmunized people should be excluded for 26 or
more days after onset of parotitis in last case. A second
dose of MMR vaccine (or MMRV, if age appropriate)
should be offered to all students (including those in
postsecondary school) and to all healthcare personnel
born in or after 1957 who have only received one dose
of MMR vaccine. A second dose of MMR also may be
considered during outbreaks for preschool-­age children
who have received one MMR dose. People previously
vaccinated with two doses of a mumps-­containing
vaccine who are identified by public health as at
increased risk for mumps because of an outbreak should
receive a third dose of a mumps-­containing vaccine to
improve protection against mumps disease and related
complications.

Pediculosis capitis (head
lice) infestation

Treatment at end of program day and readmission on
completion of first treatment. Children should not be
excluded or sent home early from school because of
head lice, because this infestation has low contagion
within classrooms.

Household and close contacts should be examined and
treated if infested. No exclusion necessary.

Pertussis

Exclusion until completion of 5 days of the
recommended course of antimicrobial therapy if
pertussis is suspected. Children and providers who
refuse treatment should be excluded until 21 days
have elapsed from cough onset.

Immunization and chemoprophylaxis should be
administered as recommended for household
contacts. Symptomatic children and staff should be
excluded until completion of 5 days of antimicrobial
therapy. Untreated adults should be excluded until 21
days after onset of cough.

Rubella

Exclusion for 7 days after onset of rash for postnatal
infection.

During an outbreak, children without evidence of
immunity should be immunized or excluded for
21 days after onset of rash of the last case in the
outbreak. Pregnant contacts should be evaluated.

Infection with Salmonella
serotypes Typhi or
Paratyphi

Exclusion until three consecutive stool cultures obtained
at least 48 hr after cessation of antimicrobial therapy
are negative, stools are contained in the diaper or
child is continent, and stool frequency is no more than
two stools above that child’s normal frequency for the
time the child is in the program.

When Salmonella serotype Typhi infection is identified
in a child care staff member, local or state health
departments may be consulted regarding regulations
for length of exclusion and testing, which may vary by
jurisdiction.

Infection with nontyphoidal
Salmonella spp.,
Salmonella of unknown
serotype

Exclusion until stools are contained in the diaper or child
is continent and stool frequency is no more than two
stools above that child’s normal frequency for the time
the child is in the program. Stool consistency does
not need to return to normal to be able to return to
childcare. Negative stool culture results not required
for nonserotype Typhi or Paratyphi Salmonella spp.

Symptomatic contacts should be excluded until stools
are contained in the diaper or child is continent and
stool frequency is no more than two stools above
that child’s normal frequency for the time the child
is in the program. Stool cultures are not required for
asymptomatic contacts.

Scabies

Exclusion until after treatment given.

Close contacts with prolonged skin-­to-­skin contact
should receive prophylactic therapy. Bedding and
clothing in contact with skin of infected people should
be laundered.

Infection with Shiga
toxin–producing
Escherichia coli (STEC),
including E. coli O157:H7

Exclusion until two stool cultures (obtained at least 48 hr
after any antimicrobial therapy, if administered, has
been discontinued) are negative, stools are contained
in the diaper or child is continent, and stool frequency
is no more than two stools above that child’s normal
frequency. Some state health departments have less
stringent exclusion policies for children who have
recovered from less virulent STEC infection.

Meticulous hand hygiene; stool cultures should
be performed for any symptomatic contacts. In
outbreak situations involving virulent STEC strains,
stool cultures of asymptomatic contacts may aid in
controlling spread. Center(s) with cases should be
closed to new admissions during STEC outbreak.

Shigellosis

Exclusion until treatment complete and one or more
posttreatment stool cultures are negative for Shigella
spp., stools are contained in the diaper or child is
continent, and stool frequency is no more than two
stools above that child’s normal frequency for the time
the child is in the program. Some states may require
more than one negative stool culture.

Meticulous hand hygiene; stool cultures should be
performed for any symptomatic contacts.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 217 u Childcare and Communicable Diseases

1625

Table 217.2  Disease-­or Condition-­Specific Recommendations for Exclusion of Children in Out-­of-­Home Childcare—cont’d
CONDITION

MANAGEMENT OF CASE

MANAGEMENT OF CONTACTS

Staphylococcus aureus skin
infections

Exclusion only if skin lesions are draining and cannot be
covered with a watertight dressing.

Meticulous hand hygiene; cultures of contacts are not
recommended.

Streptococcal pharyngitis

Exclusion until at least 12 hr after treatment has been
initiated.

Symptomatic contacts of documented cases of group A
streptococcal infection should be tested and treated
if test results are positive.

Tuberculosis

Most children younger than 10 yr are not considered
contagious. For those with active disease, exclusion
until determined to be noninfectious by physician or
health department authority. No exclusion for latent
tuberculosis infection (LTBI).

Local health department personnel should be informed
for contact investigation.

Varicella

Exclusion until all lesions have crusted or, in immunized
people without crusts, until no new lesions appear
within a 24-­hr period.

For people without evidence of immunity, varicella
vaccine should be administered, ideally within 3 days,
but up to 5 days after exposure, or when indicated,
varicella-­zoster immune globulin (VariZIG) should be
administered up to 10 days after exposure; if VariZIG
is not available, intravenous immunoglobulin (IGIV)
should be considered as an alternative. If vaccine
cannot be administered and VariZIG/IGIV is not
indicated, preemptive oral acyclovir or valacyclovir can
be considered.

From Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021–2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2021, Table 2.3, pp. 128–132.

Table 217.3  Recommendations for Inclusion or Exclusion of Childcare*
CHILDREN NEED NOT BE EXCLUDED FOR A MINOR ILLNESS
UNLESS ANY OF THE FOLLOWING EXISTS:
• The illness prevents the child from participating comfortably in
program activities.
• The illness results in a greater care need than the childcare staff
can provide without compromising the health and safety of the
other children.
• The child has any of the following conditions: fever, unusual
lethargy, irritability, persistent crying, difficulty breathing, or other
signs of possible severe illness.
• Diarrhea (defined as an increased number of stools compared
with the child’s normal pattern, with increased stool water and/
or decreased form) that is not contained by diapers or toilet
use.
• Vomiting two or more times in the previous 24 hours, unless the
vomiting is determined to be caused by a noncommunicable
condition and the child is not in danger of dehydration.
• Mouth sores associated with an inability of the child to control
his or her saliva, unless the child’s physician or local health
department authority states that the child is noninfectious.
• Rash with fever or behavior change, until a physician has
determined the illness to not be a communicable disease.
• Purulent conjunctivitis (defined as pink or red conjunctiva with
white or yellow eye discharge, often with matted eyelids after
sleep and eye pain or redness of the eyelids or skin surrounding
the eye), until examined by a physician and approved to
readmission, with or without treatment.
• Tuberculosis, until the child’s physician or local health department
authority states that the child is noninfectious.

• Impetigo, until 24 hours after treatment has been initiated.
• Streptococcal pharyngitis, until 24 hours after treatment has been
initiated and unless the child has been afebrile for 24 hours.
• Head lice (pediculosis), until the morning after the first treatment.
• Scabies, until after treatment has been completed.
• Varicella, until the sixth day after the onset of rash or sooner if all
lesions have dried and crusted.
• Pertussis (which is confirmed by laboratory or suspected based on
symptoms of the illness or because of cough onset within 14 days
of having face-­to-­face contact with a person in a household or
classroom who has a laboratory-­confirmed case of pertussis), until
5 days of appropriate antibiotic therapy (currently: erythromycin)
has been completed (total course of treatment is 14 days).
• Mumps, until 9 days after onset of parotid gland swelling.
• Hepatitis A virus infection, until 1 week after onset of illness
and jaundice, if present, has disappeared or until passive
immunoprophylaxis (immune serum globulin) has been
administered to appropriate children and staff in the program, as
directed by the responsible health department.
Certain conditions do not constitute a prior reason for excluding
a child from childcare unless the child would be excluded by the
above criteria or the disease is determined by a health authority
to contribute to transmission of the illness at the program. These
conditions include the following: a symptomatic excretion of
an enteropathogen; nonpurulent conjunctivitis (defined as pink
conjunctiva with a clear, watery eye discharge and without fever,
eye pain, or eyelid redness); rash without fever and without
behavior change; cytomegalovirus infection; hepatitis B virus
carrier state; and HIV infection.

*Child and caregiver-specific exclusion policies reflect the present state of knowledge.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: https://dchealth.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/doh/publication/attachments/Recommendations%20for%20Inclusion%20or%20
Exclusion%20CDC.pdf

Center jointly publish comprehensive health and safety performance
standards that can be used by pediatricians and other healthcare professionals to guide decisions about management of infectious diseases
in childcare facilities (available at http://nrckids.org/CFOC). Additionally, the National Association for the Education of Young Children
(NAEYC), a professional organization supporting early childhood
education efforts and volunteer accreditation, is gaining recognition as

a resource for health and safety standards for childcare facilities (http:/
/www.naeyc.org/). Specific standards set by all states can be reviewed at
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ National Center
on Early Childhood Quality Assurance website (https://childcareta.a
cf.hhs.gov/licensing).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1626 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 218

Health Advice for Children
Traveling Internationally
John C. Christenson and James G. Carlucci
Children are traveling internationally with increasing frequency and
to more exotic destinations that pose unique injury and disease risks.
Compared to adults, children are less likely to receive pretravel advice
and more likely to be seen by a medical provider or be hospitalized
on return for a travel-­related illness. Primary care providers are confronted with the challenge of trying to ensure safe, healthy travel for
their patients, whether travel is occurring for purposes of tourism,
study abroad, visiting friends and relatives, or volunteerism. Whenever
possible, health professionals are encouraged to consult with travel
medicine specialists, especially when uncertain about pretravel advice,
unique travel medicine vaccines (e.g., yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis, typhoid, rabies), and recommendations for malaria medications.
Travel medicine is a unique specialty, and experienced travel medicine practitioners provide specialized guidance on the infectious and
noninfectious risks based on age, itinerary, duration, season, purpose
of travel, and underlying traveler characteristics (health and vaccination status). A pretravel consultation includes the essential elements
of (1) safety and preventive counseling against injuries and diseases, (2)
routine, recommended, and required vaccinations, based on individual
risk assessment, (3) counseling and medications for self-­treatment of
traveler’s diarrhea, and (4) when indicated by itinerary, malaria chemoprophylaxis (Table 218.1).
In the United States, recommendations and vaccine requirements
for travel to different countries are provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and are available online at https
://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/yellowbook-­home (Table 218.2). Some
travel vaccines and medications may not be recommended based on
specifics of travel itinerary, trip duration, or patient characteristics.
Alternatively, some vaccinations are not approved for younger children because of lack of data or limited immunologic response but may
still confer potential benefit to the young traveler with off-­label vaccine administration. In both scenarios, consultation or referral to a
knowledgeable travel medicine practitioner is encouraged, especially if
uncertainty exists regarding pretravel recommendations.

THE PEDIATRIC TRAVEL MEDICINE CONSULTATION

Parents of traveling children should seek medical consultation at least
1 month before departure to review the travel itinerary, obtain safety
and preventive counseling, ensure adequate vaccinations (routine, recommended, and required), receive necessary medications for chronic
health conditions, and obtain important medications for self-­treatment
of traveler’s diarrhea and, when indicated, malaria chemoprophylaxis
with counseling. Advice, vaccinations, and medications should be
emphasized as important measures, with the provider goal of keeping
the child healthy during travel rather than to discourage traveling.

Pediatric Travelers Visiting Friends and Relatives

Compared to most children traveling internationally, the pediatric
visiting-­friends-­and-­relatives (VFR) traveler is the most vulnerable
population uniquely at risk for travel-­related illnesses. VFR travelers
may include immigrants, refugees, migrants, students, or displaced persons who are traveling back to their country of origin for the purposes
of visiting friends and relatives. Pediatric VFR travelers are typically
children accompanying their parents or family members back to their
ancestral country, where relational, social, and cultural connections
remain. Compared to tourist travelers, VFR travelers are more likely
to travel for longer durations, visit more remote destinations, travel by

higher-­risk local transportation modes, experience closer contact with
the local population, and use fewer insect, food, and water precautions.
Adult and pediatric VFR travelers are also less likely to perceive a risk
of travel-­related illnesses, seek pretravel advice, receive travel immunizations, or use effective malaria prophylaxis on arrival in the destination country. VFR travel comprises ∼60% of imported malaria in U.S.
children (i.e., malaria acquired outside the United States), and pediatric VFR travelers are reported to be 25 times more likely than tourist
travelers to acquire malaria. Among all travelers, unvaccinated pediatric VFR travelers remain at higher risk for contracting and having
symptomatic illness caused by hepatitis A virus. Several studies suggest
that VFR travelers are at disproportionate risk of acquiring typhoid
fever and possibly tuberculosis as well.

SAFETY AND PREVENTIVE COUNSELING TOPICS
Health and Evacuation Insurance, Underlying Health
Conditions, and Medications

Parents should be made aware that their medical insurance policy
might not provide coverage for hospitalizations or medical emergencies in foreign countries and is unlikely to cover the high cost of an
emergency medical evacuation. Supplemental travel medical insurance and evacuation insurance may be purchased and are especially
recommended for prolonged travel itineraries, for remote destinations,
and for children with higher-­risk preexistent health conditions going
to countries where inpatient care at a level comparable to the traveler’s
home country may not be available. Information regarding medical
and evacuation insurance providers can be found at the U.S. Department of State International Travel advisory website (https://travel.st
ate.gov/content/travel/en/international-­travel/before-­you-­go/your-­
health-­abroad/insurance-­providers-­overseas.html) and the CDC
Travel Health website (https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/insurance).
Parents of children with medical conditions should take with them
a brief medical summary and a sufficient supply of prescription medications for their children, with bottles that are clearly identified by
prescription labels. For children requiring care by specialists, an international directory for that specialty can be consulted. A directory of
physicians worldwide who speak English and who have met certain
qualifications is available from the International Society of Travel Medicine (https://www.istm.org). If medical care is needed urgently when
abroad, sources of information include the U.S. embassy or consulate,
hotel managers, travel agents catering to foreign tourists, and missionary hospitals.
A travel health kit consisting of prescription medications and nonprescription items, such as acetaminophen, an antihistamine, oral
rehydration solution packets, antibiotic ointment, bandages, insect
repellent (DEET or picaridin), and sunscreen, is highly recommended
for all children. Children with persistent asthma should have bronchodilators and oral corticosteroids prescribed for treatment of any acute
asthma exacerbations encountered during overseas travel. Children
with a history of angioedema, anaphylaxis, or severe allergies to food
or insects should have an epinephrine autoinjector (EpiPen) and antihistamines available for use during travel.
Parents and family members should be aware of the prevalence
of counterfeit medication and lack of quality control of medications
in many areas of the world, particularly in low-­and middle-­income
countries. Critical medications, including insulin and newly prescribed
antimalarials, should be purchased before international travel and
packed in original prescription containers.

Safety and Injury Prevention

Motor vehicle accidents are a leading cause of traumatic injuries, hospitalizations, and deaths, both in pediatric and adult travelers. Differences in traffic patterns and regulations (e.g., right-­vs. left-­hand traffic
and pedestrian right of way) should be emphasized to children, and
the use of safety belts should be reinforced. When possible, child safety
seats should be taken on the trip. Parents should also be aware of additional risks for small children that may exist overseas, such as open
balconies, windows without screens or bars, exposed wires and electrical outlets, paint chips, pest and rodent poison, and stray animals.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 218 u Health Advice for Children Traveling Internationally
Table 218.1  Checklist of Items to Address in the
Pretravel Consultation
ISSUES THAT SHOULD BE
ADDRESSED

CATEGORY
Patient risk assessment

Obtain history: itinerary, type of
travel, personal medical history,
age, underlying diseases, allergies,
current medications, pregnancy
status, previous vaccination status

Immunizations

Update routine immunizations
Provide routine travel immunizations
Provide destination-­specific
immunizations

Malaria prophylaxis

If indicated:
Provide malaria education and
advice; discuss bite-­avoidance
measures
Prescribe antimalaria prophylaxis

Traveler’s diarrhea

Prescribe oral rehydration therapy
and loperamide (Imodium)*
Prescribe appropriate antibiotic (see
Table 218.4)

Prevention against mosquito
bites

Give advice regarding mosquito-­
borne disease
Discuss personal protection
measures

Rabies prevention

Give advice regarding behavior near
animals
Discuss measures to take if bitten
or scratched by an animal—seek
urgent medical advice
Administer vaccine when indicated

Prevention of sexually
transmitted diseases

Provide education regarding safe
sex

Zika virus

Discuss potential risk of congenital
Zika syndrome for pregnant
women or women/men planning
to conceive after return from an
endemic area

Some of the recommendations are indicated only for specific destinations or specific
at-­risk groups.
*Contraindicated in bacterial diarrhea, dysentery.
Modified from Matson KB, Siraj DS. Travel medicine. In Kellerman RD, Rakel DP,
Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy 2023. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2023: Table 2, p. 1474.

Water-­related activities also are associated with significant injuries in
pediatric travelers, and pools and oceanfronts are often unsupervised
and without lifeguards at overseas destinations. Injuries to children on
flights are also well-­documented. Children should not sit in aisle seats,
as they can be injured by aisle traffic, service carts, and falling objects
from overhead storage bins.

Animal Contact

Among travelers, attacks from domestic or stray animals are much
more likely to occur than attacks from wild animals. Wounds
from animal bites present a risk for bacterial infections, tetanus,
and rabies. Dogs are responsible for >95% of all rabies transmission in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Globally, the World Health
Organization (WHO) estimates that approximately 59,000 human
deaths result from rabies each year, with the vast majority of cases
occurring in South Asia, Southeast Asia, and Africa. Rabies transmission is reported less frequently after bites from cats and other
carnivores, monkeys, and bats. Macaque monkeys native to Asia
and North Africa can be found in urban centers and tourist sites
and pose a risk for rabies and herpes B virus infections after bites
and scratches.

1627

Young children are more likely to be bitten and experience more
severe facial wounds because of their short stature. They are at higher
risk for rabies exposure from dogs and other animals during travel and
require greater supervision. Parents should always encourage their
children to report bite injuries and to avoid petting, feeding, or handling dogs, monkeys, and stray animals. Before travel, tetanus vaccinations need to be current for all travelers. Children, long-­term travelers,
expatriates, and all individuals likely to come into contact with animals
in a rabies-­endemic region (primarily Africa and South and Southeast Asia) should consider preexposure vaccination for rabies before
international travel (see Rabies later). Bite or scratch wounds should
be washed thoroughly and for a prolonged time (≥15 minutes) with
copious water and soap. Local wound care will substantially reduce the
risk of canine and other mammalian rabies transmission. Rabies postexposure vaccination and rabies immunoglobulin is likely indicated in
most cases, and medical care should be sought emergently. Antibiotics
(e.g., amoxicillin-­clavulanate) may need to be administered to a child
to prevent secondary infections, especially for animal bites involving
the hands and head/neck areas.

ROUTINE CHILDHOOD VACCINATIONS REQUIRED
FOR PEDIATRIC TRAVEL

Parents should allow at least 4 weeks before departure for optimal
administration of vaccines to their children. All children who travel
should be immunized according to the routine childhood immunization schedule with all vaccines appropriate for their age. The immunization schedule can be accelerated to maximize protection for traveling
children, especially for unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated children (see Fig. 215.1 in Chapter 215). Routine and catch-­up childhood
vaccine schedules can be found at the CDC website (https://www.cdc.
gov/vaccines/schedules/).
Live-­attenuated viral vaccines should be administered concurrently
or ≥4 weeks apart to minimize immunologic interference. Intramuscular Immunoglobulin administration interferes with the immune
response to measles immunization and possibly to varicella immunization. If a child requires measles or varicella immunization, the vaccines
should be given either 2 weeks before or 3 months after immunoglobulin administration (longer with higher doses of intravenous immunoglobulin). Immunoglobulin does not interfere with the immune
response to oral typhoid, poliovirus, or yellow fever vaccines.
Vaccine products produced in eggs (yellow fever, influenza) may
be associated with hypersensitivity responses, including anaphylaxis
in persons with known severe egg sensitivity. Screening by inquiring
about adverse effects when eating eggs is a reasonable way to identify
those at risk for anaphylaxis from receiving influenza or yellow fever
vaccines. Although measles and mumps vaccines are produced in chick
embryo cell cultures, children with egg allergy are at very low risk for
anaphylaxis with these vaccines.

Diphtheria-­Tetanus-­Pertussis

Children traveling internationally should be fully vaccinated with
diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis (DTaP), having
completed the fourth or fifth booster dose by 4-­6 years of age. A single
dose of an adolescent/adult preparation of tetanus and diphtheria toxoids and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine is recommended at 11-­12
years of age for those who have completed the recommended primary
DTaP (or DTP) series.
Adolescents and adults should receive a single Tdap booster if >5
years have elapsed since the last dose, since a tetanus-­containing
booster (Td or Tdap) may not be readily available for tetanus-­prone
wounds during international travel or in remote settings (e.g., adventure travel, wilderness).

Haemophilus influenzae Type b

Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) remains a leading cause of meningitis in children 6 months to 3 years of age in many low-­and middle-­
income countries. Before they travel, all unimmunized children <5
years old should be vaccinated against Hib (see Chapter 215). A single
dose of Hib vaccine should also be administered to unvaccinated or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1628 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
partially vaccinated children ≥5 years old if they have anatomic or
functional asplenia, sickle cell disease, HIV infection, leukemia, malignancy, or other immunocompromising condition. Unvaccinated children >5 years old do not need vaccination unless they have a high-­risk
condition.

Hepatitis A

Hepatitis A is a routine childhood vaccine in the United States but
requires special considerations in the traveling pediatric patient. Protection from hepatitis A in specific children may also involve the provision of immunoglobulin. For these reasons, hepatitis A vaccination is
covered later in Specialized Pediatric Travel Vaccinations.

Hepatitis B

Hepatitis B can be a travel-­associated infection. Hepatitis B is highly
prevalent throughout much of the world, including areas of South
America, sub-­Saharan Africa, Eastern and Southeastern Asia, and most
of the Pacific basin. In certain parts of the world, 8–15% of the population may be chronically infected. Disease can be transmitted by blood
transfusions not screened for hepatitis B surface antigen, exposure to
unsterilized needles, close contact with local children who have open
skin lesions, and sexual exposure. Exposure to hepatitis B is more likely
for travelers residing for prolonged periods in endemic areas. Partial
protection may be provided by one or two doses, but ideally three doses
should be given before travel. For unvaccinated adolescents, a three-­
dose hepatitis B vaccine series should be administered, with a minimum interval of 4 weeks between the first and second doses, 8 weeks
between the second and third doses, and at least 16 weeks between the
first and third doses.
All unvaccinated children and adolescents should receive the accelerated hepatitis B vaccine series before travel. Because one or two doses
provide some protection, hepatitis B vaccination should be initiated
even if the full series cannot be completed before travel.

Respiratory Viruses

Infections by respiratory viruses such as influenza and SARS-­CoV-­2 are
well recognized as a cause of morbidity among adult and pediatric travelers. Disease caused by these viruses can be prevented through vaccination. The risk for exposure to influenza during international travel varies
depending on the time of year, destination, and close contact with infected
persons. During the peak of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, the use of lockdowns and quarantine, masks, and physical distancing used in many countries to control the spread of SARS-­CoV-­2 greatly altered the epidemiology
of influenza and other respiratory viruses, resulting in few reported infections More recently, influenza appears to have returned to its “traditional”
seasonality.
Influenza vaccination is recommended for all children older than 6
months of age and for adults. Vaccines against SARS-­CoV-­2 are also
available (for persons ≥ 6 months of age) and are recommended to prevent severe disease, hospitalization, and death. Oseltamivir can be used
to treat (and prevent) influenza infections. Antivirals are available to treat
serious SARS-CoV-2 infections, especially for high-risk individuals.
There are no available vaccines effective against avian influenza
strains such as influenza A H5N1 and H7N9, which have become a
great concern worldwide. Because these strains of influenza virus are
spread through contact with infected birds, precautions include avoiding direct contact with birds or surfaces with bird droppings, avoiding poultry farms or bird markets, eating only well-­cooked poultry or
products, and washing hands frequently. Oseltamivir is the antiviral of
choice to treat infections caused by these viruses.

Measles-­Mumps-­Rubella

Measles is still endemic in many low-­and middle-­income countries
and in some industrialized nations. It remains a leading cause of
vaccine-­preventable death in much of the world. Vaccine status for
measles is important for all traveling children, particularly if they are
traveling to low-­and middle-­income countries or areas with measles
outbreaks. Measles vaccine, preferably in combination with mumps
and rubella vaccines (MMR), should be given to all children at 12-­15

months and at 4-­6 years of age, unless there is a contraindication (see
Chapter 215). In children traveling internationally, the second vaccination can be given as soon as 4 weeks after the first to induce immunity
among those children who did not respond to the first MMR vaccine.
Children 6-­12 months old traveling to low-­and middle-­income
countries should be vaccinated early. The monovalent measles vaccine is not available in the United States, so MMR can be administered. Early vaccination (i.e., 6-­12 months of age) will provide some
immunity to measles, but antibody response may not be durable or
lasting. Therefore any MMR vaccine administered before 12 months
of age should not be counted toward the routine vaccination schedule;
children vaccinated early for purposes of international travel must be
revaccinated on or after their first birthday with two doses separated
by at least 4 weeks. Infants <6 months old are generally protected by
maternal antibodies (assuming the mother has previously been immunized against measles or had natural infection) and would not need
early MMR vaccination before travel.

Pneumococcal Vaccines

Streptococcus pneumoniae is the leading cause of childhood bacterial
pneumonia and is among the leading causes of bacteremia and bacterial meningitis in children in low-­and middle-­income and industrialized nations. Preparing a child to travel internationally includes routine
or catch-­up vaccination with 20-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV20) and, for children with certain high-­risk conditions,
use of 23-­valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23). A
single dose of PCV20 should be administered to previously unvaccinated children 6-­18 years old with underlying high-­risk medical conditions, including anatomic or functional asplenia (including sickle cell
disease), HIV infection, a congenital immunodeficiency or immunocompromising condition, chronic heart or lung disease, chronic renal
failure or nephrotic syndrome, diabetes mellitus, cerebrospinal fluid
leak, or cochlear implant. The Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices (ACIP) also recommends that high-­risk children ≥2 years old
receive the PPSV23 vaccine ≥8 weeks after their last PCV13 dose. ACIP
recommendations on prevention of pneumococcal disease among
infants and children using PCV13 and PPSV23 can be found at http://
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-­recs/vacc-­specific/pneumo.html.

Polio Vaccine

Poliomyelitis (wild type) was eradicated from the Western Hemisphere
in 1991. Polio remains endemic in two countries—Afghanistan and
Pakistan—with additional surrounding countries at risk for importation of polio. Unfortunately, many other countries throughout the world,
mainly Africa, are experiencing infections by vaccine-derived poliovirus.
The poliovirus vaccination schedule in the United States is a four-­dose,
all-­inactivated poliovirus (IPV) regimen (see Chapter 215). Traveling
infants should begin the IPV series as early as 6 weeks of age (for an
accelerated dosing schedule for children, see Fig. 215.1 and Table 215.1).
Length of immunity conferred by IPV immunization is not known; a
single booster dose of IPV is therefore recommended for previously
vaccinated adolescents and adults traveling to polio-­endemic areas if
approximately 10 years have elapsed since they completed their primary
series. Oral poliovirus vaccine is no longer available in the United States.

Varicella

All children ≥12 months old who have no history of varicella vaccination
or chickenpox should be vaccinated unless there is a contraindication
to vaccination (see Chapter 215). Unlike measles vaccine (see earlier),
varicella vaccine is not approved or recommended for traveling children
6-­12 months of age. Infants <6 months old are generally protected by
maternal antibodies. All children now require two doses, the first at 12
months of age and the second at 4-­6 years. The second dose can be given
as soon as 3 months after the first dose. For unvaccinated children ≥13
years old, the first and second doses can be separated by 4 weeks.

SPECIALIZED PEDIATRIC TRAVEL VACCINATIONS

Table 218.2 summarizes the dosages and age restrictions of vaccines
specifically given to children traveling internationally.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 218 u Health Advice for Children Traveling Internationally
Cholera

Cholera is present in many low-­and middle-­income countries, but the risk
for infection among travelers to these countries is extremely low. Travelers entering countries reporting cholera outbreaks are at minimal risk of
acquiring cholera if they take adequate safe food and water precautions and
practice frequent handwashing. No country or territory currently requires
cholera vaccination as a condition for entry. Of note, a live-­attenuated,
single-­dose oral suspension vaccine is licensed in the United States to prevent disease in travelers 2-­64 years of age visiting endemic regions.

Hepatitis A Vaccination and Preexposure
Immunoglobulin

Hepatitis A virus (HAV) is endemic in most of the world, and travelers
are at risk, even if their travel is restricted to the usual tourist routes.
HAV infection can result from eating shellfish harvested from sewage-­
contaminated waters, eating unwashed vegetables or fruits, or eating
food prepared by an asymptomatic HAV carrier. Young children infected
with hepatitis A are often asymptomatic but can transmit infection to
unvaccinated older children and adults, who are more likely to develop
clinical hepatitis. Few areas carry no risk of HAV infection, and therefore immunization is recommended for all travelers. Hepatitis A vaccine
(HepA) is recommended in the United States for universal immunization of all children ≥12 months old, administered as two doses 6 months
apart. A single dose of HepA vaccine given to travelers will provide adequate protection. Protective immunity develops within 2 weeks after the
initial vaccine dose. A combined three-­dose HepA and hepatitis B vaccine (Twinrix, GlaxoSmithKline) is available in the United States but is
licensed for use only in individuals >18 years old. Pediatric combination
hepatitis A–hepatitis B vaccine (HepA-­HepB) (Twinrix-­Junior, GlaxoSmithKline) is licensed for use in children 1-­18 years old in Canada and
Europe. In many countries, a combination hepatitis A–typhoid fever vaccine is available for persons >16 years of age.
Children <1 year old are at lower risk of clinical HAV infection,
especially if they are breastfed or residing in areas with safe water for
formula reconstitution. Some experts recommend use of preexposure
intramuscular immunoglobulin for children <6 months who are traveling internationally to higher-­risk destinations, particularly low-­income
destinations or regions where hygienic or sanitary conditions are limited. However, administration of immunoglobulin diminishes the
immunogenicity of live-­virus vaccines, in particular measles vaccine,
that may be needed for infant travelers. Vaccination against measles
should occur ≥2 weeks before any immunoglobulin administration,
and a 3-­month interval is suggested between immunoglobulin administration and subsequent measles immunization.
Because measles-­endemic countries frequently overlap with higher-­
risk travel destinations for HAV infection, HepA vaccine is recommended for infant travelers 6-­
11 months of age. Several studies
demonstrate that infants as young as 6 months will develop antibodies
after HepA, especially if there are no interfering maternal antibodies
from prior maternal vaccination or disease. There is potential for a
more durable immune response to the HepA vaccination, especially in
later infancy, when potential interfering maternal antibody concentrations are lower. If early HepA vaccination is given rather than immunoglobulin to infant travelers (age 6-­11 months), it should not count
toward the routine two-­dose vaccine series. Similar to MMR vaccination, an informed decision should be made with the parents, balancing
the risk of travel-­associated disease and vaccine adverse events with the
potential protective benefit to the traveling infant.

Japanese Encephalitis

Japanese encephalitis is a disease transmitted by mosquitoes in many
areas of Asia, especially in rural farming areas. Although it is a leading
cause of vaccine-­preventable encephalitis in children in many Asian
countries and parts of western Pacific countries, the risk of disease to
nonimmune travelers is low. A map showing where Japanese encephalitis transmission occurs can be found at https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel
/yellowbook/2024/infections-­diseases/japanese-­encephalitis.
Most human infections with Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) are
asymptomatic, and <1% of individuals develop clinical disease. With

1629

symptomatic disease, the fatality rate is 20–30%, and the incidence of
neurologic or psychiatric sequelae in survivors is 30–50%. The risk of
JEV disease for pediatric travelers is unknown, but among all travelers, it is estimated to be less than 1 case per 1 million travelers to
Asia. However, if residing in a rural area with active JEV transmission
in the rainy season, the risk may increase to 5-­50 cases per 100,000
population per year. Risk of Japanese encephalitis neurologic disease
after mosquito-­bite transmission is thought to be higher in children
than in adults. The disease occurs primarily from June to September
in temperate zones and throughout the entire year in tropical zones.
Vaccination is recommended for travelers planning visits >1 months to
rural areas of Asia, where the disease is endemic, especially areas of rice
or pig farming. Vaccination is recommended for shorter visits to such
areas if the traveler will often be outdoors or where increased disease
activity is reported. Risk for infection can be greatly reduced by following the standard precautions to avoid mosquito bites.
The inactivated Vero cell culture–derived Japanese encephalitis vaccine (Ixiaro) has replaced the older inactivated mouse brain–derived
vaccine (JE-­VAX), which is no longer manufactured. Japanese encephalitis vaccine efficacy is >95% in adults who receive two doses administered 7-­28 days apart. The licensed range for Japanese encephalitis
vaccine has been extended to include children as young as 2 months,
with a dose administered on days 0 and 28.

Meningococcal Vaccines

Meningococcal vaccines currently available in the United States include
two quadrivalent conjugate A/C/Y/W-­135 vaccines, MenACWY-­CRM
(Menveo) and MenACWY-­TT (MenQuadfi), and two meningococcal
B vaccines (Bexsero, Trumenba).
Children traveling to those equatorial countries in sub-­Saharan Africa
(i.e., the “meningitis belt”) where the incidence of meningococcal disease (especially group A) is highest should receive a Neisseria meningitidis quadrivalent vaccine, especially if travel is prolonged or occurs
during the dry season of December to June. Risk is greatest in the meningitis belt of sub-­Saharan Africa, with rates of meningococcal disease in
endemic regions reaching up to 1,000 cases per 100,000 population per
year. Vaccination programs for resident populations with a monovalent
group A vaccine in highly endemic areas have resulted in a decrease in
cases of invasive disease. In recent years, other serogrups have become
more prevalent. Conjugate A/C/Y/W-­
135 vaccines are available to
pediatric travelers ≥2 months of age, but the dosing schedule varies by
product and age, as outlined in Table 218.2. Booster doses of conjugate
A/C/Y/W-­135 should occur every 3-­5 years for travelers returning to
endemic areas, depending on the age of the pediatric traveler. Providers
may also want to consider meningococcal vaccination for other pediatric
travelers, especially if there is remote or rural travel within low-­income
countries with limited healthcare access, because meningococcal outbreaks can occur anywhere in the world. Proof of receipt of quadrivalent
meningococcal vaccination is also necessary for individuals traveling to
Saudi Arabia for the annual Hajj or Umrah pilgrimage.
Serogroups A and C are most often associated with epidemics of
meningitis in sub-­Saharan Africa, especially in the meningitis belt of
equatorial Africa during the dry season months (December to June).
Serogroups Y and W-­135 have also been found in meningococcal outbreaks. Serogroup B is associated with more sporadic cases of invasive meningococcal disease in industrialized countries, including the
United States. Routine vaccination of travelers with meningococcal B
vaccine is currently not recommended. Additional vaccine information on meningococcal vaccination regimens and booster intervals can
be found at the CDC website (https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellow
book/2024/­infections-­diseases/meningococcal-­disease).

Rabies

Rabies is endemic in many countries in Africa, Asia, and Central and
South America. Children are at particular risk because they are less
likely to report bites and because facial bites are more common in children. Rabies has the potential for an extended latency period (months)
and is uniformly fatal once the clinical symptoms emerge. Preexposure
prophylaxis is recommended for ambulatory children with extended

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1630 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 218.2  Travel Vaccine Summary Table
TRADE NAME
(MFR)

AGE

DOSE

ROUTE

SCHEDULE

BOOSTER

Cholera CVD 103-­
HgR vaccine

Vaxchora (PaxVax)

18-­64 yr

100 mL
(reconstituted)

Oral

1 dose1

Undetermined2

Hepatitis A vaccine,
inactivated

Havrix
(GlaxoSmithKline)

1-­18 yr

0.5 mL (720 ELISA
units)

IM

0 and 6-­12 mo

None

≥19 yr

1.0 mL (1,440
ELISA units)

IM

0 and 6-­12 mo

None

VACCINE

Hepatitis A vaccine,
inactivated

Vaqta (Merck & Co.,
Inc.)

1-­18 yr

0.5 mL (25 U)

IM

0 and 6-­18 mo

None

≥19 yr

1.0 mL (50 U)

IM

0 and 6-­18 mo

None

Hepatitis B vaccine,
recombinant with
novel adjuvant
(1018)

Heplisav-­B (Dynavax
Technologies
Corp.)

>18

0.5 mL (20 μg
HBsAg and
3,000 μg of 1018)

IM

0, 1 mo

None

Hepatitis B vaccine,
recombinant2,3

Engerix-­B
(GlaxoSmithKline)

0-­19 yr

0.5 mL (10 μg
HBsAg)

IM

0, 1, 6 mo

None

0-­10 yr
(accelerated)

0.5 mL (10 μg
HBsAg)

IM

0, 1, 2 mo

12 mo

11-­19 yr
(accelerated)

1 mL (20 μg
HBsAg)

IM

0, 1, 2 mo

12 mo

≥20 yr (primary)

1 mL (20 μg
HBsAg)

IM

0, 1, 6 mo

None

≥20 yr
(accelerated)

1 mL (20 μg
HBsAg)

IM

0, 1, 2 mo

12 mo

0-­19 yr (primary)

0.5 mL (5 μg
HBsAg)

IM

0, 1, 6 mo

None

11-­15 yr
(adolescent
accelerated)

1 mL (10 μg
HBsAg)

IM

0, 4-­6 mo

None

≥20 yr (primary)

1 mL (10 μg
HBsAg)

IM

0, 1, 6 mo

None

≥18 yr (primary)

1.0 mL (720 ELU
HAV + 20 μg
HBsAg)

IM

0, 1, 6 mo

None

≥18 yr
(accelerated)

1.0 mL (720 ELU
HAV + 20 μg
HBsAg)

IM

0, 7, and 21-­30
days

12 mo

2 mo to 2 yr

0.25 mL

IM

0, 28 days

≥1 year after
primary series4

3-­17 yr

0.5 mL

IM

0, 28 days

≥1 yr after primary
series4

18-­65 yr

0.5 mL

IM

0, 7-­28 days

≥1 yr after primary
series4

>65 yr

0.5 mL

IM

0, 28 days

≥1 yr after primary
series4

Hepatitis B vaccine,
recombinant2,3

Combined hepatitis
A and hepatitis B
vaccine

Japanese
encephalitis
vaccine,
inactivated

Recombivax HB
(Merck & Co., Inc.)

Twinrix
(GlaxoSmithKline)

Ixiaro (Valneva)

Meningococcal
polysaccharide
tetanus toxoid
conjugate vaccine
(MenACWY-­TT)5

MenQuadfi
(Sanofi Pasteur)

≥2 yr

0.5 mL

IM

1 dose6

If at continued
risk7

Meningococcal
oligosaccharide
diphtheria
CRM197 conjugate
vaccine
(MenACWY-­
CRM)5

Menveo
(GSK)

2-­12 mo

0.5 mL

IM

0, 2, 4, 10 mo

If at continued
risk7

7-­23 yr

0.5 mL

IM

0, 3 mo
(second dose
administered in
second year of
life)

≥2 yr

0.5 mL

IM

1 dose6

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 218 u Health Advice for Children Traveling Internationally

1631

Table 218.2  Travel Vaccine Summary Table—cont’d
TRADE NAME
(MFR)

AGE

DOSE

ROUTE

SCHEDULE

BOOSTER

Polio vaccine,
inactivated

IPOL (Sanofi Pasteur)

≥18 yr

0.5 mL

SC or IM

1 dose if patient
has completed a
pediatric series

Repeat boosters
may be needed
for long-­term
travelers to
polio-­affected
countries;
see Chapter 296

Rabies vaccine
(human diploid
cell)

Imovax (Sanofi
Pasteur)

Any

1 mL

IM

Preexposure
series: days 0,
7, and 21 or 28
days

None; see
Chapter 320 for
postexposure
immunization

Rabies vaccine
(purified chick
embryo cell)

RabAvert (Novartis)

Any

1 mL

IM

Preexposure
series: days 0,
7, and 21 or 28
days

None; see
Chapter 320 for
postexposure
immunization

Typhoid vaccine
(oral, live,
attenuated)

Vivotif (PaxVax)

≥6 yr

1 capsule8

Oral

0, 2, 4, 6 days

Repeat primary
series after 5 yr

Typhoid vaccine
(Vi capsular
polysaccharide)

Typhim Vi (Sanofi
Pasteur)

≥2 yr

0.5 mL

IM

1 dose

2 yr

Yellow fever

YF-­Vax (Sanofi
Pasteur)

≥9 mo9

0.5 mL10

SC

1 dose

Not
recommended
for most11

VACCINE

1Must be administered in a healthcare setting.
2In a clinical trial, vaccine efficacy was 90% at 10 days postvaccination and declined to 80% at 3 months postvaccination in prevention of severe diarrhea after oral cholera challenge.

Long-­term immunogenicity is unknown. Clinicians advising travelers who are at continued or repeated risk over an extended period may consider revaccination, although the
appropriate interval and efficacy are unknown.
3Consult the prescribing information for differences in dosing for hemodialysis and other immunocompromised patients.
4If potential for Japanese encephalitis virus exposure continues.
5If an infant is receiving the vaccine before travel, two doses may be administered as early as 8 wk apart.
6People with HIV, anatomic or functional asplenia, and persistent complement component deficiencies (C3, C5-­9, properdin, factor D, and factor H or people taking
eculizumab [Soliris]) should receive a two-­dose primary series 8-­12 wk apart.
7Revaccination with meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MenACWY-­D or MenACWY-­CRM) is recommended after 3 yr for children who received their last dose at <7 yr of age.
Revaccination with meningococcal conjugate vaccine is recommended after 5 yr for people who received their last dose at ≥7 yr of age and every 5 yr thereafter for people who are
at continued risk.
8Must be kept refrigerated at 35.6°F to 46.4°F (2°C to 8°C); administer with cool liquid no warmer than 98.6°F (37°C).
9Ages 6-­8 mo and ≥60 yr are precautions and age <6 mo is a contraindication to the use of yellow fever vaccine.
10YF Vax is available in single-­dose and multiple-­dose (five-­dose) vials.
11For full details regarding revaccination, see https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/yellow-­book-­resources.
ACIP, Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices; ELU, ELISA units of inactivated HAV; HAV, hepatitis A virus; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; IM, intramuscular; U, units
HAV antigen; SC, subcutaneous.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). International travel with infants and children: Yellow Book 2024. Atlanta: CDC, 2024. https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/
travel/yellowbook

travel to high-­risk regions, especially expatriate children and younger
children traveling to or living in rural areas where enzootic dog rabies
is endemic. Rabies preexposure vaccination should also be considered
for adventure travelers (e.g., hikers, bikers), individuals likely to come
into contact with rabies vectors (e.g., students working with animal
or bat conservation), or travelers with itineraries to rabies-­endemic
regions where timely, effective postexposure prophylaxis might not
be available after an animal bite. Most animal bites in a rabies-­endemic
area should be considered a medical emergency, especially bites from
stray dogs, other carnivores, and bats. Immediate and copious wound
irrigation should be followed by prompt administration of appropriate postexposure rabies prophylaxis at a medical facility. Postexposure
prophylaxis is required even for persons who received preexposure
vaccination. Algorithms for preexposure and postexposure vaccination
are the same regardless of patient age.
Numerous rabies vaccine formulations exist around the world. In
the United States, two rabies vaccines are available: human diploid
cell vaccine (HDCV; Imovax, Sanofi Pasteur, SA) and purified chick
embryo cell vaccine (PCEC; RabAvert, Novartis). Preexposure prophylaxis is given intramuscularly (HDCV or PCEC) as two doses (1 mL)
on days 0 and 7. For previously unvaccinated individuals, postexposure

prophylaxis is given as four doses (1 mL) of HDCV or PCEC vaccine
intramuscularly on days 0, 3, 7, and 14. A fifth dose is recommended
at day 28 for immunocompromised individuals. For previously vaccinated individuals, only two doses (1 mL) intramuscularly on days
0 and 3 are recommended. Previously unvaccinated persons should
also receive rabies immunoglobulin (RIG, 20 IU/kg), with as much
of the dose as possible infiltrated around the wound site at the time
of initial postexposure prophylaxis. Previously vaccinated persons do
not require RIG. Unpurified or purified equine RIG preparations are
still used in some low-­and middle-­income countries and are associated with a higher risk for severe reactions, including serum sickness
and anaphylaxis. Purified cell culture–derived vaccines also are not
always available abroad; travelers should be aware that any rabies vaccines derived from neural tissue carry an increased risk for adverse
reactions, often with neurologic sequelae. If rabies prophylaxis is
initiated abroad, neutralizing titers should be checked on return and
immunization completed with a cell culture–derived vaccine. If rabies
prophylaxis cannot be provided abroad, children with high-­risk bites
(e.g., stray dog) should be emergently transported to a site where they
can receive prophylaxis, because the vaccinations should be started as
soon as possible after the bite and ideally within 24 hours. Infants and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1632 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
young children respond well to rabies vaccine, and both preexposure
and postexposure vaccinations can be given at any age, using the same
dose and schedule as adults. Individual travelers simultaneously receiving mefloquine or chloroquine may have limited immune reactions to
intradermal (ID) rabies vaccine and should be vaccinated intramuscularly. The ID administration route is not currently recommended in the
United States.

Tuberculosis

The risk for tuberculosis in the typical traveler is low. Pretravel and
posttravel testing for tuberculosis is controversial and should be done
on an individualized basis depending on the itinerary, duration, and
activities (e.g., working in a hospital setting). Immunization with bacille Calmette-­Guérin (BCG) is even more controversial. BCG vaccine
has variable efficacy in reducing severe tuberculosis disease in infants
and young children, is not available in the United States, and is generally not recommended for pediatric travelers. However, parents traveling with young children who plan to reside in countries with high
endemic rates of tuberculosis may consider vaccination once in country to prevent disseminated disease. Infection with Mycobacterium
bovis can be prevented through avoiding consumption of unpasteurized dairy products.

Typhoid

Salmonella Typhi infection, or typhoid fever, is common in many low-­
and middle-­income countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America (see
Chapter 244). Typhoid vaccination is recommended for most children
≥2 years old who are traveling to the Indian subcontinent because the
incidence of typhoid is 10-­100 times higher for travelers to the Indian
subcontinent than all other travel destinations. Vaccination should
be strongly considered for other travelers to low-­and middle-­income
countries, particularly if they are VFR travelers, lack access to reliable
clean water and food, are traveling for a prolonged duration, or are
adventurous eaters.
Two typhoid vaccines, the intramuscular (IM) Vi-­polysaccharide
vaccine and the oral Ty21a strain live-­attenuated vaccine, are recommended for use in children in the United States. Both produce a
protective response in 50–80% of recipients. The Ty21a vaccine may
offer partial protection against Salmonella Paratyphi, another cause of
enteric fever. Travelers who have had prior diagnoses of typhoid fever
should still receive vaccination because past infection does not confer
long-­term immunity.
The IM Vi-­polysaccharide vaccine is licensed for use in children
≥2 years old. It can be given any time before departure, but it should
ideally be administered 2 weeks before travel, with a booster needed
2-­3 years later. The oral Ty21a vaccine can only be used in children
≥6 years old and is given in four doses over 1 week. Enteric-­coated
capsules are to be swallowed with a cool or room-­temperature drink,
at least 1 hour before a meal, every other day until the four doses are
completed. Oral typhoid capsules must remain refrigerated (not frozen). Capsules should never be broken open, because vaccine efficacy
depends on capsules being swallowed whole in order to pass through
the acidic stomach contents. The oral vaccine is associated with an
immune response lasting 5-­7 years (depending on national labeling).
Antibiotics inhibit the immune response to the oral Ty21a vaccine;
the vaccine should not be given within 72 hours of antibiotic treatment, and antibiotics should be avoided until 7 days after completing
the vaccine series. Studies demonstrate that mefloquine, chloroquine,
and atovaquone-­proguanil can be given concurrently with the oral
Ty21a vaccine without affecting the immunogenicity of the vaccine.
Oral Ty21a vaccine should not be given to immunocompromised
children; these children should receive the IM Vi-­polysaccharide
vaccine.

Yellow Fever

Yellow fever (see Chapter 316) is a mosquito-­borne viral illness resembling other viral hemorrhagic fevers (see Chapter 317) but with more
prominent hepatic involvement. Yellow fever is present in tropical
areas of South America and Africa.

Yellow fever vaccination is indicated in children >9 months old traveling to an endemic area. Many countries require yellow fever vaccination by law for travelers arriving from endemic areas, and some African
countries require evidence of vaccination from all entering travelers.
Current recommendations can be obtained by contacting state or local
health departments or the Division of Vector-­Borne Infectious Diseases of the CDC (800-­232-­4636; https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellow
book/2024/infections-­diseases/yellow-­fever.
Most countries accept a medical waiver for children who are too
young to be vaccinated (i.e., <6 months of age) and for persons with
a contraindication to vaccination. Children with asymptomatic HIV
infection may be vaccinated if exposure to yellow fever virus (YFV)
cannot be avoided.
Yellow fever vaccine (0.5 mL subcutaneously), a live-­attenuated
vaccine (17D strain) developed in chick embryos, is safe and highly
effective in children >9 months old, but in young infants is associated
with a greatly increased risk for vaccine-­associated encephalitis (0.5-­
4/1,000) and other severe reactions. Yellow fever vaccine should never
be given to infants <6 months old; infants 6-­8 months old should be
vaccinated only in consultation with the CDC or a travel medicine
expert to assess the current epidemiology, travel itinerary and duration, and whether the risk of YFV exposure is greater than vaccine
risks. In children >9 months old, adverse effects are rare, although
vaccine-­associated neurotropic and viscerotropic disease associated
with the vaccine has been reported. The risk of these reactions is
higher in those with thymic disease, altered immune status, multiple
sclerosis, or age <9 months (neurotropic disease) or >60 years. Yellow
fever vaccination is generally contraindicated in pregnancy and for
nursing mothers, unless extended travel to a yellow fever–endemic
area is unavoidable.
Children with immunodeficiency or an immunosuppressed state, a
thymic disorder or dysfunction (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome), or a history of anaphylactic reactions to eggs should not receive yellow fever
vaccine. Long-­lived immunity develops with this vaccine, perhaps even
lasting for a lifetime. Effective July 2016, the WHO and countries following international health regulations no longer require revaccination
every 10 years (i.e., a single lifetime dose is now accepted); however,
individuals traveling to high-­risk areas with active yellow fever transmission and who anticipate frequent or prolonged stays should still
consider being reimmunized every 10 years.

TRAVELER’S DIARRHEA

Ingestion of contaminated food or water makes travel-­associated diarrhea the most common health complaint among international travelers. Traveler’s diarrhea, characterized by a twofold or greater increase
in the frequency of unformed bowel movements, occurs in as many as
40% of all travelers overseas (see Chapter 387.1). Children, especially
those <3 years old, have a higher incidence of diarrhea, more severe
symptoms, and more prolonged symptoms than adults, with a reported
attack rate of 60% for those <3 years old in one study.
An important risk factor for traveler’s diarrhea is the country of
destination. High-­risk areas (attack rates of 25–50%) include low-­and
middle-­income countries of Latin America, Africa, the Middle East,
and Asia. Intermediate risk occurs in Mediterranean countries, China,
and Israel. Low-­risk areas include North America, Northern Europe,
Australia, and New Zealand. Fecal-­oral diarrheal pathogens that children acquire during travel are similar to those acquired by adults and
include enterotoxigenic and enteroaggregative Escherichia coli, Campylobacter, Salmonella (nontyphoidal serotypes predominate), and Shigella spp. Enteric protozoa are a much less common cause of traveler’s
diarrhea than bacterial pathogens; Giardia lamblia is the most likely
protozoal cause of persistent diarrhea. Less common travel-­associated
protozoa include Cryptosporidium spp., Entamoeba histolytica, and
Cyclospora. Viral infections, particularly rotavirus and norovirus infections, may also cause travel-­associated diarrhea in children. Clinicians
should be aware that not all diarrheal illness in children is food-­borne
or water-­borne; for example, febrile children with malaria may also
present with vomiting and/or nonbloody diarrhea and may be misdiagnosed as having traveler’s diarrhea.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 218 u Health Advice for Children Traveling Internationally
Guidance on Prevention of Traveler’s Diarrhea

Food and water hygiene remain important measures to reduce the incidence of traveler’s diarrhea in children. However, creating long lists of
foods to avoid or offering the popular, simple advice of “Boil it, peel
it, cook it, or forget it!” is generally an ineffective method of reducing
traveler’s diarrhea. Most studies show that these types of dietary directives are difficult to keep and may have little impact on the incidence
of traveler’s diarrhea. In adult studies, the risk of developing traveler’s
diarrhea appears to be more associated with where a person eats rather
than what they eat. Eating in a relative’s or friend’s home is generally
safer than eating in a restaurant, where restaurant kitchen hygiene and
proper refrigeration may be lacking and employee handwashing may
be sporadic.
In general, travel medicine providers can give some commonsense
food and water advice to family travelers. Boiled or bottled water,
hot beverages, and canned or bottled beverages are generally safe to
consume. Ice should be avoided. In low-­and middle-­income countries, tap water is generally unsafe for drinking or brushing teeth.
Boiling water for ≥1 minute (or 3 minutes at altitudes >2,000 meters)
remains a reliable method of disinfecting water. Food that is thoroughly cooked and served hot is almost always safe to eat. Dry foods,
such as pastry items, breads, and cookies, are generally safe to eat.
Unpasteurized milk or other dairy products (cheese) should always
be avoided. Breastfeeding should be encouraged for young children,
especially infants <6 months old, to reduce exposure to contaminated
water or formula. All children should be reminded to wash their
hands before eating and after playing around soil or animals. Chemoprophylactic agents for traveler’s diarrhea are not recommended
for children.

Management of Traveler’s Diarrhea

Dehydration is the greatest threat presented by a diarrheal illness in a
small child. Parents should be made aware of the symptoms and signs
of dehydration and given instructions on how to prepare and administer rehydration solutions. Prepackaged WHO oral rehydration solution packets, which are available at stores or pharmacies in almost all
low-­and middle-­income countries, should be part of a child’s travel kit.
Oral rehydration solution should be mixed as directed with bottled or
boiled water and given slowly, as tolerated, to the child while symptoms
persist.
Antimotility agents such as diphenoxylate (Lomotil) and loperamide (Imodium) should be avoided in infants and young children.
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) does not recommend
their routine use in acute gastroenteritis. Use of antimotility agents
may be beneficial in older children and adolescents with afebrile,
nonbloody traveler’s diarrhea. In general, antimotility agents should
not distract parents from giving frequent oral rehydration solution, because ongoing intestinal fluid losses likely continue despite
a decrease in stooling. Bismuth subsalicylate for acute gastroenteritis
should be avoided because of concern for toxicity and Reye syndrome.

Presumptive Antibiotic Treatment

Oral rehydration is the mainstay of treatment for pediatric traveler’s
diarrhea. However, antibiotics should be prescribed for the pediatric
traveler, with parental instructions to start presumptive treatment early
in the diarrheal illness (Tables 218.3 and 218.4). Systemic antibiotics
can shorten the duration and severity of diarrheal illness, especially
if presumptive antibiotics are initiated immediately after the onset of
traveler’s diarrhea. For children, the drug of choice is azithromycin
(10 mg/kg once daily for up to 3 days, with a maximum daily dose
of 500 mg). Ciprofloxacin (10 mg/kg per dose twice daily for up to 3
days, maximum dose of 500 mg twice daily) is an alternative but should
not be prescribed for travelers to the Indian subcontinent or Southeast
Asia, where fluoroquinolone resistance is common. Shiga toxin–producing E. coli, such as E. coli O157:H7, is an extremely uncommon
cause of pediatric traveler’s diarrhea in nonindustrialized countries,
and the benefit of presumptive antibiotic therapy in traveling children, even with bloody diarrhea, typically outweighs the low risk of
developing hemolytic-­uremic syndrome. Parents need to be aware that

1633

Table 218.3  Traveler’s Diarrhea Empiric Treatment
Recommendations
Therapy of mild traveler’s diarrhea: diarrhea that is tolerable, is not
distressing, and does not interfere with planned activities.
• Antibiotic treatment is not recommended in patients with mild
traveler’s diarrhea.
• Loperamide or BSS may be considered in the treatment of mild
traveler’s diarrhea in older children.
Therapy of moderate traveler’s diarrhea: diarrhea that is distressing
or interferes with planned activities.
• Antibiotics may be used to treat cases of moderate traveler’s diarrhea.
• Fluoroquinolones may be used to treat moderate traveler’s
diarrhea depending on resistance patterns of country or region.
• Azithromycin may be used to treat moderate traveler’s diarrhea.
• Rifaximin may be used to treat moderate, noninvasive traveler’s
diarrhea.
• Loperamide may be used as adjunctive therapy for moderate
to severe traveler’s diarrhea. Antimotility agents alone are not
recommended for patients with bloody diarrhea or those who
have diarrhea and fever.
• Loperamide may be considered for use as monotherapy in
moderate traveler’s diarrhea in older children.
Therapy of severe traveler’s diarrhea: diarrhea that is incapacitating
or completely prevents planned activities: all dysentery is
considered severe.
• Antibiotics should be used to treat severe traveler’s diarrhea.
• Azithromycin is preferred to treat severe traveler’s diarrhea.
• Fluoroquinolones may be used to treat severe, nondysenteric
traveler’s diarrhea depending on resistance patterns of country or
region.
• Rifaximin may be used to treat severe, nondysenteric traveler’s
diarrhea.*
• Single-­dose antibiotic regimens may be used to treat traveler’s
diarrhea.
*These treatment recommendations were developed before the approval of rifamycin
SV in the United States. Because it is in the same category of antimicrobial drug as
rifaximin and because they have the same mechanism of action, rifamycin SV can be
considered as an alternative to rifaximin.
Modified from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). International
travel with infants and children: Yellow Book 2024. Atlanta: CDC, 2020. Box 2-­04 and
Table 2-­10. https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2024/preparing/travelers-­
diarrhea#treatment

the use of antibiotics for the treatment of traveler’s diarrhea has been
associated with colonization with highly resistant organisms such as
extended-­spectrum β-­lactamase–producing Enterobacteriaceae. These
organisms could later cause infections once back home.
Azithromycin is highly effective against most bacterial pathogens
that cause traveler’s diarrhea and is the preferred antibiotic among
many travel experts. Azithromycin can be prescribed in powder form
that can be reconstituted with safe water into a liquid suspension when
needed. Amoxicillin, trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (cotrimoxazole), and erythromycin should not be prescribed for self-­treatment of
traveler’s diarrhea, because of widespread resistance among diarrheal
pathogens. Traveler’s diarrhea that results in bloody stools, persistently
high fevers, systemic chills and rigors, severe or localizing abdominal pain, or continued fluid losses should prompt additional medical
evaluation.

INSECT-­BORNE INFECTIONS

Insect-­borne infections for which traveling children are most at risk
include malaria, dengue, chikungunya, yellow fever, Zika, and Japanese
encephalitis, depending on the area of travel. Malaria is transmitted by
nighttime biting Anopheles mosquitoes, whereas dengue occurs from
mosquito species (Culex, Aedes) that are predominantly active during
the day. Families should be encouraged to protect children against daytime and nighttime biting mosquitoes, because many regions of the
world where malaria is found also have diseases transmitted by daytime

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1634 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 218.4  Acute Diarrhea Adult Antibiotic Treatment Recommendations*
ANTIBIOTIC*

DOSE

DURATION

Azithromycin†,‡

1,000 mg

Single or divided dose§

500 mg daily

3 days

Levofloxacin

500 mg daily

1-­3 days§

Ciprofloxacin

750 mg

Single dose§

500 mg bid

3 days

Ofloxacin

400 mg bid

1-­3 days§

Rifamycin SV||

388 mg bid

3 days

Rifaximin||

200 mg tid

3 days

*See also Chapter 387.1. Lower weight-based dosing should be used where appropriate.
*Antibiotic regimens may be combined with loperamide 4 mg initially followed by 2 mg after each loose stool, not to exceed 16 mg in a 24-­hr period. This is the adult dose of
loperamide, which might be appropriate for older children and adolescents, but antimotility agents are generally not recommended for younger children, and if they are used then
lower doses may be more appropriate.
†Use empirically as first-­line in Southeast Asia or other areas if fluoroquinolone-­resistant bacteria are suspected.
‡Preferred regimen for dysentery or febrile diarrhea.
§If symptoms are not resolved after 24 hr, continue daily dosing for up to 3 days.
||Do not use if clinical suspicion for Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, or other causes of invasive diarrhea. Use may be reserved for patients unable to receive fluoroquinolones or
azithromycin.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). International travel with infants and children: Yellow Book 2024. Atlanta: CDC, 2024. Table 2-­09. https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/
yellowbook/2024/preparing/travelers-­diarrhea#table 209

biting mosquitoes (dengue, Zika, chikungunya). Zika can also be sexually transmitted, so sexually active adolescents and young adults need
to be advised on these additional risks when traveling to Zika-­endemic
regions. In addition to insect bite prevention using insect repellents,
methods of contraception should be discussed with the traveler. Ticks,
fleas, lice, and other arthropods are also known to transmit rickettsial,
borrelial, and parasitic pathogens, but transmission can be prevented
by close attention to measures to mitigate exposures that are appropriate when outdoors, close inspection for ticks once returning indoors,
and use of insect repellents on skin and clothing with products containing DEET and permethrin, respectively.
Exposure to insect bites can be reduced by wearing appropriate
attire and using insect repellents containing N,N-­diethyl-­m-­toluamide
(DEET) or picaridin. The AAP recommends avoiding DEET-­
containing repellents in children <2 months old. Rare cases of neurologic events have been reported in very young children with exposure
to inappropriate, frequent applications of DEET-­containing repellents
(>10 times/day) or who licked off DEET. Concentrations of 25–30%
DEET need be applied every 4-­6 hours, as needed, whereas 5–7%
DEET provides only 1-­2 hours of protection time. DEET concentrations >40–50% do not confer a substantially longer protection time for
children and are not recommended.
Picaridin is fragrance-­free, effective, and generally well tolerated on
exposed skin and faces. It has similar efficacy to DEET but with less
inhalational or dermal irritation. Picaridin at concentrations of 20%
or higher provides adequate protection against Anopheles mosquitoes
that have potential to transmit malaria. When applying sunscreen and
insect repellent, sunscreen should be applied first, followed by DEET
or picaridin.
Spraying or treating clothing with permethrin, a synthetic pyrethroid, is a safe and effective method of further reducing insect bites
in children. Permethrin can be applied directly to clothing, bed nets,
shoes, and hats and should be allowed to dry fully before use. As an
insecticide, permethrin should never be applied to skin. Permethrin-­
treated garments retain both repellency and insecticidal activity, even
with repeated laundering. Clothing will eventually need to be retreated
to maintain repellency, according to the product label. Bed nets, particularly permethrin-­impregnated bed nets, also decrease the risk of
insect bites, and their use is highly recommended in malarial areas.

MALARIA CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS

Malaria, a mosquito-­borne infection, is the leading parasitic cause of
death in children worldwide (see Chapter 334). Of the five Plasmodium

species that infect humans, Plasmodium falciparum causes the greatest
morbidity and mortality. Each year, >8 million U.S. citizens visit parts of
the world where malaria is endemic (sub-­Saharan Africa, Central and
South America, India, Southeast Asia, Oceania). Children accounted
for 15–20% of imported malaria cases in a WHO study in Europe.
Given travel of young children with their families to endemic countries, physicians in industrialized countries are increasingly required
to give advice on prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of malaria. Risk
factors for severe malaria and death include inadequate adherence
to chemoprophylaxis, delay in seeking diagnosis and medical care,
and nonimmune status, but the case-­fatality rate of imported malaria
remains <1% in children from nonendemic countries. The CDC maintains updated information at https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellow
book/2024/infections-diseases/malaria, as well as a malaria hotline for physicians (770-­488-­7788). It is important to check this
updated information, because recommendations for prophylaxis
and treatment are often modified as a result of changes in the risk
for developing malaria in different areas of the world, changing Plasmodium resistance patterns, and the availability of new antimalarial
medications.
Avoidance of mosquitoes and barrier protection from mosquitoes
are an important part of malaria prevention for travelers to endemic
areas. The Anopheles mosquito feeds from dusk to dawn. Travelers
should remain in well-­screened areas, wear clothing that covers most
of the body, sleep under a bed net (ideally impregnated with permethrin), and use insect repellents with DEET during these hours.
Parents should be discouraged from taking a young child on a trip
that will entail evening or nighttime exposure in areas endemic for
P. falciparum.
Chemoprophylaxis is the cornerstone of malaria prevention for
nonimmune children and adults who travel to malaria-­endemic areas
but is not a replacement for other protective measures. Travelers often
do not take malaria prophylaxis as prescribed or at all. They are more
likely to use prophylactic antimalarial drugs if their physicians provide appropriate recommendations and education before departure.
However, in one survey, only 14% of persons who sought medical
advice obtained correct information about malaria prevention and
prophylaxis. Families with children visiting friends and relatives are
particularly less likely to take malaria prophylaxis or seek pretravel
medical advice.
Resistance of P. falciparum to the traditional chemoprophylactic
agent, chloroquine, is widespread, and in most areas of the world other
agents must be used (Table 218.5). Factors that must be considered

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 218 u Health Advice for Children Traveling Internationally

1635

Table 218.5  Antimalarial Chemoprophylaxis for Children
AREA

DRUG

ADULT DOSE

Chloroquine-­
resistant area

Mefloquine*,†

250 mg salt (228 mg Weight <10 kg: 5 mg
base) tablets
salt (4.6 mg base)/
One tablet weekly
kg/week

PEDIATRIC DOSE

ADVANTAGES

DISADVANTAGES COMMENTS

Once-­weekly
dosing

Bitter taste
Children going to
No pediatric
malaria-­endemic
formulation
area for ≥4 wk
Side effects
Children unlikely
of sleep
to take daily
disturbance, vivid
medication
dreams

Weight 10-­19 kg: ¼
tablet/week
Weight 20-­30 kg: ½
tablet/week
Weight 31-­45 kg: ¾
tablet/week
Weight >45 kg: 1
tablet/week
Doxycycline‡

100 mg tablet
One tablet daily

2.2 mg/kg daily (max: Known safety
Prolonged (>21
100 mg)
profile
days) courses
Readily available
should not be
in most
given to children
pharmacies
<8 yr old
Daily dosing
Must take with
food or causes
stomach upset
Photosensitivity
Yeast
superinfections

Atovaquone-­
proguanil§
(Malarone)

250/100 adult
tablet
One tablet daily

Pediatric tablet:
62.5 mg
atovaquone/25 mg
proguanil
Weight 5-­8 kg: ½
pediatric tablet
once daily

Pediatric tablet
formulation
available
Generally well
tolerated

Children ≥8 yr old
going to area
for <4 wk who
cannot take or
cannot obtain
atovaquone-­
proguanil

Daily dosing
Children going to
Expensive
malaria-­endemic
Can cause stomach
area for <4 wk
upset

Weight >8-­10 kg: ¾
pediatric tablet
once daily
Weight >10-­20 kg:
1 pediatric tablet
once daily
Weight >20-­30 kg:
2 pediatric tablets
once daily
Weight >30-­40 kg:
3 pediatric tablets
once daily
Weight >40 kg: 1
adult tablet once
daily
Chloroquine-­
susceptible
area

Chloroquine
phosphate

500 mg salt (300 mg 8.3 mg/kg salt (5 mg/ Once-­weekly
base)
kg base) weekly, up
dosing
One tablet weekly
to maximum adult Generally well
dose of 500 mg salt
tolerated
Safe in
pregnancy

Hydroxychloroquine 400 mg of salt (310
mg of base)

6.5 mg/kg of salt (5
mg/kg of base)
once weekly, up
to maximum adult
dose of 400 mg
of salt

Bitter taste
No pediatric
formulation

Safe in
pregnancy

Best medication
for children
traveling to areas
with Plasmodium
falciparum or
P. vivax that is
chloroquine
susceptible
Alternative when
chloroquine is
unavailable for
travelers to areas
with P. falciparum
or P. vivax that
is chloroquine
susceptible
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1636 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 218.5  Antimalarial Chemoprophylaxis for Children—cont’d
AREA

DRUG

ADULT DOSE

ADVANTAGES

DISADVANTAGES COMMENTS

Terminal
prophylaxis
(antirelapse
therapy)
for regions
predominantly
with P. vivax
and P. ovale.

Primaquine

26.3 mg salt (15
0.8 mg/kg of salt
mg base) tablets;
form (0.5 mg/kg of
2 tablets once
base) once daily
daily for 14 days
for 14 days after
after departure
departure from
from malarious
malarious area
area.

PEDIATRIC DOSE

Reduce risk for
relapses by P.
vivax and P.
ovale.

May cause
hemolysis in
persons with
glucose-­6-­
phosphate
dehydrogenase
(G6PD)
deficiency.
Contraindicated in
pregnancy and
breastfeeding
mothers.

Must confirm G6PD
sufficiency before
administration.

Short-­term
prophylaxis for
regions with
predominantly
Plasmodium
vivax

Primaquine

26.3 mg salt
0.8 mg/kg of salt
(15 mg base)
form (0.5 mg/kg of
tablets; 2 tablets.
base). Begin 1-­2
Begin 1-­2 days
days before travel
before travel to
to malarious areas,
malarious areas,
continue for 7 days
continue for 7
after leaving area.
days after leaving
area.

Reduce risk for
relapses by P.
vivax.

May cause
hemolysis in
persons with
G6PD deficiency.
Contraindicated in
pregnancy and
breastfeeding
mothers.

Must confirm G6PD
sufficiency before
administration.

Terminal
prophylaxis
(antirelapse
therapy)
for regions
predominantly
with P. vivax

Tafenoquine
(Krintafel)

150 mg tablets;
≥16 yr: 2 tablets,
single dose

Not recommended

Single dose

May cause
hemolysis in
persons with
G6PD deficiency.
Contraindicated in
pregnancy and
breastfeeding
mothers.

Must confirm G6PD
sufficiency before
administration.

Prophylaxis
against all
Plasmodium
spp.

Tafenoquine
(Arakoda)

100 mg tablets;
≥18 yr: 2 tablets,
daily for 3 days
before travel.
Weekly during
travel (starting
1 wk after last
pretravel dose).
Once 1 wk after
travel

Not recommended

Effective against May cause
all Plasmodium
hemolysis in
spp.
persons with
G6PD deficiency.
Contraindicated in
pregnancy and
breastfeeding
mothers.

Must confirm G6PD
sufficiency before
administration.

*Chloroquine and mefloquine should be started 1-­2 wk before departure and continued for 4 wk after last exposure.
†Mefloquine resistance exists in western Cambodia and along the Thailand-­Cambodia and Thailand-­Myanmar borders. Travelers to these areas should take doxycycline or
atovaquone-­proguanil. See text for precautions about mefloquine use.
‡Doxycycline should be started 1-­2 days before departure and continued for 4 wk after last exposure. Do not use in children <8 yr old or in pregnant women.
§Atovaquone-­proguanil (Malarone) should be started 1-­2 days before departure and continued for 7 days after last exposure; should be taken with food or a milky drink. Not
recommended in pregnant women, children who weigh <5 kg, and women breastfeeding infants who weigh <5 kg. Contraindicated in individuals with severe renal impairment
(creatinine clearance <30 mL/min).
Drugs used for chloroquine-­resistant areas can also be used in chloroquine-­susceptible areas.

in choosing appropriate chemoprophylaxis medications and dosing
schedules include age of the child, travel itinerary (including whether
the child will be traveling to areas of risk within a particular country
and whether chloroquine-­resistant P. falciparum is present in the country), vaccinations being given, allergies or other known adverse reactions to antimalarial agents, and the availability of medical care during
travel.
Children traveling to areas with chloroquine-­resistant P. falciparum can be given mefloquine, atovaquone-­proguanil, or doxycycline (if >8 years old) as malaria prophylaxis. For trips shorter
than 4 weeks, atovaquone-­proguanil is the preferred medication,
because it is given for only a short period before and after travel.
Atovaquone-­proguanil or doxycycline is also preferred for travel
of any duration to western Cambodia and the Thailand-­Cambodia
and Thailand-­Myanmar borders because of mefloquine resistance

in these areas. For periods of travel >4 weeks to all other areas with
chloroquine-­resistant P. falciparum, mefloquine is the preferred
medication because it can be taken weekly.
Mefloquine is FDA approved only for children weighing >15 kg,
but the CDC recommends mefloquine prophylaxis for all children
regardless of weight because the risk for acquiring severe malaria
outweighs the risk for potential mefloquine toxicity. Adults taking
mefloquine prophylaxis have a 10–25% incidence of sleep disturbance and dysphoria and, less frequently, more serious neuropsychiatric symptoms. These side effects appear to be less common in
children. Other potential side effects of mefloquine therapy include
nausea and vomiting.
The lack of a liquid or suspension formulation for all antimalarial
agents can make administration difficult. For children who cannot take
tablets, parents should take a chloroquine or mefloquine prescription

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 218 u Health Advice for Children Traveling Internationally
to a compounding pharmacy, which can pulverize the tablets and place
exact dosages into gel capsules. Parents can then open the gel capsules
and sprinkle the powder into food. Disguising these medications,
which have a bitter taste, is important; chocolate syrup has been used
successfully as a vehicle for the medication. Persons with depression,
neuropsychiatric disorders, seizure disorders, or cardiac conduction
defects should not take mefloquine.
Atovaquone-­proguanil fixed combination (Malarone) is an effective and safe chemoprophylaxis for travelers to chloroquine-­
resistant malaria-­endemic areas. Adverse effects are infrequent
and mild (abdominal pain, vomiting, and headache) and infrequently result in discontinuation of the medication. Atovaquone-­
proguanil prophylaxis must be taken every day with food, so it
is better suited for prophylaxis during short periods of exposure.
Recent data allow dosing down to 5 kg body weight, although the
use of atovaquone-­proguanil in children weighing 5-­10 kg is considered off-­l abel.
Daily doxycycline is an alternative chemoprophylaxis regimen for
chloroquine-­resistant P. falciparum malaria. Doxycycline has been
used extensively and is highly effective. Use in children <8 years old
should be avoided, as courses >21 days are usually required and safety
data are limited in this age-­group. Adverse effects (nausea, vomiting, photosensitivity, vaginal candidiasis) are relatively uncommon.
Persons given doxycycline prophylaxis should be warned to decrease
exposure to direct sunlight, wear protective clothing (long sleeves
and brimmed hat), and use sunscreen to minimize the possibility of
photosensitivity.
Primaquine has also been used successfully as chemoprophylaxis, especially in areas of high prevalence of Plasmodium vivax
and Plasmodium ovale, but there are limited data about its use in
nonimmune children. Primaquine prophylaxis for children should
only be given in consultation with the CDC or a travel medicine
specialist.
Chloroquine, chloroquine-­
proguanil, and azithromycin do not
provide adequate protection for children traveling to a chloroquine-­
resistant malaria-­endemic area.
In areas of the world where P. falciparum remains fully chloroquine-­
sensitive (Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Central America west of the
Panama Canal, and some countries in the Middle East), weekly chloroquine is the drug of choice for malaria chemoprophylaxis. Updated
information on chloroquine susceptibility and recommended malaria
prophylaxis is available at https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2
024/infections-­diseases/malaria.

1637

On leaving an area endemic for P. vivax or P. ovale after a prolonged visit (usually >3 months), travelers should consider terminal
prophylaxis with primaquine (0.5 mg/kg base) daily, up to a maximum dose of 30 mg base or 52.6 mg salt, for 14 days, to eliminate
extraerythrocytic forms of P. vivax and P. ovale and prevent relapses.
Screening for glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is mandatory before primaquine treatment, because primaquine is contraindicated in G6PD-­deficient persons because it can
cause severe hemolysis.
Small amounts of antimalarial drugs are secreted into breast milk.
The amounts of transferred drug are not considered to be either harmful or sufficient to provide adequate prophylaxis against malaria.
Prolonged infant exposure to doxycycline through breast milk is not
advisable.
Self-­treatment of presumptive malaria during travel remains controversial. It should never be substituted for seeking appropriate medical care, but it can be considered in special circumstances such as travel
to remote areas, intolerance of prophylaxis, or refusal of chemoprophylaxis by the traveler. Self-­treatment medication should be different
from the prescribed chemoprophylaxis. The CDC or a travel medicine
specialist should be consulted if self-­treatment medication is being
considered for a traveler.

THE RETURNING TRAVELER

Posttravel evaluations are part of travel medicine and continuing
care. Physicians unfamiliar with diseases that occur in low-­and
middle-­income countries often misdiagnose the cause of illness
in a child returning from travel abroad. Among returning patients
identified from the GeoSentinel Surveillance Network sites who
were ill, the most common disorders (in descending order of
frequency) included malaria, giardiasis, dengue fever, campylobacteriosis, cutaneous larva migrans, enteric fever, spotted fever
(rickettsiosis), chikungunya fever, hepatitis A, and influenza.
Returning pediatric travelers who are severely ill or with continued fevers should be seen in consultation with a pediatric travel
medicine or infectious diseases specialist. The cause of fever may
be suggested by the geographic area (Table 218.6) and incubation
period (Table 218.7).
Among all persons returning from travel (children and adults), three
major patterns of illness have been noted (Table 218.8). The etiology of
each of these disease presentations in part depends on the country or
geographic region visited (see Table 218.6). Table 218.9 provides suggestive clues to a diagnosis.

Table 218.6  Common Causes of Fever by Geographic Area
GEOGRAPHIC AREA

COMMON TROPICAL DISEASE-­CAUSING
FEVER

OTHER INFECTIONS CAUSING
OUTBREAKS OR CLUSTERS IN TRAVELERS

Caribbean

Chikungunya, dengue, malaria (Haiti), Zika

Acute histoplasmosis, leptospirosis

Central America

Chikungunya, dengue, malaria (primarily
Plasmodium vivax), Zika

Leptospirosis, histoplasmosis,
coccidioidomycosis

South America

Chikungunya, dengue, malaria (primarily
P. vivax), Zika

Bartonellosis, leptospirosis, enteric fever,
histoplasmosis

Southcentral Asia

Dengue, enteric fever, malaria (primarily non–
P. falciparum)

Chikungunya

Southeast Asia

Dengue, malaria (primarily non–P. falciparum)

Chikungunya, leptospirosis

Sub-­Saharan Africa

Malaria (primarily P. falciparum), tick-­borne
rickettsiae (main cause of fever in southern
Africa), acute schistosomiasis, dengue

https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2024/posttravel-­evaluation/general-­approach-­to-­the-­returned-­traveler
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). International travel with infants and children: Yellow Book 2024. Wilson ME. Post-­travel evaluation. Atlanta: CDC, 2024. Table
11-­09.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1638 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 218.7  Common Infections by Incubation Period
DISEASE

USUAL INCUBATION PERIOD (RANGE)

DISTRIBUTION

INCUBATION <14 DAYS
Chikungunya

2-­4 days (1-­14 days)

Tropics, subtropics

Dengue

4-­8 days (3-­14 days)

Topics, subtropics

Encephalitis, arboviral (Japanese encephalitis,
tick-­borne encephalitis, West Nile virus,
other)

3-­14 days (1-­20 days)

Specific agents vary by region

Enteric fever (typhoid/paratyphoid)

7-­18 days (3-­60 days)

Especially in Indian subcontinent

Acute HIV

10-­28 days (10 days to 6 weeks)

Worldwide

Influenza

1-­3 days

Worldwide, can also be acquired while
traveling

Legionellosis

5-­6 days (2-­10 days)

Widespread

Leptospirosis

7-­12 days (2-­26 days)

Widespread, most common in tropical areas

Malaria, Plasmodium falciparum

6-­30 days (98% onset within 3 mo of travel)

Tropics, subtropics

Malaria, Plasmodium vivax

8 days to 12 mo (almost half have onset >30
days after completion of travel)

Widespread in tropics and subtropics

Spotted-­fever rickettsiae

Few days to 2-­3 wk

Causative species vary by region

Zika virus infection

3-­14 days

Widespread in Latin America, endemic
through much of Africa, Southeast Asia, and
Pacific Islands

INCUBATION 14 DAYS TO 6 WEEKS
Encephalitis, arboviral; enteric fever; acute HIV; See above incubation periods for relevant
leptospirosis; malaria
diseases.

See above distribution for relevant diseases

Amebic liver abscess

Weeks to months

Most common in resource-­poor countries

Hepatitis A

28-­30 days (15-­50 days)

Most common in resource-­poor countries

Hepatitis E

26-­42 days (2-­9 wk)

Widespread

Acute schistosomiasis (Katayama syndrome)

4-­8 wk

Most common in sub-­Saharan Africa

INCUBATION >6 WK
Amebic liver abscess, hepatitis E, malaria,
acute schistosomiasis

See above incubation periods for relevant
diseases.

See above distribution for relevant diseases

Hepatitis B

90 days (60-­150 days)

Widespread

Leishmaniasis, visceral

2-­10 mo (10 days to years)

Asia, Africa, Latin America, Southern Europe,
and the Middle East

Tuberculosis

Primary, weeks; reactivation, years

Global distribution, rates, and levels of
resistance vary widely

https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2024/posttravel-­evaluation/general-­approach-­to-­the-­returned-­traveler
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). International travel with infants and children: Yellow Book 2024. Fairley JK. General approach to the returned traveler.
Atlanta: CDC, 2024. Table 11-­02.

Fever is a particularly worrisome symptom. Children with a
febrile/systemic illness after recent travel to a malarial destination
should be promptly evaluated for malaria, especially if having traveled to sub-­Sahara Africa and Papua New Guinea. P. falciparum
malaria will generally present within 1-­2 months after return from
travel to a malaria-­endemic area, but can occur within the first year
after return. In contrast, symptoms of P. vivax or P. ovale malaria are
typically later in onset after travel (i.e., several months), are milder
in disease severity, and may occur in a relapsing pattern if undiagnosed or improperly treated. Other symptoms of malaria can be
nonspecific and include chills, malaise, headache, myalgias, vomiting, diarrhea, cough, and possible seizures. Children are more likely
than adults to have higher fevers and also gastrointestinal symptoms, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and severe anemia. Thrombocytopenia (without increased bleeding) and fever in a child returning
from an endemic area are highly suggestive of malaria.

Thick and thin blood smears need to be performed for diagnosis if malaria is clinically suspected. If results are negative initially,
two or more additional smears should be done 12-­24 hours after
the initial smears. The diagnostic yield of blood smears may be
higher if obtained during a febrile episode. Rapid malaria antigen
tests (BinaxNOW Malaria) are also available, are FDA-­approved,
and are sensitive for diagnosing P. falciparum malaria. At times, a
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay is necessary to confirm the
malarial parasite species. Treatment should be initiated immediately once the diagnosis is confirmed or empirically if presentation
is severe with suspected malaria. Treatment should be determined
in consultation with a pediatric infectious disease specialist and/or
the CDC for updated information on the drugs of choice, which are
similar to those for adults (see Chapter 334). Great caution should
be used with young children, nonimmune patients, and pregnant
patients with P. falciparum malaria, and hospitalization of these

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 218 u Health Advice for Children Traveling Internationally

1639

Table 218.8  Patterns of Illness in Returning International
Travelers

Table 218.9  Common Clinical Findings and Associated
Infections

SYSTEMIC FEBRILE ILLNESS
Malaria
Dengue
Zika
Enteric fever (typhoid/paratyphoid)
Chikungunya virus
Spotted fever rickettsiae
Hepatitis A
Acute HIV
Leptospirosis
Measles
Infectious mononucleosis
Respiratory causes (pneumonia, influenza)
Undetermined fever source

COMMON CLINICAL
FINDINGS

INFECTIONS TO CONSIDER
AFTER TRAVEL

Fever and rash

Dengue, chikungunya, Zika,
rickettsial infections, enteric
fever (skin lesions may be
sparse or absent), acute HIV
infection, measles

Fever and abdominal pain

Enteric fever, amebic liver
abscess

Undifferentiated fever and
normal or low white blood cell
count

Dengue, malaria, rickettsial
infection, enteric fever,
chikungunya, Zika

ACUTE DIARRHEA
Campylobacter
Shigella spp.
Salmonella spp.
Diarrheagenic Escherichia coli (enterotoxigenic E. coli,
enteroadherent E. coli—not tested for by routine stool culture
methods)
Giardiasis (acute, persistent, or recurrent)
Entamoeba histolytica
Cryptosporidium spp.
Cyclospora cayetanensis
Presumed viral enteritis

Fever and hemorrhage

Viral hemorrhagic fevers (dengue
and others), meningococcemia,
leptospirosis, rickettsial
infections

Fever and arthralgia or myalgia,
sometimes persistent

Chikungunya, dengue, Zika

Fever and eosinophilia

Acute schistosomiasis, drug
hypersensitivity reaction,
fascioliasis and other parasitic
infections (rare)

Fever and pulmonary infiltrates

Common bacterial and viral
pathogens, legionellosis,
acute schistosomiasis, Q fever,
leptospirosis

Fever and altered mental status

Cerebral malaria, viral or
bacterial meningoencephalitis,
African trypanosomiasis, scrub
typhus

Mononucleosis syndrome

Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) infection,
cytomegalovirus (CMV)
infection, toxoplasmosis, acute
HIV infection

Fever persisting >2 wk

Malaria, enteric fever, EBV
infection, CMV infection,
toxoplasmosis, acute
HIV infection, acute
schistosomiasis, brucellosis,
tuberculosis, Q fever, visceral
leishmaniasis (rare)

Fever with onset >6 wk after
travel

Plasmodium vivax or P. ovale
malaria, acute hepatitis (B, C,
or E), tuberculosis, amebic liver
abscess

DERMATOLOGIC MANIFESTATIONS
Rash with fever (dengue)
Arthropod-­related dermatitis (insect bites)
Cutaneous larva migrans (Ancylostoma braziliense)
Bacterial skin infections—pyoderma, impetigo, ecthyma, erysipelas
Myiasis (tumbu and botfly)
Scabies
Tungiasis
Superficial mycosis
Animal bites
Leishmaniasis
Rickettsial diseases
Marine envenomation/dermatitis
Photoallergic dermatitis and phytophotodermatitis

patients should be strongly considered until reliable improvement
is observed.
Enteric (typhoid) fever should be considered in children with
persistent or recurrent fevers, especially after return from the
Indian subcontinent. Multiple blood cultures and a stool culture
may both be necessary for diagnosis of enteric fever. Dengue is
another cause of fever and systemic illness in ill travelers, particularly when returning from Southeast Asia, the Caribbean, Central
and South America, or the Indian subcontinent. Many bacterial
and protozoal causes of acute traveler’s diarrhea may also result
in fever and systemic symptoms in children. Additional travel-­
associated febrile, diarrheal, and dermatologic illnesses exist, of
which the most common etiologies can be found in Tables 218.8
and 218.9.

THE ADOLESCENT TRAVELER

The preparation of an adolescent interested in traveling abroad can
pose a challenge for most clinicians. Study abroad, gap year, humanitarian volunteer work, adventure, and tourism are among many reasons for travel to countries with limited resources. Although many
travel-­related problems discussed in this chapter are relevant to this
group, other high-­risk activities such as sexual intercourse, alcohol

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). International travel with
infants and children: Yellow Book 2024. Wilson ME. Post-­travel evaluation. Atlanta:
CDC, 2024. Table 11-­4. https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2024/posttravel-­
evaluation/general-­approach-­to-­the-­returned-­traveler.

consumption, driving, use of illicit drugs, and adventure travel (e.g.,
mountain climbing, white water rafting, kayaking, biking) require special attention and discussion with the traveler and parents/guardians.
Topics such as HIV exposure, sexually transmitted infections, sexual
assault, and unplanned pregnancy may require specific preventive
strategies such as condom use, contraception, and postexposure HIV
prophylaxis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1640 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 219

Fever
Linda S. Nield and Deepak Kamat
Fever is defined as a rectal temperature ≥38°C (100.4°F), and a fever
>40°C (104°F) is called hyperpyrexia. Traditionally, body temperature
fluctuates in a defined normal range (36.6–37.9°C [97.9–100.2°F] rectally), so that the highest point is reached in the early evening and the
lowest point is reached in the morning. Any abnormal rise in body
temperature should be considered a symptom and sign of an underlying condition.

PATHOGENESIS

Body temperature is regulated by thermosensitive neurons located in
the preoptic or anterior hypothalamus that respond to changes in blood
temperature, as well as by cold and warm receptors located in skin and
muscles. Thermoregulatory responses include redirecting blood to or
from cutaneous vascular beds, increased or decreased sweating, regulation of extracellular fluid (ECF) volume by arginine vasopressin, and
behavioral responses, such as seeking a warmer or cooler environmental temperature.
Three different mechanisms can produce fever: pyrogens, heat production exceeding heat loss, and defective heat loss. The first mechanism involves endogenous and exogenous pyrogens that raise the
hypothalamic temperature set point. Endogenous pyrogens include
the cytokines interleukin (IL)-­
1 and IL-­
6, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-­α, and interferon (IFN)-­β and IFN-­γ. Stimulated leukocytes
and other cells produce lipids that also serve as endogenous pyrogens.
The best-­studied lipid mediator is prostaglandin E2, which attaches to
the prostaglandin receptors in the hypothalamus to produce the new
temperature set point. Along with infectious diseases, drugs, malignancy, and inflammatory diseases can cause fever through the production of endogenous pyrogens. Some substances produced within
the body are not pyrogens but are capable of stimulating endogenous
pyrogens. Such substances include antigen-­antibody complexes in the
presence of complement components, lymphocyte products, bile acids,
and androgenic steroid metabolites. Exogenous pyrogens come from
outside the body and consist of mainly infectious pathogens and drugs.
Microbes, microbial toxins, or other products of microbes are the most
common exogenous pyrogens, which stimulate macrophages and other
cells to produce endogenous pyrogens. Endotoxin is one of the few
substances that can directly affect thermoregulation in the hypothalamus and stimulate endogenous pyrogen release. Many drugs cause
fever, and the mechanism for increasing body temperature varies with
the class of drug. Drugs that are known to cause fever include vancomycin, amphotericin B, and allopurinol.
Heat production exceeding heat loss is the second mechanism that
leads to fever; examples include salicylate poisoning and malignant
hyperthermia. Defective heat loss, the third mechanism, may occur in
children with ectodermal dysplasia or victims of severe heat exposure.

ETIOLOGY

The causes of fever can be organized into four main categories: infectious, inflammatory, neoplastic, and miscellaneous. Self-­limited viral
infections (common cold, influenza, gastroenteritis) and uncomplicated bacterial infections (otitis media, pharyngitis, sinusitis) are the
most common causes of acute fever. The body temperature rarely rises
above potentially lethal levels (42°C [107.6°F]) in the neurologically
intact child unless extreme hyperthermic environmental conditions
are present or other extenuating circumstances exist, such as underlying malignant hyperthermia or thyrotoxicosis.
The pattern of the fever can provide clues to the underlying etiology. Viral infections typically are associated with a slow decline of fever
over several days, whereas bacterial infections are often associated with

a prompt resolution of fever after effective antimicrobial treatment.
Although antimicrobials can result in rapid elimination of bacteria, if
tissue injury has been extensive, the inflammatory response and fever
can continue for days after all microbes have been eradicated.
Intermittent fever is an exaggerated circadian rhythm that includes
a period of normal temperatures on most days; extremely wide fluctuations may be termed septic or hectic fever. Sustained fever is
persistent and does not vary by >0.5°C (0.9°F)/day. Remittent fever
is persistent and varies by >0.5°C/day. Relapsing fever is characterized by febrile periods separated by intervals of normal temperature;
tertian fever occurs on the first and third days (malaria caused by Plasmodium vivax), and quartan fever occurs on the first and fourth days
(malaria caused by Plasmodium malariae). Diseases characterized by
relapsing fevers should be distinguished from infectious diseases that
tend to relapse (Table 219.1). Biphasic fever indicates a single illness
with two distinct periods (camelback fever pattern); poliomyelitis is
the classic example. A biphasic course is also characteristic of other
enteroviral infections, leptospirosis, dengue fever, yellow fever, Colorado tick fever, spirillary rat-­bite fever (caused by Spirillum minus), and
the African hemorrhagic fevers (Marburg, Ebola, and Lassa fevers). The
term periodic fever is used narrowly to describe fever syndromes with
a regular periodicity (cyclic neutropenia and periodic fever, aphthous
Table 219.1  Fevers Prone to Relapse
INFECTIOUS CAUSES
Acute rheumatic fever
Babesiosis
Blastomycosis
Brucellosis
Chronic meningococcemia
Coccidioidomycosis
Colorado tick fever
COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2 and MIS-C
Dengue fever
Epstein-­Barr virus infection
Histoplasmosis
Leptospirosis
Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi)
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis (LCM) infection
Malaria
Melioidosis (Pseudomonas pseudomallei)
Noninfluenza respiratory viral infection
Oroya fever (Bartonella bacilliformis)
Q fever (Coxiella burnetii)
Rat-­bite fever (Spirillum minus)
Relapsing fever (Borrelia recurrentis)
Syphilis (Treponema pallidum)
Tuberculosis
Typhoid fever (Salmonella typhi)
Visceral leishmaniasis
Yellow fever
NONINFECTIOUS CAUSES
Behçet disease
Crohn disease
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis syndromes
Sweet syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus and other autoimmune disorders
Weber-­Christian disease (panniculitis)
Others
PERIODIC FEVER SYNDROMES (SEE CHAPTER 204)
Cyclic neutropenia
Familial Mediterranean fever
Hyper–immunoglobulin D syndrome
Muckle-­Wells syndrome
Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenopathy
(PFAPA)
Tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated periodic syndrome
[TRAPS])
Others
MIS-C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 219 u Fever
stomatitis, pharyngitis, adenopathy) or more broadly to include disorders characterized by recurrent episodes of fever that do not follow
a strictly periodic pattern (familial Mediterranean fever, TNF receptor–associated periodic syndrome [Hibernian fever], hyper-­IgD syndrome, Muckle-­Wells syndrome) (see Chapter 204). Factitious fever,
or self-­induced fever, may be caused by intentional manipulation of the
thermometer or injection of pyrogenic material.
The double quotidian fever (or fever that peaks twice in 24 hours)
is classically associated with juvenile idiopathic arthritis. In general, a
single isolated fever spike is not associated with an infectious disease.
Such a spike can be attributed to the infusion of blood products and
some drugs, as well as some procedures or manipulation of a catheter on a colonized or infected body surface. Similarly, temperatures
in excess of 41°C (105.8°F) are most often associated with a noninfectious cause. Causes for very high temperatures (>41°C [105.8°F])
include central fever (resulting from central nervous system dysfunction involving the hypothalamus or spinal cord injury), malignant
hyperthermia, malignant neuroleptic syndrome, drug fever, or heat
stroke. Temperatures that are lower than normal (<36°C [96.8°F]) can
be associated with overwhelming sepsis but are more often related to
cold exposure, hypothyroidism, autonomic instability, central nervous
system lesions, or overuse of antipyretics.

CLINICAL FEATURES

The clinical features of fever can range from no symptoms to extreme
malaise. Children might complain of feeling hot or cold, display facial
flushing, and experience shivering. Fatigue and irritability may be
evident. Parents often report that the child looks ill or pale and has a
decreased appetite. The underlying etiology also produces accompanying symptoms. Although the underlying etiologies can manifest in
varied ways clinically, there are some predictable features. For example,
fever with petechiae in an ill-­appearing patient indicates the high possibility of life-­threatening conditions such as meningococcemia, Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, or acute bacterial endocarditis. The unusual
symptom of loss of smell and taste can accompany fever in COVID-­19.
Changes in heart rate, most frequently tachycardia, accompany
fever. Normally heart rate rises by 10 beats/min per 1°C (1.8°F) rise
in temperature for children >2 months old. Relative tachycardia, when
the pulse rate is elevated disproportionately to the temperature, is usually caused by noninfectious diseases or infectious diseases in which
a toxin is responsible for the clinical manifestations. Relative bradycardia (temperature-­pulse dissociation), when the pulse rate remains
low in the presence of fever, can accompany typhoid fever, brucellosis,
leptospirosis, or drug fever. Bradycardia in the presence of fever also
may be a result of a conduction defect resulting from cardiac involvement with acute rheumatic fever, Lyme disease, viral myocarditis, or
infective endocarditis.

EVALUATION

Most acute febrile episodes in a normal host can be diagnosed by a
careful history and physical examination and require few, if any, laboratory tests. Because infection is the most likely etiology of acute fever,
the evaluation should initially be geared to discovering an underlying
infectious cause (Table 219.2 and Chapter 220). The details of the history should include the onset and pattern of fever and any accompanying signs and symptoms. The patient often displays signs or symptoms
that provide clues to the cause of the fever. Exposures to other ill persons at home, daycare, and school should be noted, along with any
recent travel, animal exposures, or medications. The past medical history should include information about underlying immune deficiencies or other major illnesses and receipt of childhood vaccines.
Physical examination should begin with a complete evaluation of
vital signs, which should include pulse oximetry, because hypoxia may
indicate lower respiratory infection. In the acutely febrile child, the
physical examination should focus on any localized complaints, but
a complete head-­to-­toe screen is recommended, because clues to the
underlying diagnosis may be found. For example, palm and sole lesions
may be discovered during a thorough skin examination and provide a
clue for infection with coxsackievirus.

1641

Table 219.2  Evaluation of Acute Fever
Thorough history: onset, other symptoms, exposures (daycare,
school, family, pets, playmates, other ill individuals), travel,
medications, other underlying disorders, immunizations
Physical examination: complete, with focus on localizing symptoms
Laboratory studies on a case-­by-­case basis:
• Blood: complete blood count, culture, C-­reactive protein,
procalcitonin, sedimentation rate
• Cerebrospinal fluid: cell count, culture, glucose, Gram stain,
NAAT for herpes simplex virus, protein
• Nasopharyngeal: NAAT for respiratory viruses
• Pharyngeal: NAAT and culture for group A Streptococcus
• Stool: calprotectin, culture, NAAT for enteric pathogens
• Urine: culture, gross and microscopic analysis, NAAT for genital
pathogens
• Others (such as chest radiograph or other radiologic imaging)
NAAT, Nucleic acid amplification test.

If a fever has an obvious cause, laboratory evaluation may not be
required, and management is tailored to the underlying cause with as-­
needed reevaluation. If the cause of the fever is not apparent, further
diagnostic evaluation should be considered on a case-­by-­case basis.
The history of presentation and abnormal physical examination findings guide the evaluation. The child with respiratory symptoms and
hypoxia may require a chest radiograph, rapid antigen testing for respiratory syncytial virus or influenza, or polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
testing for SARS-­CoV-­2. The child with pharyngitis can benefit from
PCR testing for group A Streptococcus and a throat culture. Dysuria,
back pain, or a history of vesicoureteral reflux should prompt a urinalysis and urine culture, and bloody diarrhea should prompt a stool culture. A complete blood count and blood culture should be considered
in the ill-­appearing child, along with cerebrospinal fluid studies if the
child has neck stiffness or if the possibility of meningitis is considered.
Well-­defined high-­risk groups require a more extensive evaluation on
the basis of age, associated disease, or immunodeficiency status and
might warrant prompt antimicrobial therapy before a pathogen is identified. Fever in neonates and young infants (0-­3 months old), fever in
older children, and fever of unknown origin are discussed in Chapters
220, 221, and 222, respectively.

MANAGEMENT

Although fever is a common parental worry, no evidence supports the
belief that high fever can result in brain damage or other bodily harm,
except in rare instances of febrile status epilepticus and heat stroke.
Treating fever in self-­limiting illnesses for the sole reason of bringing the
body temperature back to normal is not necessary in the otherwise healthy
child. Most evidence suggests that fever is an adaptive response and
should be treated only in select circumstances. In humans, increased
temperatures are associated with decreased microbial replication and
an increased inflammatory response. Although fever can have beneficial effects, it also increases oxygen consumption, carbon dioxide production, and cardiac output and can exacerbate cardiac insufficiency in
patients with heart disease or chronic anemia (e.g., sickle cell disease),
pulmonary insufficiency in patients with chronic lung disease, and
metabolic instability in patients with diabetes mellitus or inborn errors
of metabolism. Children between 6 months and 5 years of age are at
increased risk for simple febrile seizures. The focus of the evaluation
and treatment of febrile seizures is aimed at determining the underlying
cause of the fever. Children with idiopathic epilepsy also often have an
increased frequency of seizures associated with a fever. High fever during pregnancy may be teratogenic.
Fever with temperatures <39°C (102.2°F) in healthy children generally does not require treatment. However, as temperatures become
higher, patients tend to become more uncomfortable, and treatment
of fever is then reasonable. If a child is included in one of the high-­risk
groups previously discussed or if the child’s caregiver is concerned that
the fever is adversely affecting the child’s behavior and causing discomfort, treatment may be given to hasten the resolution of the fever.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1642 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Other than providing symptomatic relief, antipyretic therapy does not
change the course of infectious diseases. Encouraging good hydration
is the first step to replacing fluids that are lost related to the increased
metabolic demands and insensible losses of fever. Antipyretic therapy
is beneficial in high-­risk patients and patients with discomfort. Hyperpyrexia (>41°C [105.8°F]) indicates high probability of a hypothalamic disorder or central nervous system injury (hemorrhage, other
etiology) and should be treated with antipyretics. Some studies show
that hyperpyrexia may be associated with a significantly increased risk
of serious bacterial infection, but other studies have not substantiated this relationship. The most common antipyretics are acetaminophen 10-­15 mg/kg/dose every 4 hours and ibuprofen in children >6
months old at 5-­10 mg/kg/dose every 8 hours. Antipyretics reduce
fever by reducing production of prostaglandins. If used appropriately,
antipyretics are safe; potential adverse effects include liver damage
(acetaminophen) and gastrointestinal or kidney disturbances (ibuprofen). To reduce fever most safely, the caregiver should choose one
type of medication and clearly record the dose and time of administration so that overdosage does not occur, especially if multiple caregivers are involved in the management. Physical measures such as tepid
baths and cooling blankets are not considered effective to reduce fever.
Evidence is also scarce for the use of complementary and alternative
medicine interventions.
Fever caused by specific underlying etiologies resolves when the
condition is properly treated. Examples include administration of
intravenous immunoglobulin to treat Kawasaki disease or the administration of antibiotics to treat bacterial infections.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 220

Fever Without a Focus in
the Neonate and Young
Infant
Laura Brower and Samir S. Shah
Fever is a common reason for neonates and young infants to undergo
medical evaluation in the hospital or ambulatory setting. For this age-­
group (0-­3 months), fever without a focus refers to a rectal temperature of 38°C (100.4°F) or greater without other presenting signs or
symptoms. The evaluation of these patients can be challenging because
of the difficulty distinguishing between a serious infection (bacterial
or viral) and a self-­limited viral illness. The etiology and evaluation of
fever without a focus depend on the age of the child. Three age-­groups
are typically considered: neonates 0-­28 days, young infants 29-­90 days,
and children 3-­36 months.

increased screening of pregnant women and use of intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis. Other, less common organisms include Klebsiella
spp., Enterococcus spp., Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, and Staphylococcus aureus (Table 220.1). Listeria monocytogenes is
a rare cause of neonatal infections, potentially related to changes in
public health education and improvements in food safety. Additional
details about specific bacteria are available in the following chapters:
E. coli (see Chapter 246), GBS (see Chapter 230), S. pneumoniae (see
Chapter 228), N. meningitidis (see Chapter 237), S. aureus (see Chapter 227.1), and L. monocytogenes (see Chapter 234). Specific bacterial infections that can present with fever in this age-­group, although
often with symptoms other than isolated fever, include pneumonia
(see Chapter 449), gastroenteritis (see Chapter 387), osteomyelitis (see
Chapter 725), septic arthritis (see Chapter 726), omphalitis (see Chapter 144), cellulitis, and other skin and soft tissue infections (see Chapter
706).
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections (see Chapter 299) should
also be considered in febrile neonates, particularly those under 28 days
old, given the high rate of mortality and significant morbidity among
survivors. Neonatal HSV is rare, with a prevalence of 0.2–0.3% among
febrile neonates. Most of these infections are caused by HSV type 2,
though HSV type 1 can also cause neonatal infection. Neonates with
disseminated disease and skin, eye, and mouth (SEM) disease typically present at 5-­12 days of life. Neonates with central nervous system
(CNS) disease generally present at 16-­19 days. Perinatally acquired
HSV occasionally manifests beyond 28 days of age, although most
cases beyond 28 days of age represent postnatal acquisition.
In febrile infants who appear well, viral illnesses are much more
common than bacterial or serious viral infections. The most common
viruses include respiratory syncytial virus (RSV; see Chapter 307),
enteroviruses (see Chapter 297), influenza viruses (see Chapter 305),
parainfluenza viruses (see Chapter 306), human metapneumovirus
(see Chapter 308), adenovirus (see Chapter 309), parechoviruses (see
Chapter 297), and rhinovirus (see Chapter 310).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In neonates and young infants, bacterial and viral infections can present with isolated fever or nonspecific symptoms, making diagnosis of
serious illnesses challenging. Some neonates and young infants will
have signs of systemic illness at presentation, including abnormal
temperature (hypothermia <36°C [96.8°F], fever ≥38°C [100.4°F]),
abnormal respiratory examination (tachypnea >60 breaths/min, respiratory distress, apnea), abnormal circulatory examination (tachycardia
>180 beats/min, delayed capillary refill >3 seconds, weak or bounding pulses), abnormal abdominal examination, abnormal neurologic
Table 220.1  Bacterial Pathogens in Neonates and
Young Infants with Urinary Tract Infection,
Bacteremia, or Meningitis
FREQUENCY

URINARY TRACT
INFECTION

BACTEREMIA AND
MENINGITIS

Common

Escherichia coli

Escherichia coli
Group B Streptococcus

Less common

Klebsiella spp.
Enterococcus spp.

Listeria monocytogenes
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
Staphylococcus aureus
Klebsiella spp.

Rare

Group B
Streptococcus
Staphylococcus
aureus
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
Enterobacter spp.
Citrobacter spp.
Proteus mirabilis

Neisseria meningitidis
Salmonella spp.
Enterobacter spp.
Enterococcus spp.
Cronobacter sakazakii
Haemophilus influenzae
Citrobacter

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Serious bacterial infection (SBI) occurs in 7–13% of neonates and
young infants with fever. In this group, the most common SBIs are
urinary tract infection (UTI; 5–13%), bacteremia (1–2%), and meningitis (0.2–0.5%). The risk for SBI is highest in those appearing ill (in
contrast to well appearing) and those with risk factors and is inversely
related to postnatal age. The term invasive bacterial infection (IBI),
which refers to bacteremia and meningitis, recognizes that infants with
UTIs may be managed differently (e.g., often with oral antibiotics) than
those with bacteremia or meningitis. Escherichia coli is the most common organism causing SBI, followed by group B Streptococcus (GBS).
The frequency of GBS infections has decreased as a consequence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1642 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Other than providing symptomatic relief, antipyretic therapy does not
change the course of infectious diseases. Encouraging good hydration
is the first step to replacing fluids that are lost related to the increased
metabolic demands and insensible losses of fever. Antipyretic therapy
is beneficial in high-­risk patients and patients with discomfort. Hyperpyrexia (>41°C [105.8°F]) indicates high probability of a hypothalamic disorder or central nervous system injury (hemorrhage, other
etiology) and should be treated with antipyretics. Some studies show
that hyperpyrexia may be associated with a significantly increased risk
of serious bacterial infection, but other studies have not substantiated this relationship. The most common antipyretics are acetaminophen 10-­15 mg/kg/dose every 4 hours and ibuprofen in children >6
months old at 5-­10 mg/kg/dose every 8 hours. Antipyretics reduce
fever by reducing production of prostaglandins. If used appropriately,
antipyretics are safe; potential adverse effects include liver damage
(acetaminophen) and gastrointestinal or kidney disturbances (ibuprofen). To reduce fever most safely, the caregiver should choose one
type of medication and clearly record the dose and time of administration so that overdosage does not occur, especially if multiple caregivers are involved in the management. Physical measures such as tepid
baths and cooling blankets are not considered effective to reduce fever.
Evidence is also scarce for the use of complementary and alternative
medicine interventions.
Fever caused by specific underlying etiologies resolves when the
condition is properly treated. Examples include administration of
intravenous immunoglobulin to treat Kawasaki disease or the administration of antibiotics to treat bacterial infections.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 220

Fever Without a Focus in
the Neonate and Young
Infant
Laura Brower and Samir S. Shah
Fever is a common reason for neonates and young infants to undergo
medical evaluation in the hospital or ambulatory setting. For this age-­
group (0-­3 months), fever without a focus refers to a rectal temperature of 38°C (100.4°F) or greater without other presenting signs or
symptoms. The evaluation of these patients can be challenging because
of the difficulty distinguishing between a serious infection (bacterial
or viral) and a self-­limited viral illness. The etiology and evaluation of
fever without a focus depend on the age of the child. Three age-­groups
are typically considered: neonates 0-­28 days, young infants 29-­90 days,
and children 3-­36 months.

increased screening of pregnant women and use of intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis. Other, less common organisms include Klebsiella
spp., Enterococcus spp., Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, and Staphylococcus aureus (Table 220.1). Listeria monocytogenes is
a rare cause of neonatal infections, potentially related to changes in
public health education and improvements in food safety. Additional
details about specific bacteria are available in the following chapters:
E. coli (see Chapter 246), GBS (see Chapter 230), S. pneumoniae (see
Chapter 228), N. meningitidis (see Chapter 237), S. aureus (see Chapter 227.1), and L. monocytogenes (see Chapter 234). Specific bacterial infections that can present with fever in this age-­group, although
often with symptoms other than isolated fever, include pneumonia
(see Chapter 449), gastroenteritis (see Chapter 387), osteomyelitis (see
Chapter 725), septic arthritis (see Chapter 726), omphalitis (see Chapter 144), cellulitis, and other skin and soft tissue infections (see Chapter
706).
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections (see Chapter 299) should
also be considered in febrile neonates, particularly those under 28 days
old, given the high rate of mortality and significant morbidity among
survivors. Neonatal HSV is rare, with a prevalence of 0.2–0.3% among
febrile neonates. Most of these infections are caused by HSV type 2,
though HSV type 1 can also cause neonatal infection. Neonates with
disseminated disease and skin, eye, and mouth (SEM) disease typically present at 5-­12 days of life. Neonates with central nervous system
(CNS) disease generally present at 16-­19 days. Perinatally acquired
HSV occasionally manifests beyond 28 days of age, although most
cases beyond 28 days of age represent postnatal acquisition.
In febrile infants who appear well, viral illnesses are much more
common than bacterial or serious viral infections. The most common
viruses include respiratory syncytial virus (RSV; see Chapter 307),
enteroviruses (see Chapter 297), influenza viruses (see Chapter 305),
parainfluenza viruses (see Chapter 306), human metapneumovirus
(see Chapter 308), adenovirus (see Chapter 309), parechoviruses (see
Chapter 297), and rhinovirus (see Chapter 310).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In neonates and young infants, bacterial and viral infections can present with isolated fever or nonspecific symptoms, making diagnosis of
serious illnesses challenging. Some neonates and young infants will
have signs of systemic illness at presentation, including abnormal
temperature (hypothermia <36°C [96.8°F], fever ≥38°C [100.4°F]),
abnormal respiratory examination (tachypnea >60 breaths/min, respiratory distress, apnea), abnormal circulatory examination (tachycardia
>180 beats/min, delayed capillary refill >3 seconds, weak or bounding pulses), abnormal abdominal examination, abnormal neurologic
Table 220.1  Bacterial Pathogens in Neonates and
Young Infants with Urinary Tract Infection,
Bacteremia, or Meningitis
FREQUENCY

URINARY TRACT
INFECTION

BACTEREMIA AND
MENINGITIS

Common

Escherichia coli

Escherichia coli
Group B Streptococcus

Less common

Klebsiella spp.
Enterococcus spp.

Listeria monocytogenes
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
Staphylococcus aureus
Klebsiella spp.

Rare

Group B
Streptococcus
Staphylococcus
aureus
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
Enterobacter spp.
Citrobacter spp.
Proteus mirabilis

Neisseria meningitidis
Salmonella spp.
Enterobacter spp.
Enterococcus spp.
Cronobacter sakazakii
Haemophilus influenzae
Citrobacter

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Serious bacterial infection (SBI) occurs in 7–13% of neonates and
young infants with fever. In this group, the most common SBIs are
urinary tract infection (UTI; 5–13%), bacteremia (1–2%), and meningitis (0.2–0.5%). The risk for SBI is highest in those appearing ill (in
contrast to well appearing) and those with risk factors and is inversely
related to postnatal age. The term invasive bacterial infection (IBI),
which refers to bacteremia and meningitis, recognizes that infants with
UTIs may be managed differently (e.g., often with oral antibiotics) than
those with bacteremia or meningitis. Escherichia coli is the most common organism causing SBI, followed by group B Streptococcus (GBS).
The frequency of GBS infections has decreased as a consequence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 220 u Fever Without a Focus in the Neonate and Young Infant
examination (lethargy, irritability, alterations in tone), or abnormal
skin examination (rash, petechiae, cyanosis). Infants with septic
arthritis or osteomyelitis may appear well except for signs around
the involved joint or bone or may only manifest with pseudoparalysis (disuse) and paradoxical irritability (infant experiences pain during
attempts to comfort the child).

DIAGNOSIS

Historically, all neonates <60 or <90 days of age were hospitalized;
underwent laboratory evaluation of the blood, urine, and cerebrospinal

1643

fluid (CSF); and received empirical antibiotics. Additionally, some
patients had stool cultures, had chest radiographs, had HSV evaluation, and/or received empirical antiviral agents. Under this approach,
many infants without SBI or serious viral infection received evaluation,
treatment, and hospitalization. Protocols were subsequently developed
to identify infants at lower risk of SBI, who may be managed outside the
hospital setting. The most current protocol is the American Academy
of Pediatrics (AAP) guideline, which considers UTIs separately from
bacteremia and meningitis (Table 220.2). Despite protocols, substantial variation continues to exist in the approach to and management

Table 220.2  Management of Fever Without Source in Infants 0-­36 Months Old
GROUP

MANAGEMENT

Any toxic-­appearing child 0–36 mo and temperature
≥38°C (100.4°F)

Hospitalize, cultures (blood, urine, CSF) plus other tests*, parenteral antibiotics

WELL-­APPEARING CHILD
Child <22 days and temperature ≥38°C (100.4°F)

Hospitalize, cultures (blood, urine, CSF) plus other tests*, parenteral antibiotics

Child 22–60 days and temperature ≥38°C (100.4°F)

Three-­Step Process
1.	Determine risk based on history, physical examination, and laboratory studies.
Low risk:
• Uncomplicated medical history
• Well-­appearing physical examination
• Normal laboratory studies
• Urine: negative leukocyte esterase and nitrite, ≤5 WBC/hpf centrifuged and
<10 WBC/hpf uncentrifuged
• Inflammatory markers: temperature ≤38.5°C, procalcitonin ≤0.5 ng/mL, CRP
≤20 mg/L, absolute neutrophil count ≤4,000-­5,200/mm3
• Stool studies if diarrhea (no RBC and <5 WBC/hpf)
2.	If child fulfills all low-­risk criteria, use age to determine need for LP, parenteral
antimicrobials, and hospital observation.
• Age 22-­28 days: Obtain UA, blood culture, inflammatory markers. May
perform LP. May administer parenteral antimicrobials. Observe in hospital.
• Age 29-­60 days old: Obtain UA, blood culture, inflammatory markers. Need
not perform LP. Need not administer antimicrobials. Observe closely at home
with follow-­up within 24-­36 hr.
3.	If child does not fulfill all low-­risk criteria, use age and lab results to determine
need for LP, antimicrobials, and hospital observation.
• Age 22-­28 days with abnormal UA and normal inflammatory markers: May
perform LP. Administer parenteral antimicrobials. Observe in hospital.
• Age 22-­28 days with abnormal inflammatory markers: Perform LP. If CSF
pleocytosis, CSF uninterpretable, or abnormal UA, administer parenteral
antimicrobials and observe in hospital. If CSF and UA are normal, may observe
at home after parenteral antimicrobials or observe in the hospital with or
without parenteral antimicrobials.
• Age 29-­60 days with abnormal UA and normal inflammatory markers:
Administer oral antimicrobials. May observe closely at home with follow-­up in
12-­24 hr.
• Age 29-­60 days with abnormal inflammatory markers: May perform LP.
If CSF pleocytosis, administer parenteral antimicrobials and observe in
hospital. If CSF is normal, may administer parenteral or oral antimicrobials
and may observe closely in hospital or at home. If CSF is not available or
uninterpretable, administer parenteral antimicrobials and may observe closely
in hospital or at home.

Child 2-­36 mo and temperature 38–39°C (100.4–102.2°F)

Reassurance that diagnosis is likely self-­limited viral infection, but advise return
with persistence of fever, temperatures >39°C (102.2°F), and/or new signs and
symptoms.

Child 2-­36 mo and temperature >39°C (102.2°F)

Two-­Step Process
1.	Determine immunization status.
2.	If received conjugate pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzae type b
vaccines, obtain urine studies (urine WBC, leukocyte esterase, nitrite, and
culture) for all females, all males <6 mo old, all uncircumcised males <2 yr, and all
children with recurrent urinary tract infections.
If did not receive conjugate pneumococcal and H. influenzae type b vaccines,
manage according to the 1993 Guidelines (see Baraff et al. Ann Emerg Med.
1993;22:1198–1210).

*Other tests may include chest radiograph, stool studies, herpes simplex and other virus polymerase chain reaction.
CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; hpf, high-­powered field; LP, lumbar puncture; RBC, red blood cell; UA, urinalysis; WBC, white blood cell.
Modified from Huppler A. Fever. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 52.5, p.
971; with data from Pantell RH, Roberts KB, Adams WG, et al. Evaluation and management of well appearing febrile infants 8 to 60 days old. Pediatrics. 2021;148(2):e2021052228.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1644 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
of the febrile infant. It must be emphasized that these criteria apply to
the well-­appearing child; those who appear critically ill (septic) require
prompt evaluation, resuscitation, and empiric antibiotic therapy (within
1 hour).
In the past, experts advocated that all neonates ≤28 days old undergo
a complete evaluation for serious infection, receive empirical antimicrobials, and be hospitalized. In prior risk criteria, one allowed neonates ≤28 days to be designated as “low risk” and managed outside the
hospital without antimicrobials. In one study, <1% of low-­risk infants
≤28 days old had SBI; however, in another study applying the other
criteria to neonates, 3–4% of those classified as low risk had SBI. In
the current protocols, neonates 22-­28 days who meet certain low-­risk
criteria can be managed outside the hospital; in one study, the risk of
bacteremia in this age-­group was lower than in infants <22 days (1.6%
vs 3.3–5.3%).
Young febrile infants ≥29 days old who appear ill (with signs of
systemic illness) require complete evaluation for serious infection,
empiric antimicrobials, and hospitalization; however, well-­appearing
infants can be managed safely as outpatients using low-­risk criteria
as indicated in Table 220.2. With each of these approaches, infants
must have a normal physical examination, must be able to reliably
obtain close follow-­up, and must meet certain laboratory and/or
radiographic criteria. Based on these protocols, all infants meeting
the previous criteria would undergo lumbar puncture (LP), whereas
low-­risk infants meeting other criteria and following the current protocols would not. There is substantial variation in clinical practice in
the performance of LPs in well-­appearing infants >28 days. When
deciding whether to perform an LP in this age-­group, clinicians
should consider multiple factors, including the home situation and
the ability to contact the family.
The protocols discussed in Table 220.2 were initially developed for
use in the emergency department (ED). Infants evaluated in the office
setting may warrant a different approach when a relationship between
the physician and family already exists to facilitate clear communication and timely follow-­up. In one large study of febrile infants <3
months old who were initially evaluated for fever in the office setting,
clinicians hospitalized only 36% of infants but initiated antibiotics in
61 of the 63 infants with bacteremia or bacterial meningitis. These
findings suggest that, with very close follow-­up (including multiple
in-­person visits or frequent contacts by telephone), some febrile
infants perceived to be at low risk for invasive bacterial infection
(bacteremia and meningitis) on the basis of history, physical examination, and normal but limited laboratory testing can be managed in
an office-­based setting. It is important to note that 3% of infants with
SBI did not initially receive empiric antibiotics, necessitating careful
consideration of risks and benefits of selective rather than universal
testing and empiric antibiotic treatment of febrile infants evaluated
in the office setting.

Viral Respiratory Illness

Several studies have demonstrated a decreased risk of SBI in infants
with positive testing for influenza, RSV, and other respiratory viral illnesses, although the risk of UTI remains significant. In one prospective
study, the risk of SBI in neonates <28 days old was not altered by RSV
status. Given these data, young febrile infants with bronchiolitis may
not require LP, particularly if they can be closely observed or have close
follow-­up.

Urinary Tract Infection and Bacterial Meningitis

In the past, infants with abnormal findings on urinalysis (UA) would
undergo complete evaluation for infection, including LP. In well-­
appearing infants >28 days old with an abnormal UA, some evidence
suggests that the risk of bacterial meningitis is extremely low: <0.5%.
For neonates 0-­28 days, the risk of concomitant bacterial meningitis
with UTI is 1–2%.
CSF pleocytosis in the absence of bacterial meningitis (i.e., sterile
pleocytosis) has been reported in ∼23% infants with UTI. The cause is
uncertain, with some studies attributing this phenomenon to traumatic

LPs or undetected viral infection rather than inflammation in the context of systemic illness.

LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
Complete Blood Count

The peripheral complete blood cell count (CBC) and differential are
frequently obtained by providers when evaluating febrile neonates
and infants. The white blood cell (WBC) count alone cannot accurately predict SBI risk. In one series, isolated use of the WBC cutoffs of
outside 5,000-­15,000 WBCs/mm3 would miss at least 33% of infants
with bacteremia and 40% of those with meningitis. A prospective
study found no increased risk of SBI in febrile, well-­appearing infants
with leukopenia (WBC count <5,000/mm3). The WBC count combined with other factors may help determine an infant’s risk of SBI,
but it should not be used in isolation to predict infection risk. The
absolute neutrophil count (ANC) has also been used in evaluating
the risk of serious infection. Two recent large studies derived ANC
cutoffs of greater than 4,000 and 5,200 per mm3 for use in specific
protocols; however, these protocols used ANC in conjunction with
other markers.

Blood Culture

The ability to identify pathogens in the blood depends on the volume
of blood, the timing of the blood culture in relation to antimicrobial
administration, and, to a lesser degree, the number of blood cultures
obtained. A negative blood culture does not exclude the possibility of
bacterial meningitis; in one study, 38% of infants with culture-­proven
bacterial meningitis had negative blood cultures. For additional information on the time to positivity of blood cultures in neonates and
young infants, see “Discharge from the Hospital.”

Urinalysis

Different methods can assist in making a presumptive diagnosis of
UTI while awaiting results of a urine culture. Traditional UA consists of dipstick biochemical analysis of urine for nitrites or leukocyte
esterase (LE) and microscopic examination of the urine for WBCs and
bacteria. One study found that the traditional UA had a higher negative predictive value (NPV) than dipstick alone (99.2% vs 98.7%), but
that dipstick alone had a higher positive predictive value (PPV, 66.8%
for dipstick alone vs 51.2% for traditional UA). Enhanced UA includes
hemocytometer cell count (to decrease variability of urine cell counts)
and Gram stain on uncentrifuged urine. The enhanced UA has a higher
sensitivity but comparable specificity to traditional UA. However, the
enhanced UA has not been studied in the most common protocols for
evaluation of the febrile infant, and many institutions/office practices
do not perform this test.

Cerebrospinal Fluid

CSF evaluation consists of culture and Gram stain, cell count, glucose,
and protein. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing may also be sent
based on the clinical scenario, usually for enterovirus or HSV (some
include bacterial pathogens). Normal CSF parameters vary by age of
the infant and should be interpreted in combination with other clinical
and historical risk factors, given that some infants with normal CSF
parameters may rarely have CNS infections (Table 220.3). The CSF
Gram stain can be a useful adjunct to other CSF parameters given the
high specificity of the test (99.3–99.9%; i.e., relatively few false-­positive
results), although the range of reported sensitivity is much broader
(67–94.1%).
The interpretation of CSF can be challenging in the setting of a traumatic LP, where the CSF is contaminated with peripheral blood. Some
clinicians assume a ratio of WBCs to red blood cells (RBCs) of 1:500
in the CSF. Others advocate calculating the expected CSF WBCs based
on the peripheral blood WBCs and RBCs and then using the observed-­
to-­predicted ratio of CSF WBCs to aid in the identification of bacterial
meningitis. This calculation assumes that the ratio of WBCs to RBCs in
the peripheral blood remains constant after introduction into the CSF.
Next-­generation molecular testing is helpful in identifying the most

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 220 u Fever Without a Focus in the Neonate and Young Infant

1645

Table 220.3  Values of Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Studies in Neonates and Infants by Age
CSF WHITE BLOOD CELL COUNTS

CELLS/MM3

CSF PROTEIN

MG/DL

90th percentile by age†

Upper limit of normal by age*
1-­28 days

18

0-­7 days

153

29-­60 days

8.5

8-­28 days

84-­106

61-­90 days

8.5

29-­56 days

84-­105

95th percentile by age§

Upper limit of normal by age#
0-­28 days

15

0-­14 days

132

29-­60 days

9

15-­28 days

100

29-­42 days

89

43-­56 days

83

90th percentile by age†
0-­7 days

26

8-­28 days

8-­9

29-­56 days

6-­8

95th percentile by age‡
0-­28 days

19

29-­56 days

9

95th percentile by age#

95th percentile by age#
0-­28 days

118

29-­60 days

91

CSF GLUCOSE

MG/DL

Lower limit of normal by age*
1-­28 days

30

0-­28 days

16

29-­60 days

30.5

29-­60 days

11

61-­90 days

33.5

CSF PROTEIN

MG/DL

Upper limit of normal by age*

Lower limit of normal by age#
0-­28 days

25

29-­60 days

27

1-­28 days

131

29-­60 days

105.5

10th percentile for infants 0-­56 days†

71

10th percentile by age#

61-­90 days
Upper limit of normal by age#
0-­28 days

127

29-­60 days

99

38-­43

0-­28 days

37

29-­60 days

39

*Data from Byington CL, Kendrick J, Sheng X. Normative cerebrospinal fluid profiles in febrile infants. J Pediatr. 2011;158(1):130–134. All infants had nontraumatic lumbar puncture
(LP) and no evidence of bacterial or viral infection.
†Data from Chadwick SL, Wilson JW, Levin JE, Martin JM. Cerebrospinal fluid characteristics of infants who present to the emergency department with fever: establishing normal
values by week of age. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011;30(4):e63–e67. All infants were excluded if they had identified viral or bacterial meningitis, positive blood or urine cultures, a
ventriculoperitoneal shunt, recent neurosurgery/antibiotics/seizure, or a traumatic LP.
‡Data from Kestenbaum LA, Ebberson J, Zorc JJ, et al. Defining cerebrospinal fluid white blood cell count reference values in neonates and young infants. Pediatrics. 2010;125(2):257–
264. Infants were excluded for traumatic LP, serious bacterial infection, congenital infection, seizure, presence of ventricular shunt, or positive CSF testing for enterovirus.
§Data from Shah SS, Ebberson J, Kestenbaum LA, et al. Age-­specific reference values for cerebrospinal fluid protein concentration in neonates and young infants. J Hosp Med.
2011;6(1):22–27. Infants were excluded for traumatic LP, serious bacterial infection, congenital infection, seizure, presence of a ventricular shunt, positive CSF testing for enterovirus,
or elevated serum bilirubin.
#Data from Thomson J, Sucharew H, Cruz AT, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid reference values for young infants undergoing lumbar puncture. Pediatrics. 2018;141(3):e20173405. Infants were
excluded for missing any component of the CSF profile, traumatic LP, serious bacterial infection, viral CNS infection, non-­CNS HSV disease, or prolonged hospital length of stay.

common bacterial and viral pathogens despite a traumatic LP; results
are often available within a few hours.
One retrospective cohort study concluded that an observed/predicted CSF WBC ratio of ≤0.01 was helpful in predicting the absence
of bacterial meningitis; however, another retrospective cohort study
and one case series of traumatic LPs concluded that adjustment of CSF
WBC count does not improve the accuracy of diagnosis of meningitis
in patients with traumatic LPs. Clinicians may consider hospitalization
and empirical antimicrobials in patients with traumatic LPs given the
challenge of interpreting the CSF WBC count when there is blood contamination of the specimen.
Treatment with antibiotics before LP can complicate the interpretation of CSF cultures. CSF cultures are negative relatively rapidly
after antibiotic administration, within 2 hours for N. meningitidis and

4-­24 hours for S. pneumoniae. Next-­generation molecular testing is
not affected by prior antibiotic treatment, thus enhancing a diagnosis
despite prior antibiotic therapy. In patients with bacterial meningitis,
CSF glucose increases to normal range, often within 4-­24 hours of
antibiotic administration, whereas CSF protein concentrations, despite
decreasing, remain abnormal for >24 hours after antibiotic administration. Changes in CSF WBC count and ANC are minimal in the first
24 hours of antibiotic therapy. Therefore CSF findings can provide relevant management information even in the setting of antibiotic administration before LP.

Herpes Simplex Virus Testing

No consensus exists on which neonates should be tested and empirically treated for HSV infection. Historical and clinical features that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1646 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
should raise concern for HSV include exposure to individuals infected
with HSV, particularly mothers with primary HSV infections or first-­
time genital infections, seizure or abnormal neurologic examination,
vesicular rash, ill appearance, apnea, hypothermia, petechial rash/
excessive bleeding, hepatic failure, or a history of a scalp electrode.
However, neonates with HSV can present without any high-­risk clinical or historical features, particularly with early isolated CNS disease. Published approaches to neonatal HSV include (1) testing and
empirical treatment of all neonates <21 days old who are evaluated
for infection; (2) testing and empirical treatment of neonates with
the presence of high-­risk clinical features for HSV; and (3) testing
and empirical treatment for all neonates with high-­risk features plus
testing the CSF of all neonates <21 days old while deferring empirical acyclovir in those without high-­risk features, unless the CSF HSV
PCR test is positive.
The AAP Committee on Infectious Diseases recommends that
neonates undergoing evaluation for HSV have the following laboratory studies performed: surface cultures or PCR of the conjunctiva,
mouth or nasopharynx, rectum, and any vesicles; CSF PCR (sensitivity:
75–100%); whole blood PCR; and serum levels of alanine transaminase
(ALT). HSV PCR testing of the mouth, conjunctiva, nasopharynx, rectum, and vesicles has been shown to be more sensitive than culture,
with comparable specificity, although no direct comparisons have been
performed in neonates.

Enterovirus Testing

Enterovirus is a common and typically benign cause of fever in febrile
infants, although it can be difficult to distinguish from SBI on initial
presentation. Enterovirus PCR testing of the CSF is a sensitive and
rapid means to diagnose infection. One retrospective study of patients
with CSF enterovirus testing found no cases of bacterial meningitis in
patients with positive enterovirus PCR; this study did not include neonates ≤28 days old. Several studies have demonstrated shorter length of
stay, fewer antibiotics, and lower cost among infants with positive CSF
enterovirus test results. These results suggest that during local enterovirus seasons, and if PCR testing is available, testing for enterovirus may
be of benefit in the evaluation of febrile infants and neonates. Some
centers have implemented multiplex PCR panels, which permit testing for multiple viruses, including enterovirus and HSV (and bacteria)
simultaneously.

Other Inflammatory Markers

Investigations have examined the utility of inflammatory markers
such as C-­reactive protein (CRP) and serum procalcitonin (PCT)
in the diagnosis of SBI and, more specifically, IBI (bacteremia and
meningitis) (see Table 220.2). One meta-­analysis reported that PCT
is superior to WBC count and CRP for the detection of IBI in children <3 years old, whereas another found that PCT was inferior to
prediction rules in identifying SBI in young infants. A prospective
multicenter cohort study of febrile infants 7-­91 days old determined
that the PCT was better at identifying patients with IBI than CRP,
WBC count, or ANC. Building on these results, clinical prediction
rules for febrile infants, such as the Step-­by-­Step approach, incorporate PCT and CRP, along with age ≤21 days, ill appearance, ANC
>10,000/mm3, and pyuria in a stepwise approach to determine which
patients are at high risk for IBI; only 0.7% of infants who met none of
those criteria had IBI. In the approach from the AAP, inflammatory
markers are recommended for all infants 22 days and older as part of
risk stratification. If available, this approach recommends PCT along
with either CRP or ANC. If PCT is unavailable, then CRP, ANC, and
elevation in temperature should be considered as markers of inflammation (see Table 220.2).

Other Diagnostic Studies

Older infants with positive RSV and influenza testing have a very low
risk of SBI beyond UTI. One large case-­based survey demonstrated
decreased admission rates and antibiotic use for infants with positive

respiratory viral tests, and another study demonstrated that implementation of a care algorithm incorporating viral testing led to a shorter
length of stay and antibiotic course.
Chest radiographs are unlikely to be clinically useful in the evaluation of the febrile infant without respiratory symptoms. Studies that
have examined routine use of radiographs have found limited utility
because in infants without respiratory symptoms, most results will be
normal and abnormal results can be difficult to interpret.

TREATMENT
Antimicrobials

Ill-­appearing and high-­risk infants and those <22 days old hospitalized
for evaluation for SBI should receive antimicrobial therapy. Commonly
used regimens include (1) a third-­generation cephalosporin (typically
cefepime or ceftazidime), (2) a third-­generation cephalosporin and
ampicillin, or (3) an aminoglycoside and ampicillin.
Ampicillin is the preferred treatment of GBS and covers L. monocytogenes and many Enterococcus spp. and some E. coli. For neonates
0-­28 days, options 2 or 3 have been recommended, given the risk of L.
monocytogenes. For young infants >28 days, option 1 (third-­generation
cephalosporin: ceftriaxone) is a reasonable choice. For ill-­appearing
infants or those with positive CSF Gram stains, additional antibiotics
may include vancomycin or broad-­spectrum antibiotics such as carbapenems. Local epidemiology and resistance patterns may assist in
these choices. Neonates with concern for HSV should be empirically
treated with high-­dose acyclovir (60 mg/kg/day).
Treatment duration and route of antimicrobial administration
depend on the infection. Additional details based on specific infections
and organisms are available in the following chapters: meningitis (see
Chapter 148), UTI (see Chapter 575), E. coli (see Chapter 246), GBS
(see Chapter 230), and HSV (see Chapter 299).

Discharge from the Hospital

Traditionally, infants remained in the hospital receiving antimicrobial
therapy until bacterial cultures were negative for 48 hours or even longer. Multiple studies have suggested that shorter culture observation
periods (i.e., 24 or 36 hours) may be reasonable because most pathogens in the blood grow within this time frame when automated blood
culture monitoring systems are used. In one multicenter retrospective
cross-­sectional study, 91% of blood cultures were positive by 24 hours
and 96% by 36 hours. Fewer studies have evaluated the time to positivity
of CSF and urine cultures, but in one large study of febrile infants 28-­90
days old, all positive CSF cultures grew within 24 hours (median time
to positivity, 18 hours). For blood cultures, 1.3% grew after 24 hours
(median time to positivity, 16 hours), and for urine cultures, 0.9% grew
after 24 hours (median time to positivity, 16 hours). In one multicenter
study including infants <60 days old, 82% of CSF cultures were positive
by 24 hours and 86% by 36 hours. For neonates undergoing evaluation for HSV, it is reasonable to await results of HSV testing before
discharge to home. For patients with identified bacterial infections or
HSV infections, the duration of the hospital stay will be determined by
the specific pathogen and site of infection.

PROGNOSIS

Most well-­appearing neonates and young infants with fever recover
completely and relatively quickly, depending on the etiology of the
fever. Most infection-­related mortality and long-­term morbidity result
from HSV infection and bacterial meningitis. For HSV, reported mortality rates range from 27% to 31% for disseminated disease and from
4% to 6% for CNS disease. Of those who survive, 83% of patients with
disseminated disease and 31% of those with CNS disease will have normal development at 12 months old. The mortality of bacterial meningitis varies by pathogen but ranges from 4% to 15%. In one study of
children who had meningitis as infants, 84% had normal development
at age 5 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 221 u Fever in the Older Child

Chapter 221

Fever in the Older Child
Laura Brower and Samir S. Shah
Fever is the most common reason for a child to seek medical care.
While most infants and children have benign viral causes of fever, a
small proportion will have more serious infections. Unlike fever in
young infants, pediatricians can rely more readily on symptoms and
physical examination findings to establish a diagnosis in older children. Laboratory testing and radiographic studies are not routinely
indicated but may be helpful when diagnostic uncertainty exists or the
patient appears critically ill. Occult infections, such as urinary tract
infection (UTI), may be present, and testing for such infections should
be guided by demographic and contextual factors such as patient age,
patient gender, and environmental exposures.

DIAGNOSIS

The many potential causes of fever in older infants and children can
be broadly categorized into viral and bacterial infections, further organized by body region, as well as the less common inflammatory, oncologic, endocrine, and medication-­induced causes (Table 221.1).

Viral Infections

Viral infections are the most common cause of fever, and the prevalence
of specific viral infections varies by season. Typically, in the summer and
early fall, enteroviruses (e.g., coxsackieviruses) predominate, usually
presenting as hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease, herpangina, aseptic meningitis, or a variety of other manifestations. In the late fall and winter,
viral upper and lower respiratory tract infections caused by respiratory
viruses such as respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and influenza and gastroenteritis caused by gastrointestinal (GI) viruses such as norovirus and
rotavirus are common. Parainfluenza viruses are a common cause of
laryngotracheobronchitis (croup) and occur primarily in the fall and
spring, affecting mostly infants and toddlers. Varicella is a less common
cause of fever than in the past because of childhood vaccination but still
occurs, with the highest incidence in winter and early spring. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-­19) caused by SARS-­CoV-­2 can cause fever
alone or with either upper or lower respiratory tract symptoms in young
children, though asymptomatic infections also occur.

Bacterial Infections

Common bacterial infections include acute otitis media and streptococcal pharyngitis (strep throat). Acute otitis media is diagnosed by the
presence of a bulging, erythematous, and nonmobile tympanic membrane
upon insufflation. Streptococcal pharyngitis occurs most frequently in
the late fall and winter and is uncommon before age 3 years. The presence of focal auscultatory findings, including crackles, suggests a lower
respiratory tract infection, such as bacterial pneumonia, but may also be
present among children with bronchiolitis and viral pneumonia. Atypical
pneumonia caused by mycoplasma typically occurs in school-­age children
and is often associated with headache, sore throat, malaise, and low-­grade
fever. The presence of neck pain (especially with neck extension for those
with retropharyngeal abscess), drooling, or muffled voice may indicate
a deep neck infection such as a retropharyngeal abscess, which occurs
in infants and young children, or a peritonsillar abscess, which typically
affects older children. Skin and soft tissue infections such as cellulitis and
abscess may also present with fever, with the buttocks a common area for
abscesses in young children. Bone and joint infections such as osteomyelitis and septic arthritis may present with fever and refusal to bear weight
or limp in the young child. Invasive bacterial infections, including sepsis
and bacterial meningitis, must be considered in young children presenting with fever. Although uncommon, these infections are potentially life-­
threatening and require prompt recognition and treatment. Ill appearance,
lethargy, and tachycardia are typically present among children with severe

1647

sepsis, and petechiae may be an early finding among children with meningococcemia or other invasive bacterial diseases. Figures 221.1 and 221.2
show age-­related diagnoses and organisms producing bacterial sepsis in
infants and children. Children with fever who are immunosuppressed,
such as children receiving chemotherapy or those with sickle cell disease,
are at higher risk for invasive bacterial infection.
Infants and children age 2-­24 months merit special consideration
because they have limited verbal skills, are at risk for occult bacterial
infections, and may be otherwise asymptomatic except for fever (see
Chapter 220).

Occult Urinary Tract Infection

Among children 2-­
24 months old without symptoms or physical
examination findings that identify another focal source of infection,
the prevalence of UTI may be as high as 5–10%. The highest risk of
UTI occurs in females and uncircumcised males, with a very low rate
of infection (<0.5%) in circumcised males. Table 221.2 lists clinical risk
factors for UTI.

Occult Bacteremia

Occult bacteremia is defined as a positive blood culture for a pathogen
in a well-­appearing child without an obvious source of infection. In the
1990s, before vaccination programs against Haemophilus influenzae
type b (Hib) and Streptococcus pneumoniae, up to 5% of young children
age 2 to 24 (up to 36) months with fever ≥39°C (102.2°F) had occult
bacteremia, most often caused by S. pneumoniae. Currently, the prevalence of occult bacteremia is far less than 1% in febrile, well-­appearing
young children. Most cases of pneumococcal occult bacteremia are
transient, with a minority of these children developing new focal
infections, sepsis, or other sequelae. Unimmunized and incompletely
immunized young children remain at higher risk for occult bacteremia
because of pneumococcus (see Chapter 228). Bacteremia caused by
Hib or meningococcus should not be considered benign because subsequent serious invasive infection may rapidly follow the bacteremia.

GENERAL APPROACH

The general approach to fever in the older child begins with an assessment of the child’s overall appearance and vital signs. A detailed history
of the present illness and a thorough physical examination should be
performed to identify the cause of the fever.

Overall Appearance and Vital Signs

Children who are ill or appear toxic or who have abnormal vital signs
(e.g., tachycardia, tachypnea, hypotension) require rapid assessment,
including a focused physical examination to evaluate for the possibility
of an invasive bacterial infection. A more detailed history and physical
exam can be performed in the well-­appearing child.

Symptoms

A thorough history should be obtained from the caregiver (and patient,
when appropriate), including a characterization of the fever and any
other associated symptoms. The degree and duration of the fever should
be assessed, and the method of taking the temperature should be ascertained (e.g., forehead, axillary, oral, rectal). For children with prolonged
fever, it is important to determine whether the fever has been episodic or
persistent. Patients with prolonged fever may harbor occult infections,
UTI, or bone or soft tissue infections or may have an inflammatory or
oncologic condition. Additionally, Kawasaki disease and multisystem
inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­
C) should be considered
among children with prolonged fever, and a careful evaluation for other
stigmata associated with these conditions is warranted (see Chapter 208).
After characterizing the fever, it is important to ask systematically about the presence of symptoms that may identify an etiology for the fever, including symptoms of common viral infections
such as rhinorrhea, cough, vomiting, and diarrhea. Additionally,
symptoms should be elicited for each body system: headache, ear
pain, sore throat, neck pain or swelling, difficulty breathing, chest
pain, abdominal pain, rash or changes in skin color, extremity pain
or difficulty with ambulation (including refusal to bear weight in a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1648 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 221.1  Etiologies of Fever in Children >2 Mo of Age
INFECTIOUS
Central Nervous System
Bacterial meningitis
Viral meningitis
Viral encephalitis
Epidural abscess
Brain abscess
Ear, Nose, and Throat
Acute otitis media
Mastoiditis
Viral upper respiratory infection (i.e., common cold)
Acute bacterial sinusitis
Acute streptococcal pharyngitis
Acute viral pharyngitis
Retropharyngeal abscess
Ludwig angina
Peritonsillar abscess
Herpangina
Herpes simplex virus gingivostomatitis
Acute bacterial lymphadenitis
Viral laryngotracheobronchitis (i.e., croup)
Bacterial tracheitis
Epiglottitis
Lemierre syndrome
Face and Ocular
Parotitis (viral and bacterial)
Erysipelas
Preseptal cellulitis
Orbital cellulitis
Lower Respiratory Tract
Acute viral bronchiolitis
Pneumonia (viral and bacterial)
Complicated pneumonia (e.g., empyema, pleural effusion)
Tuberculosis
Cardiac
Pericarditis
Myocarditis
Endocarditis
Gastrointestinal
Gastroenteritis (viral and bacterial)
Mesenteric adenitis
Acute appendicitis
Hepatitis
Pancreatitis
Gallbladder disease (e.g., cholecystitis, cholangitis)
Intraabdominal abscess
Genitourinary
Urinary tract infection/pyelonephritis
Renal abscess
Epididymitis
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Tubo-­ovarian abscess
Skin, Soft Tissue, and Muscle
Viral exanthemas (e.g., varicella, coxsackievirus, roseola, measles)
Scarlet fever
Syphilis
Cellulitis
Abscess
Necrotizing fasciitis
Myositis (viral and bacterial and immune)

young child), and overall activity level. In older children, the presence of dysuria, urinary frequency, or back pain may indicate UTI.
Assessment of oral intake and urine output is also critical because
dehydration may accompany common childhood infections and is
associated with higher rates of morbidity. The presence of weight
loss or night sweats may indicate leukemia, lymphoma, or tuberculosis. Additionally, a thorough social history should be performed,

Bone and Joint
Osteomyelitis
Septic arthritis
Transient synovitis
Spondylodiscitis
Toxin Mediated
Toxic shock syndrome
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
Invasive Bacterial Infections
Occult bacteremia
Bacterial sepsis
Bacterial meningitis
Disseminated gonococcal infection
Systemic Infection
EBV
CMV
HIV
Cat scratch disease
Brucellosis
Influenza
Others (see Chapter 222)
Vector-­Borne (Tick, Mosquito)
Lyme disease
Rickettsiae (e.g., Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Ehrlichiosis
Arboviruses (e.g., West Nile virus)
Dengue fever
INFLAMMATORY
Kawasaki disease
Acute rheumatic fever
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Inflammatory bowel disease
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Other rheumatologic diseases (e.g., dermatomyositis)
Periodic fever syndromes
Serum-­like sickness syndrome
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C)
ONCOLOGIC
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Solid tumors (e.g., neuroblastoma)
ENDOCRINE
Thyrotoxicosis/thyroid storm
MEDICATION INDUCED
Serotonin syndrome
Anticholinergic toxidrome (e.g., antihistamines)
Sympathomimetic toxidrome (e.g., cocaine)
Salicylate toxicity
OTHER
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Macrophage activation syndrome
Ectodermal dysplasia
Dysautonomia
Factitious

inquiring about attendance at daycare, any travel, and any sick contacts at daycare, school, or in the household.

Physical Examination

A complete physical examination includes particular attention
to body systems with associated symptoms (e.g., thorough exam
of oropharynx for child with sore throat). A complete physical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 221 u Fever in the Older Child
A

B

1649

C

Proportion of episodes (%)

100

75

50

25

Patient group
Abdominal infection
Other infection type*

Bone and joint infection
Pneumonia

N
(< eo
28 na
da tes
28 ys)
−3
65
da
ys
1−
4
ye
ar
s
5−
9
ye
ar
s
10
−1
6
ye
ar
s

Pr
ev
iou
sly
h
ch eal
ild thy
re
Ne n
on
at
es
C
co hild
m re
or n
bid wi
itie th
s

N
(< eo
28 na
da tes
28 ys)
−3
65
da
ys
1−
4
ye
ar
s
5−
9
ye
ar
s
10
−1
6
ye
ar
s

0

Age group
CNS infection
Primary bloodstream infection

Age group
CLABSI
Urinary-tract infection

Fig. 221.1 Age distribution of sites of infection causing blood culture–proven bacterial sepsis in children. Sites of infection are shown for (A) the three

patient groups together and separately for (B) previously healthy children ≥28 days old and (C) neonates and children with comorbidities ≥28 days
old. CLABSI, Central line–associated bloodstream infection; CNS, central nervous system. *Skin infection, wound infection, endocarditis, toxic shock
syndrome; ear, nose, and throat infection; other, nonspecified focal infection. (From Agyeman PKA, Schlapbach LJ, Giannoni E, et al. Epidemiology
of blood culture-­proven bacterial sepsis in children in Switzerland: a population-­based cohort study. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2017;1:124–133, Fig. 3.)

A

B

C

75

50

Pr
ev
iou
sly
h
ch eal
ild thy
re
Ne n
on
at
es
C
co hild
m re
or n
bid wi
itie th
s

0

Patient group
Coagulase-negative staphylococci
Other Gram-negative pathogens*

Age group
Escherichia coli
Other Gram-positive pathogens†

N
(< eo
28 na
d te
28 ays s
−3 )
65
da
ys
1−
4
ye
ar
s
5−
9
ye
ar
s
10
−1
6
ye
ar
s

25

N
(< eo
28 na
da te
28 ys) s
−3
65
da
ys
1−
4
ye
ar
s
5−
9
ye
ar
s
10
−1
6
ye
ar
s

Proportion of episodes (%)

100

Group A streptococci
Staphylococcus aureus

Age group
Group B streptococci
Streptococcus pneumoniae

Fig. 221.2 Age distribution of pathogens causing blood culture–proven bacterial sepsis in children. Pathogens isolated in blood culture are

shown for (A) the three patient groups together and separately for (B) previously healthy children ≥28 days old and (C) neonates and children with
comorbidities ≥28 days old. *Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella spp., Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae, other gram-­negative
pathogens. †Enterococcus spp., viridans group streptococci, other gram-­positive pathogens. (From Agyeman PKA, Schlapbach LJ, Giannoni E,
et al. Epidemiology of blood culture-­proven bacterial sepsis in children in Switzerland: a population-­based cohort study. Lancet Child Adolesc.
2017;1:124–133, Fig. 4.)

examination is particularly important in young children <24 months
old who have limited verbal skills to communicate localized pain. In
older children the physical exam may proceed systematically from
head to toe, but in younger children, who may be fearful of the exam,
it is important to auscultate the heart and lungs first before proceeding
to potentially painful or distressing aspects of the examination (e.g.,
inspection of ears or oropharynx). In addition to a careful evaluation
of each body system, a complete examination should include an assessment of neck pain and mobility, which may be limited in children with
meningitis. Additionally, the examiner should palpate carefully for the
presence of lymphadenopathy, which may be present with infectious
and oncologic causes of fever. Erythema and exudate of the tonsils with
palatal petechiae suggest streptococcal pharyngitis. Erythema, bulging,
and decreased mobility of the tympanic membrane are the cardinal
signs of acute otitis media. Diffuse crackles and wheezes on auscultation of the lungs occur with acute viral bronchiolitis, whereas focal
crackles or decreased breath sounds are more consistent with bacterial
pneumonia. Focal tenderness in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen suggests appendicitis, and suprapubic tenderness may indicate
UTI (cystitis). Any focal bony tenderness may reflect a diagnosis of
osteomyelitis, whereas erythema, swelling, and limitation of range of
motion suggest a diagnosis of septic arthritis. Abnormal gait or pain
with ambulation without focal findings may also reflect a bone or joint
infection. A careful skin examination should also be performed. The

presence of petechiae may suggest meningococcal or other invasive
bacterial infection, whereas viral exanthems are typically associated
with a blanching macular or maculopapular rash.

EVALUATION
Laboratory Testing

Laboratory testing is not routinely indicated in the well-­appearing child
without a focus of infection on examination. Urine testing should be
considered based on the child’s age, duration of fever, and risk factors
for UTI (see Table 221.2). In general, the decision to perform laboratory testing should be guided by the overall appearance and vital signs
of the child, the presence of specific symptoms or physical examination
findings, and the child’s age.
For children who are ill or appear toxic or who have vital sign abnormalities indicative of an invasive bacterial infection (tachycardia, hypotension), rapid laboratory evaluation should be performed. Testing
may include a blood culture and possibly urine and cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) cultures, depending on the age of the child and the presence or
absence of physical exam findings indicative of UTI or bacterial meningitis. Markers of inflammation, such as procalcitonin or C-­reactive protein may also be considered. Complete blood counts (CBCs) identify
leukocytosis or leukopenia, anemia, and thrombocytosis or thrombocytopenia. Children with infectious mononucleosis may have lymphocyte predominance and the presence of atypical lymphocytes. Children

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1650 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
who are immunosuppressed or who have a central venous catheter
should also undergo diagnostic testing and receive prompt antimicrobial therapy, given their higher risk of invasive bacterial infection.
For well-­appearing children with symptoms or signs indicative of a
viral upper respiratory or GI infection, routine viral testing is not generally indicated. Influenza testing may be indicated within 48 hours
of symptom onset in certain higher-­risk populations, with immunosuppression, chronic respiratory or cardiac disease, sickle cell disease,
hospitalization, and age <2 years influencing the decision to treat with
an antiviral agent. Testing for SARS-­CoV-­2 may be indicated based on
local prevalence and symptoms (fever, cough, congestion, loss of taste
or smell, shortness of breath, body aches, fatigue, headache, sore throat,
nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea). Viral testing may also be useful with prolonged fever to identify a source of the fever and avoid extensive evaluation for inflammatory conditions such as Kawasaki disease or MIS-­C.
Rapid strep testing of the oropharynx is indicated for children
≥3 years old with signs of streptococcal pharyngitis on examination.
Although strep throat is uncommon in children <3 years old, this
group should undergo rapid strep testing if they have signs of strep
throat on exam and a household contact with streptococcal pharyngitis
(see Chapter 229).
Febrile children 2 months to 2 years old with several of the risk
factors for UTI listed in Table 221.2, particularly females and uncircumcised males, should undergo evaluation with urine dipstick, urine
microscopy, and urine culture. Females and uncircumcised males 2-­6
months old with high fever or fever that lasts ≥2 days may undergo
urine testing even in the presence of respiratory tract infection, given
the higher risk of UTI in this younger group (see Chapter 575).
Given the very low risk of occult bacteremia, routine performance
of blood testing (e.g., CBC, blood culture) is not indicated in the
vast majority of immunized children with fever. Unimmunized and
underimmunized children <2 years old remain at higher risk of occult
pneumococcal bacteremia, and CBC, blood culture, and/or inflammatory markers may be considered in this population in the absence of
another source of infection.

Imaging

recommend presumptive antibiotic treatment for pneumonia based on
clinical grounds and reserve the use of chest radiography for children
with hypoxemia or significant respiratory distress and for those who
fail outpatient therapy. Chest radiography is indicated for hospitalized
children to assess for complicated pneumonia, including empyema. The
performance of other imaging should be dictated by physical exam findings. The presence of drooling and neck or throat pain in an infant or
toddler may be suggestive of a retropharyngeal abscess, which is usually
confirmed by imaging that may include a lateral radiograph of the soft
tissue of the neck or computed tomography (CT) if clinical suspicion is
high. Ultrasonography (US) may be performed to assess for appendicitis
in children with fever and focal right lower quadrant pain or abdominal
pain that is severe. However, definitive imaging, including CT or MRI,
may be required if US is nondiagnostic or if clinical suspicion is high.

MANAGEMENT
General Management Principles

Management should be guided by the presence of specific symptoms
by history or signs on physical examination. Based on the child’s age and
duration of fever, management may also be guided by focused diagnostic
testing, such a urinalysis and selective urine culture testing among young
febrile children (Fig. 221.3 and see Table 221.2). Supportive care, including the use of antipyretics and adequate hydration, should be reviewed
with the patient and caregiver for all children with fever. Children with
viral infections generally require supportive care only, except for children at higher risk of severe or complicated disease with influenza virus
(see Chapter 305) or SARS-­CoV-­2 (see Chapter 311). Antibiotics should
Toxic-appearing or signs of sepsis?

Yes

Treatment for sepsis (e.g.
broad-spectrum antibiotics,
intravenous fluids)
[Chapter 85]

No

Immunocompromised?

Yes

The presence of focal crackles or decreased breath sounds on auscultation in the febrile child is suggestive of pneumonia. Current guidelines

Evaluation and
management discussed in
Chapter 223

No

Table 221.2  Risk Factors for Urinary Tract Infection in
Children
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS CLINICAL PRACTICE
GUIDELINE*
CHILDREN 2-­24 MO OF AGE
Female
Age <1 yr
Temperature ≥39°C (102.2°F)
Fever duration ≥2 days
No obvious source of infection
Male
Uncircumcised males at higher risk
Temperature ≥39°C (102.2°F)
Fever duration >1 day
No obvious source of infection
UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH UTICALC†
CHILDREN 2-­23 MO OF AGE
Age <12 mo
Maximum temperature ≥39°C
History of UTI
Female or uncircumcised male
Duration of fever ≥48 hr
No other source of fever
*Adapted from Subcommittee on Urinary Tract Infection, et al. Urinary tract infection
clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management of the initial UTI in
febrile infants and children 2 to 24 months. Pediatrics. 2011;128(3):595–610.
†Adapted from Shaikh N, Hoberman A, Hum SW, et al. Development and validation of
a calculator for estimating the probability of urinary tract infection in young febrile
children. JAMA Pediatr. 2018;172(6):550–556 and UTICalc Version 3.0, University of
Pittsburgh 2021, https://uticalc.pitt.edu/

> 24 months of age?

Yes

Management guided by
physical examination
findings

No

Obvious source of infection

Management guided by
physical examination
findings

Yes

No

Risk factors for urinary tract infection
(Table 221.2)

Yes

No

Unimmunized or under-immunized
against pneumococcus or Hib?

Yes

Urinalysis and urine
culture; treatment based
on results of urinalysis

Consider complete blood
count and blood culture;
ceftriaxone if WBC
≥15,000/microL

No
Supportive care, follow-up

Fig. 221.3 Algorithm for evaluation and management of fever in in-

fants and children >2 mo of age. Hib, Haemophilus influenzae type b;
WBC, white blood cell count.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 222 u Fever of Unknown Origin
be reserved for children with evidence of bacterial infection on physical
examination. A wait-­and-­see approach can be considered for children
with acute otitis media, in whom a prescription for antibiotics can be
provided to the family but instructions given to not fill the prescription unless severe or worsening symptoms develop (see Chapter 680).
Oral antibiotics can be prescribed to young children with UTI, although
children who cannot tolerate oral intake, are vomiting or dehydrated, or
appear toxic require parenteral antibiotics and hospitalization.
Blood tests, including CBC and blood culture, should be considered to evaluate for occult bacteremia in the unimmunized child. One
management strategy for these children is to administer a parenteral
antibiotic (e.g., ceftriaxone) if leukocytosis (white blood cell count
≥15,000/μL), elevated absolute neutrophil count (≥10,000/μL), or elevated inflammatory markers (procalcitonin >0.5 ng/mL) are present
while awaiting results of blood culture. Children who appear toxic or
who have signs of either sepsis or bacterial meningitis require emergent treatment with parenteral antibiotics as well as adjunct therapies
to support the child’s hemodynamics (see Chapter 85).
Importantly, anticipatory guidance should be provided to all families
of children with fever, including the criteria to return to care and the
importance of fever control and adequate hydration.

Other Considerations

Children who are unimmunized or underimmunized are at higher risk
of invasive bacterial infection, as are children who are immunocompromised. Management of fever in these children is described further
in Chapter 223. Additionally, the approach to fever in the returning
traveler should be focused on identifying commonly encountered
infections based on the region of travel (see Chapter 218).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 222

Fever of Unknown Origin
Andrew P. Steenhoff
Fever of unknown origin (FUO) is a diagnostic dilemma for pediatricians because it is often difficult to distinguish clinically between
benign and potentially life-­threatening causes. Pediatricians face the
important challenge of not missing the diagnosis of a serious illness
or an easily treatable condition that can result in increased morbidity.
Fortunately, FUO is usually an uncommon presentation of a common
disease, with most of these common diseases being easily treatable.
The classification of FUO is best reserved for children with a temperature >38°C (100.4°F) documented by a healthcare provider and for
which the cause could not be identified after at least 8 days of evaluation (Table 222.1). It is important to differentiate FUO from fever
without a source (FWS). FWS is fever where the source has not yet
been identified and is differentiated from FUO by the duration of the
fever. FWS can progress to FUO if no cause is elicited after 7 days of
evaluation.

ETIOLOGY

The many causes of FUO in children are infectious, rheumatologic
(connective tissue or autoimmune), autoinflammatory, oncologic,
neurologic, genetic, factitious, and iatrogenic processes (Table 222.2).
Although oncologic disorders should be seriously considered, most
children with malignancies do not have fever alone. The possibility of
drug fever should be considered if the patient is receiving any drug.
Drug fever is usually sustained and not associated with other symptoms. Discontinuation of the drug is associated with resolution of
the fever, generally within 72 hours, although certain drugs, such as
iodides, are excreted for a prolonged period, with fever that can persist
for as long as 1 month after drug withdrawal.

1651

Most fevers of unknown origin result from atypical presentations
of common diseases. In some cases, the presentation as an FUO is
characteristic of the disease (e.g., juvenile idiopathic arthritis), but the
definitive diagnosis can be established only after prolonged observation, because initially there are no associated or specific findings on
physical examination, and all laboratory results are negative or normal.
In the United States the systemic infectious diseases most commonly
implicated in children with FUO are bacterial enterocolitis, including
salmonellosis, as well as tuberculosis, rickettsial diseases, syphilis,
Lyme disease, cat-­scratch disease, atypical prolonged presentations
of common viral diseases such as adenovirus infection, Epstein-­Barr
virus (EBV) infection, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, viral hepatitis, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, malaria, Angiostrongylus cantonensis infection, and toxoplasmosis. Less common infectious causes
of FUO include tularemia, brucellosis, leptospirosis, and rat-­bite fever.
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) alone is not usually
responsible for FUO, although febrile illnesses often occur in patients
with AIDS as a result of opportunistic infections (see Table 222.1).
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are the connective tissue diseases most often associated with
FUO. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and Kawasaki disease are
also frequently reported as causes of FUO. If factitious fever (inoculation of pyogenic material or manipulation of the thermometer by the
patient or parent) is suspected, the presence and pattern of fever should
be documented in the hospital. Prolonged and continuous observation
of the patient, which can include electronic or video surveillance, is
imperative. FUO lasting >6 months is uncommon in children and
suggests granulomatous, autoinflammatory, or autoimmune disease.
Repeat interval evaluation is required, including history, physical
examination, laboratory evaluation, and imaging studies.
Historically, 90% of pediatric FUO cases in the United States had
an identifiable cause: approximately 50% infectious, 10–20% collagen vascular, and 10% oncologic. Other studies had variable results:
20–44% infectious, 0–7% collagen vascular, 2–3% oncologic, and up to
67% undiagnosed. The reason for the paradoxical increase in undiagnosed cases of FUO ironically is likely caused by improved infectious
and autoimmune diagnostic techniques. The advent of polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), improved culture techniques, and better understanding of atypical viral and bacterial pathogenesis and autoimmune
processes likely contribute to earlier diagnosis of these conditions and
fewer children with these conditions advancing to the category of FUO.
By contrast, causes of FUO remain primarily infectious in low and
middle income settings where there is a higher infectious disease burden and advanced diagnostic techniques are more limited.

DIAGNOSIS

The evaluation of FUO requires a thorough history and physical examination supplemented by a few screening laboratory tests and additional
laboratory and imaging evaluation informed by the history or abnormalities on examination or initial screening tests (see Table 222.2). Occasionally the fever pattern helps make a diagnosis (Fig. 222.1). Nonetheless,
most diseases causing an FUO do not have a typical fever pattern.

History

A detailed fever history should be obtained, including onset, frequency, duration, response or nonresponse to therapy, recurrence,
and associated symptoms. Repetitive chills and temperature spikes
are common in children with septicemia (regardless of cause), particularly when associated with kidney disease, liver or biliary disease,
infective endocarditis, malaria, brucellosis, rat-­bite fever, or a loculated collection of pus.
The age of the patient is helpful in evaluating FUO. Children >6
years old often have a respiratory or genitourinary tract infection,
localized infection (abscess, osteomyelitis), JIA, or rarely, leukemia.
Adolescent patients are more likely to have IBD, autoimmune processes, lymphoma, or tuberculosis in addition to the causes of FUO
found in younger children.
A history of exposure to wild or domestic animals should be solicited. The incidence of zoonotic infections in the United States is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 222 u Fever of Unknown Origin
be reserved for children with evidence of bacterial infection on physical
examination. A wait-­and-­see approach can be considered for children
with acute otitis media, in whom a prescription for antibiotics can be
provided to the family but instructions given to not fill the prescription unless severe or worsening symptoms develop (see Chapter 680).
Oral antibiotics can be prescribed to young children with UTI, although
children who cannot tolerate oral intake, are vomiting or dehydrated, or
appear toxic require parenteral antibiotics and hospitalization.
Blood tests, including CBC and blood culture, should be considered to evaluate for occult bacteremia in the unimmunized child. One
management strategy for these children is to administer a parenteral
antibiotic (e.g., ceftriaxone) if leukocytosis (white blood cell count
≥15,000/μL), elevated absolute neutrophil count (≥10,000/μL), or elevated inflammatory markers (procalcitonin >0.5 ng/mL) are present
while awaiting results of blood culture. Children who appear toxic or
who have signs of either sepsis or bacterial meningitis require emergent treatment with parenteral antibiotics as well as adjunct therapies
to support the child’s hemodynamics (see Chapter 85).
Importantly, anticipatory guidance should be provided to all families
of children with fever, including the criteria to return to care and the
importance of fever control and adequate hydration.

Other Considerations

Children who are unimmunized or underimmunized are at higher risk
of invasive bacterial infection, as are children who are immunocompromised. Management of fever in these children is described further
in Chapter 223. Additionally, the approach to fever in the returning
traveler should be focused on identifying commonly encountered
infections based on the region of travel (see Chapter 218).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 222

Fever of Unknown Origin
Andrew P. Steenhoff
Fever of unknown origin (FUO) is a diagnostic dilemma for pediatricians because it is often difficult to distinguish clinically between
benign and potentially life-­threatening causes. Pediatricians face the
important challenge of not missing the diagnosis of a serious illness
or an easily treatable condition that can result in increased morbidity.
Fortunately, FUO is usually an uncommon presentation of a common
disease, with most of these common diseases being easily treatable.
The classification of FUO is best reserved for children with a temperature >38°C (100.4°F) documented by a healthcare provider and for
which the cause could not be identified after at least 8 days of evaluation (Table 222.1). It is important to differentiate FUO from fever
without a source (FWS). FWS is fever where the source has not yet
been identified and is differentiated from FUO by the duration of the
fever. FWS can progress to FUO if no cause is elicited after 7 days of
evaluation.

ETIOLOGY

The many causes of FUO in children are infectious, rheumatologic
(connective tissue or autoimmune), autoinflammatory, oncologic,
neurologic, genetic, factitious, and iatrogenic processes (Table 222.2).
Although oncologic disorders should be seriously considered, most
children with malignancies do not have fever alone. The possibility of
drug fever should be considered if the patient is receiving any drug.
Drug fever is usually sustained and not associated with other symptoms. Discontinuation of the drug is associated with resolution of
the fever, generally within 72 hours, although certain drugs, such as
iodides, are excreted for a prolonged period, with fever that can persist
for as long as 1 month after drug withdrawal.

1651

Most fevers of unknown origin result from atypical presentations
of common diseases. In some cases, the presentation as an FUO is
characteristic of the disease (e.g., juvenile idiopathic arthritis), but the
definitive diagnosis can be established only after prolonged observation, because initially there are no associated or specific findings on
physical examination, and all laboratory results are negative or normal.
In the United States the systemic infectious diseases most commonly
implicated in children with FUO are bacterial enterocolitis, including
salmonellosis, as well as tuberculosis, rickettsial diseases, syphilis,
Lyme disease, cat-­scratch disease, atypical prolonged presentations
of common viral diseases such as adenovirus infection, Epstein-­Barr
virus (EBV) infection, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, viral hepatitis, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, malaria, Angiostrongylus cantonensis infection, and toxoplasmosis. Less common infectious causes
of FUO include tularemia, brucellosis, leptospirosis, and rat-­bite fever.
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) alone is not usually
responsible for FUO, although febrile illnesses often occur in patients
with AIDS as a result of opportunistic infections (see Table 222.1).
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are the connective tissue diseases most often associated with
FUO. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and Kawasaki disease are
also frequently reported as causes of FUO. If factitious fever (inoculation of pyogenic material or manipulation of the thermometer by the
patient or parent) is suspected, the presence and pattern of fever should
be documented in the hospital. Prolonged and continuous observation
of the patient, which can include electronic or video surveillance, is
imperative. FUO lasting >6 months is uncommon in children and
suggests granulomatous, autoinflammatory, or autoimmune disease.
Repeat interval evaluation is required, including history, physical
examination, laboratory evaluation, and imaging studies.
Historically, 90% of pediatric FUO cases in the United States had
an identifiable cause: approximately 50% infectious, 10–20% collagen vascular, and 10% oncologic. Other studies had variable results:
20–44% infectious, 0–7% collagen vascular, 2–3% oncologic, and up to
67% undiagnosed. The reason for the paradoxical increase in undiagnosed cases of FUO ironically is likely caused by improved infectious
and autoimmune diagnostic techniques. The advent of polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), improved culture techniques, and better understanding of atypical viral and bacterial pathogenesis and autoimmune
processes likely contribute to earlier diagnosis of these conditions and
fewer children with these conditions advancing to the category of FUO.
By contrast, causes of FUO remain primarily infectious in low and
middle income settings where there is a higher infectious disease burden and advanced diagnostic techniques are more limited.

DIAGNOSIS

The evaluation of FUO requires a thorough history and physical examination supplemented by a few screening laboratory tests and additional
laboratory and imaging evaluation informed by the history or abnormalities on examination or initial screening tests (see Table 222.2). Occasionally the fever pattern helps make a diagnosis (Fig. 222.1). Nonetheless,
most diseases causing an FUO do not have a typical fever pattern.

History

A detailed fever history should be obtained, including onset, frequency, duration, response or nonresponse to therapy, recurrence,
and associated symptoms. Repetitive chills and temperature spikes
are common in children with septicemia (regardless of cause), particularly when associated with kidney disease, liver or biliary disease,
infective endocarditis, malaria, brucellosis, rat-­bite fever, or a loculated collection of pus.
The age of the patient is helpful in evaluating FUO. Children >6
years old often have a respiratory or genitourinary tract infection,
localized infection (abscess, osteomyelitis), JIA, or rarely, leukemia.
Adolescent patients are more likely to have IBD, autoimmune processes, lymphoma, or tuberculosis in addition to the causes of FUO
found in younger children.
A history of exposure to wild or domestic animals should be solicited. The incidence of zoonotic infections in the United States is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1652 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 222.1  Summary of Definitions and Major Features of Four Subtypes of Fever of Unknown Origin (FUO)
HEALTHCARE-­
ASSOCIATED FUO

IMMUNE-­DEFICIENT
FUO

>38°C (100.4°F), >3 wk, >2
visits, or 1 wk in hospital

≥38°C (100.4°F), >1 wk, not
present or incubating on
admission

≥38°C (100.4°F), >1 wk,
negative cultures after
48 hr

≥38°C (100.4°F), >3 wk for
outpatients, >1 wk for
inpatients, HIV infection
confirmed

Patient location

Community, clinic, or hospital

Acute care hospital

Hospital or clinic

Community, clinic, or
hospital

Leading causes

Cancer, infections,
inflammatory conditions,
undiagnosed, habitual
hyperthermia

Healthcare-­associated
infections, postoperative
complications, drug fever

Majority caused by
infections, but cause
documented in only
40–60%

HIV itself, typical and
atypical mycobacteria,
CMV, lymphomas,
toxoplasmosis,
cryptococcosis,
immune reconstitution
inflammatory syndrome
(IRIS)

History emphasis

Travel, contacts,
animal and insect
exposure, medications,
immunizations, family
history, cardiac valve
disorder

Operations and
procedures, devices,
anatomic considerations,
drug treatment

Stage of chemotherapy,
drugs administered,
underlying
immunosuppressive
disorder

Drugs, exposures, risk
factors, travel, contacts,
stage of HIV infection

Examination emphasis

Fundi, oropharynx, temporal
artery, abdomen, lymph
nodes, spleen, joints, skin,
nails, genitalia, rectum or
prostate, lower-­limb deep
veins

Wounds, drains, devices,
sinuses, urine

Skinfolds, IV sites, lungs,
perianal area

Mouth, sinuses, skin,
lymph nodes, eyes,
lungs, perianal area

Investigation emphasis

Imaging, biopsies,
sedimentation rate, skin
tests

Imaging, bacterial cultures

CXR, bacterial cultures

Blood and lymphocyte
count; serologic tests;
CXR; stool examination;
biopsies of lung, bone
marrow, and liver for
cultures and cytologic
tests; brain imaging

Management

Observation, outpatient
temperature chart,
investigations, avoidance of
empirical drug treatments

Depends on situation

Antimicrobial treatment
protocols

Antiviral and antimicrobial
protocols, vaccines,
revision of treatment
regimens, good nutrition

Time course of disease

Months

Weeks

Days

Weeks to months

Tempo of investigation

Weeks

Days

Hours

Days to weeks

FEATURE

CLASSIC FUO

Definition

HIV-­RELATED FUO

CMV, Cytomegalovirus; CXR, chest radiograph; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; IV, intravenous line.
Adapted from Mackowak PA, Durack DT. Fever of unknown origin. In: Mandell GL, Bennett, JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010: Table 51-­1.

increasing, and these infections are often acquired from pets that are
not overtly ill. Immunization of dogs against specific disorders such
as leptospirosis can prevent canine disease but does not always prevent the animal from carrying and shedding leptospires, which may be
transmitted to household contacts. A history of ingestion of rabbit or
squirrel meat might provide a clue to the diagnosis of oropharyngeal,
glandular, or typhoidal tularemia. A history of tick bite or travel to
tick-­or parasite-­infested areas should be obtained.
Any history of pica should be elicited. Ingestion of dirt is a particularly important clue to infection with Toxocara canis (visceral larva
migrans) or Toxoplasma gondii (toxoplasmosis).
A history of unusual dietary habits or travel as early as the birth of
the child should be sought. Tuberculosis, malaria, histoplasmosis, and
coccidioidomycosis can reemerge years after visiting or living in an
endemic area. It is important to identify prophylactic immunizations
and precautions taken by the patient against ingestion of contaminated
water or food during foreign travel. Rocks, dirt, and artifacts from geographically distant regions that have been collected and brought into
the home as souvenirs can serve as vectors of disease.
A medication history should be pursued rigorously. This history should elicit information about nonprescription preparations

and topical agents, including eyedrops, that may be associated with
atropine-­induced fever.
The genetic background of a patient also is important. Descendants of the Ulster Scots may have FUO because they are afflicted with
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Familial dysautonomia (Riley-­Day
syndrome), a disorder in which hyperthermia is recurrent, is more
common among Jews than among other population groups. Ancestry
from the Mediterranean region should suggest familial Mediterranean fever. Both familial Mediterranean fever and hyper-­IgD syndrome are inherited as autosomal recessive disorders. Tumor necrosis
factor receptor–associated periodic syndrome and Muckle-­Wells syndrome are inherited as autosomal dominant traits.
Pseudo-­FUO is defined as successive episodes of benign, self-­
limited infections with fever that the parents perceive as one prolonged
fever episode. This needs to be carefully ruled out before undertaking
an unnecessary evaluation. Usually, pseudo-­FUO starts with a well-­
defined infection (frequently viral) that resolves but is followed by
other febrile viral illnesses that may be less well defined. Diagnosis of
pseudo-­FUO usually requires a careful history, focusing on identifying
afebrile periods between febrile episodes. If pseudo-­FUO is suspected
and the patient does not appear ill, keeping a fever diary can be helpful.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 222.2  Etiology of Fever of Unknown Origin (FUO) in Children
ABSCESSES
Brain
Hepatic
Intraabdominal*
Odontogenic (dental)
Pelvic*
Perinephric and renal
Psoas
Rectal
Subphrenic
BACTERIAL DISEASES
Actinomycosis
Bartonella henselae (cat-­scratch disease)*
Brucellosis
Campylobacter
Chlamydia
Francisella tularensis (tularemia)
Fusobacterium (Lemierre syndrome)
Leptospirosis
Listeria monocytogenes (listeriosis)
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Meningococcemia (chronic)
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Psittacosis
Rat-­bite fever (Streptobacillus moniliformis; streptobacillary form of
rat-­bite fever)
Salmonella
Tuberculosis*
Whipple disease
Yersiniosis
LOCALIZED INFECTIONS
Bacterial endocarditis*
Cholangitis
Ludwig angina
Mastoiditis
Osteomyelitis*
Pericarditis
Pneumonia
Pyelonephritis*
Sinusitis
Spondylodiskitis
SPIROCHETES
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease)
Leptospirosis
Rat-­bite fever (Spirillum minus; spirillary form of rat-­bite fever)
Relapsing fever (Borrelia recurrentis, Borrelia miyamotoi)
Syphilis
FUNGAL DISEASES
Blastomycosis (extrapulmonary)
Coccidioidomycosis (disseminated)
Cryptococcosis
Histoplasmosis (disseminated)
RICKETTSIAE-­LIKE ORGANISMS
Anaplasmosis
Ehrlichiosis
Q fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Tick-­borne typhus
VIRUSES
Arboviruses
Chikungunya
Cytomegalovirus*
Epstein-­Barr virus*
Hantavirus
Hepatitis viruses
HIV
Human herpesviruses (HHV-­6 and HHV-­7)
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
Respiratory viruses (especially, adenovirus and enteroviruses)*
Zika virus
PARASITIC DISEASES
Amebiasis
Babesiosis
Baylisascaris

Chapter 222 u Fever of Unknown Origin

1653

Malaria
Naegleria
Toxoplasmosis
Trichinosis
Trypanosomiasis
Visceral larva migrans (Toxocara)
RHEUMATOLOGIC DISEASES
Autoimmune hepatitis
Behçet syndrome
Chronic noninfectious osteomyelitis (CNO)
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis* ± macrophage activation syndrome
Rheumatic fever
Systemic lupus erythematosus*
Vasculitis syndromes (granulomatous, nongranulomatous)
HYPERSENSITIVITY DISEASES
Drug fever, including DRESS
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Hypersensitivity vasculitis/reactive arthritis*
Serum sickness
Weber-­Christian disease
NEOPLASMS
Atrial myxoma
Cholesterol granuloma
Hodgkin lymphoma
Inflammatory pseudotumor
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Leukemia
Lymphoma*
Pheochromocytoma
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
GRANULOMATOUS DISEASES
Crohn disease
Granulomatous hepatitis
Polyangiitis with granulomatosis
Sarcoidosis
FAMILIAL AND HEREDITARY DISEASES
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS)
Autonomic neuropathies
Fabry disease
Familial dysautonomia
Familial Hibernian fever
Familial Mediterranean fever and the many other autoinflammatory
(periodic fever) diseases (see Chapter 204)
Hypertriglyceridemia
Ichthyosis
Sickle cell crisis
Spinal cord/brain injury
MISCELLANEOUS
Addison disease
Allergic alveolitis
Castleman disease
Cyclic neutropenia
Diabetes insipidus (non-­nephrogenic and nephrogenic)
Erythema multiforme
Factitious fever
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
Hypereosinophilia syndromes
Hypothalamic-­central fever
Infantile cortical hyperostosis
Inflammatory bowel disease*
Kawasaki disease*
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease
Metal fume fever
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C)
Pancreatitis
Poisoning
Pulmonary embolism
Rosai-­Dorfman disease
Thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura
Thrombophlebitis
Thyrotoxicosis, thyroiditis

*Most common identified causes of FUO in children.
DRESS, Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms.
Modified from Huppler AR. Fever. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table. 52.9, pp. 980–981.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1654 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Physical Examination

A complete physical examination is essential to search for any clues to
the underlying diagnosis, and often it is worthwhile to repeat a detailed
examination on different days to detect signs that may have changed
or been missed (Tables 222.3-­222.5). The child’s general appearance,

including sweating during fever, should be noted. The continuing
absence of sweat in the presence of an elevated or changing body temperature suggests dehydration caused by vomiting, diarrhea, or central
or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. It also should suggest anhidrotic
ectodermal dysplasia, familial dysautonomia, or exposure to atropine.

Fig. 222.1 Distinctive fever patterns. A, Malaria. B, Typhoid fever (demonstrating relative bradycardia). C, Hodgkin disease (Pel-­Ebstein fever pattern). D, Borreliosis (relapsing fever pattern). (From Woodward TE. The fever pattern as a clinical diagnostic aid. In Mackowiak PA, ed. Fever: Basic
Mechanisms and Management, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-­Raven; 1997:215–236.)

Table 222.3  Subtle Physical Findings with Special Significance in Patients with Fever of Unknown Origin
BODY SITE

PHYSICAL FINDING

DIAGNOSIS

Head

Sinus tenderness

Sinusitis

Temporal artery

Nodules, reduced pulsations

Temporal arteritis

Oropharynx

Ulceration

Disseminated histoplasmosis, SLE, IBD, Behçet
syndrome, periodic fever syndromes

Tender tooth

Periapical abscess, sinus referred pain

Loose teeth

Langerhans cell histiocytosis, leukemia

Choroid tubercle

Disseminated granulomatosis*

Petechiae, Roth spots

Endocarditis

Thyroid

Enlargement, tenderness

Thyroiditis

Heart

Murmur

Infective or marantic endocarditis

Relative bradycardia

Typhoid fever, malaria, leptospirosis, psittacosis, central
fever, drug fever

Enlarged iliac crest lymph nodes, splenomegaly

Lymphoma, endocarditis, disseminated
granulomatosis*

Audible abdominal aortic or renal artery bruit

Large vessel vasculitis such as Takayasu arteritis

Costovertebral tenderness

Chronic pyelonephritis, perinephric abscess

Perirectal fluctuance, tenderness

Abscess

Prostatic tenderness, fluctuance

Abscess

Testicular nodule

Periarteritis nodosa, cancer

Epididymal nodule

Disseminated granulomatosis

Spinal tenderness

Vertebral osteomyelitis

Fundi or conjunctivae

Abdomen

Rectum

Genitalia

Spine

Paraspinal tenderness

Paraspinal collection

Lower extremities

Deep venous tenderness

Thrombosis or thrombophlebitis

Upper or lower extremities

Pseudoparesis

Syphilitic bone disease

Skin and nails

Petechiae, splinter hemorrhages, subcutaneous
nodules, clubbing

Vasculitis, endocarditis

*Includes tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, sarcoidosis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, and syphilis.
Adapted from Mackowak PA, Durack DT. Fever of unknown origin. In: Mandell GL, Bennett, JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010: Table 51-­8.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 222 u Fever of Unknown Origin

1655

Table 222.4  Examples of Potential Diagnostic Clues to Infections Presenting as Fever of Unknown Origin
ETIOLOGY

HISTORICAL CLUES

PHYSICAL CLUES

Anaplasmosis

Transmitted by bite of Ixodes tick in association with
outdoor activity in northern-­central and eastern United
States

Fever, headache, arthralgia, myalgia, pneumonitis,
thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, elevated liver
enzymes

Babesiosis

Transmitted by bite of Ixodes tick in association with
outdoor activity in northeastern United States

Arthralgias, myalgias, relative bradycardia,
hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia,
elevated liver enzymes

Bartonellosis

Recent travel to Andes Mountains (Oroya fever;
Bartonella bacilliformis), association with homelessness
in urban settings (Bartonella quintana) or scratch of
infected kitten or feral cat (Bartonella henselae)

Conjunctivitis, retroorbital pain, anterior tibial bone
pain, macular rash, nodular plaque lesions, regional
lymphadenopathy

Blastomycosis

Contact with soil adjacent to Mississippi and Ohio River
valleys, Saint Lawrence River in New York and Canada,
and North American Great Lakes or exposure to
infected dogs

Arthritis, atypical pneumonia, pulmonary nodules, and/
or fulminant adult respiratory distress syndrome;
verrucous, nodular, or ulcerative skin lesions; prostatitis

Brucellosis

Associated with contact or consumption of products from
infected goats, pigs, camels, yaks, buffalo, or cows and
with abattoir work

Arthralgias, hepatosplenomegaly, suppurative
musculoskeletal lesions, sacroiliitis, spondylitis, uveitis,
hepatitis, pancytopenia

Coccidioidomycosis

Exposure to soil or dust in southwestern United States

Arthralgias, pneumonia, pulmonary cavities, pulmonary
nodules, erythema multiforme, erythema nodosum

Ehrlichiosis

Transmitted by bite of Amblyomma, Dermacentor,
or Ixodes tick in association with outdoor activity in
midwestern and southeastern United States

Pneumonitis, hepatitis, thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia

Enteric fever (Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhi)

Recent travel to a low-­or middle-­income country (LMIC)
with consumption of potentially contaminated food or
water

Headache, arthritis, abdominal pain, relative bradycardia,
hepatosplenomegaly, leukopenia

Histoplasmosis

Exposure to bat or blackbird excreta in roosts, chicken
houses, or caves in region surrounding Ohio and
Mississippi River valleys

Headache, pneumonia, pulmonary cavities, mucosal
ulcers, adenopathy, erythema nodosum, erythema
multiforme, hepatitis, anemia, leukopenia,
thrombocytopenia

Leptospirosis

Occupational exposure among workers in sewers, rice
and sugarcane fields, and abattoirs; recreational water
sports and exposure to contaminated waters or infected
dogs

Bitemporal and frontal headache, calf and lumbar muscle
tenderness, conjunctival suffusion, hepatic and renal
failure, hemorrhagic pneumonitis

Leishmaniasis (visceral
disease)

Associated with recent travel to areas endemic for sand
flies

Hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and
hyperpigmentation of face, hand, foot, and abdominal
skin (kala-­azar)

Malaria

Recent travel to endemic areas in Asia, Africa, and
Central/South America

Fever, headaches, nausea, emesis, diarrhea,
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, anemia

Psittacosis (Chlamydia
psittaci)

Associated with contact with birds, especially psittacine
birds

Fever, pharyngitis, hepatosplenomegaly, pneumonia,
blanching maculopapular eruptions; erythema
multiforme, marginatum, and nodosum

Q fever (Coxiella
burnetii)

Associated with farm, veterinary, or abattoir work;
consumption of unpasteurized milk; contact with
infected sheep, goats, or cattle

Atypical pneumonia, hepatitis, hepatomegaly, relative
bradycardia, splenomegaly

Rat-­bite fever
(Streptobacillus
moniliformis)

Recent bite or scratch by rat, mouse, or squirrel; ingestion
of food or water contaminated by rat excrement

Headaches, myalgias, polyarthritis, and maculopapular,
morbilliform, petechial, vesicular, or pustular rash over
the palms, soles, and extremities

Relapsing fever (Borrelia
recurrentis)

Associated with poverty, crowding, and poor sanitation
(louse-­borne) or with camping (tick-­borne), particularly
in the Grand Canyon

High fever with rigors, headache, delirium, arthralgias,
myalgias, and hepatosplenomegaly

Rocky Mountain spotted
fever

Associated with outdoor activity in the South Atlantic
or southeastern United States and exposure to
Dermacentor tick bites

Headache, petechial rash involving the extremities,
palms, and soles

Tuberculosis

Recent contact with tuberculosis; recent immigration
from endemic country; work or residence in homeless
shelters, correctional facilities, or healthcare facilities

Night sweats, weight loss, atypical pneumonia; on chest
x-ray, hilar adenopathy is most common in younger
children, with cavitary pulmonary lesions seen in youth.

Tularemia

Associated with bites by Amblyomma or Dermacentor
ticks, deer flies, and mosquitoes or direct contact with
tissues of infected animals such as rabbits, squirrels,
deer, raccoons, cattle, sheep, and swine

Ulcerated skin lesions at a bite site, pneumonia, relative
bradycardia, lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1656 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 222.4  Examples of Potential Diagnostic Clues to Infections Presenting as Fever of Unknown Origin—cont’d
ETIOLOGY

HISTORICAL CLUES

PHYSICAL CLUES

Whipple disease
(Tropheryma whipplei)

Potential association with exposure to sewage

Chronic diarrhea, arthralgia, weight loss, malabsorption,
malnutrition

Adapted from Wright WF, Mackowiak PA. Fever of unknown origin. In: Bennett JE, Blaser MJ, Dolin R, et al., eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015: Table 56-­9.

Table 222.5  Discriminating Features of Noninfectious Causes of Fever of Unknown Origin
CAUSES OF FEVER

EXPOSURE OR CONDITION

Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease

Inflammatory pseudotumor

History of nonspecific illness
(presumed host-­controlled
infection)

Kawasaki disease (incomplete)

FEATURES

DIAGNOSTIC METHOD

Regional or generalized
lymphadenopathy; elevated
inflammatory markers

Biopsy or histology

Insidious; malaise, weight loss, vague
abdominal pain or tenderness; anemia;
elevated inflammatory markers

Abdominal CT; biopsy or histology

Asynchronous or incomplete features
of Kawasaki disease; elevated
inflammatory markers; thrombocytosis

Clinical constellation;
echocardiogram

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis

Familial, sporadic

Hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy,
exanthem; anemia, elevated
inflammatory markers

Clinical constellation

Systemic lupus erythematosus

Familial, sporadic

Malaise, weight loss; then multisystem
involvement (kidneys, joints, skin)

Serum antinuclear antibody,
anti–double-­stranded DNA,
anti–smooth muscle antibody

Hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis

Familial, virus, or
rheumatologic (macrophage
activation syndrome)
induced

Severe, rapidly progressive illness;
hepatomegaly, lymphadenopathy,
exanthem; cytopenias; extreme
elevations of inflammatory markers

Ferritin, triglyceride levels,
gene panel, other diagnostic
criteria; erythrophagocytosis by
macrophages; natural killer cell,
CD8+ T-­lymphocyte dysfunction

Vasculitis syndromes

Familial, sporadic

Specific hallmarks (renal, neurologic,
stomatitis or perianal ulcers, uveitis,
pulmonary)

Clinical constellation; specific
autoantibodies; biopsy or
histology

Sarcoidosis

Geography; race

Fatigue, weight loss, leg pain; anemia;
elevated inflammatory markers;
mediastinal lymphadenopathy; uveitis

Clinical constellation; biopsy or
histology; soluble interleukin-­2
receptor level

Inflammatory bowel disease

Familial; sporadic

Linear growth failure, subtle
gastrointestinal symptoms or
abdominal tenderness; perirectal skin
tag; iron-­deficiency anemia; elevated
inflammatory markers

Abdominal CT; barium study

Weight loss, fatigue; nonarticular bone
pain; lymphadenopathy; cytopenias

Bone marrow or tissue biopsy

Lymphoreticular malignancy
Drug hypersensitivity

Prescription or
nonprescription drug
exposure

Preserved sense of well-­being;
exanthems; eosinophilia; organ
dysfunction (renal, cardiac, pulmonary)

Clinical constellation; withdrawal
of drug

Factitious fever or Munchausen
syndrome by proxy

Predisposing parent-­patient
dynamic

Discordant temperature and vital
signs; discordant parent-­measured
temperature and urine temperature;
normal inflammatory markers

Clinical constellation; verification
of temperature in medical
setting

Hypothalamic dysfunction,
diabetes insipidus,
dysautonomia, or absent
corpus callosum

Underlying condition; genetic
syndrome; anatomic
abnormality

Normal inflammatory markers;
hypernatremia; no response to
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs

Clinical constellation; laboratory
tests and imaging

Modified from Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 15.2, p. 121.

The general activity of the patient and the presence or absence of rashes
should also be noted.
A careful ophthalmic examination is important. Red, weeping eyes
may be a sign of connective tissue disease, particularly polyarteritis
nodosa. Palpebral conjunctivitis in a febrile patient may be a clue to

measles, coxsackievirus infection, tuberculosis, infectious mononucleosis, lymphogranuloma venereum, or cat-­scratch disease. In contrast,
bulbar conjunctivitis in a child with FUO suggests Kawasaki disease
or leptospirosis. Petechial conjunctival hemorrhages suggest infective
endocarditis. Uveitis suggests sarcoidosis, JIA, SLE, Kawasaki disease,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 222 u Fever of Unknown Origin
Behçet disease, and vasculitis. Chorioretinitis suggests CMV, toxoplasmosis, and syphilis. Proptosis suggests an orbital tumor, thyrotoxicosis, metastasis (neuroblastoma), orbital infection, granulomatosis
with polyangiitis, or orbital pseudotumor.
The ophthalmoscope should also be used to examine nail-­fold capillary abnormalities that are associated with connective tissue diseases
such as juvenile dermatomyositis and systemic scleroderma. Immersion
oil or lubricating jelly is placed on the skin adjacent to the nailbed, and
the capillary pattern is observed with the ophthalmoscope set on +40.
FUO is sometimes caused by hypothalamic dysfunction. A clue
to this disorder is failure of pupillary constriction because of absence
of the sphincter constrictor muscle of the eye. This muscle develops
embryologically when hypothalamic structure and function also are
undergoing differentiation.
Fever resulting from familial dysautonomia may be suggested by
lack of tears, an absent corneal reflex, or a smooth tongue with absence
of fungiform papillae. Tenderness to tapping over the sinuses or the
upper teeth suggests sinusitis. Recurrent oral candidiasis may be a clue
to various disorders of the immune system, especially involving the T
lymphocytes. Hyperactive deep tendon reflexes can suggest thyrotoxicosis as the cause of FUO.
Hyperemia of the pharynx, with or without exudate, suggests streptococcal infection, EBV infection, CMV infection, toxoplasmosis, salmonellosis, tularemia, Kawasaki disease, gonococcal infection, or leptospirosis.
The muscles and bones should be palpated carefully. Point tenderness over a bone can suggest occult osteomyelitis or bone marrow
invasion from neoplastic disease. Tenderness over the trapezius muscle
may be a clue to subdiaphragmatic abscess. Generalized muscle tenderness suggests dermatomyositis, trichinosis, polyarteritis, Kawasaki
disease, or Mycoplasma or arboviral infection.
Rectal examination can reveal perirectal lymphadenopathy or tenderness, which suggests a deep pelvic abscess, iliac adenitis, or pelvic
osteomyelitis. A guaiac test should be obtained; occult blood loss can
suggest granulomatous colitis or ulcerative colitis as the cause of FUO.

Laboratory Evaluation

The laboratory evaluation of the child with FUO and whether inpatient
or outpatient are determined on a case-­by-­case basis. Hospitalization
may be required for laboratory or imaging studies that are unavailable
or impractical in an ambulatory setting, for more careful observation,
or for temporary relief of parental anxiety. The tempo of diagnostic
evaluation should be adjusted to the tempo of the illness; haste may be
imperative in a critically ill patient, but if the illness is more chronic,
the evaluation can proceed in a systematic manner and can be carried
out in an outpatient setting. If there are no clues in the patient’s history
or on physical examination that suggest a specific infection or area of
suspicion, it is unlikely that diagnostic studies will be helpful. In this
common scenario, continued surveillance and repeated reevaluations
of the child should be employed to detect any new clinical findings.
Although ordering a large number of diagnostic tests in every child
with FUO according to a predetermined list is discouraged, certain studies should be considered in the evaluation. A complete blood cell count
(CBC) with a white blood cell (WBC) differential and a urinalysis should
be part of the initial laboratory evaluation. An absolute neutrophil count
(ANC) of <5,000/μL is evidence against indolent bacterial infection other
than typhoid fever. Conversely, in patients with a polymorphonuclear
leukocyte (PMN) count of >10,000/μL or a nonsegmented PMN count
of >500/μL, a severe bacterial infection is highly likely. Direct examination of the blood smear with Giemsa or Wright stain can reveal organisms of malaria, trypanosomiasis, babesiosis, or relapsing fever.
An erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) >30 mm/hr indicates
inflammation and the need for further evaluation for infectious,
autoimmune, autoinflammatory, or malignant diseases, tuberculosis,
Kawasaki disease, or autoimmune disease. A low ESR does not eliminate the possibility of infection or JIA. C-­reactive protein (CRP) is
another acute-­phase reactant that becomes elevated and returns to normal more rapidly than the ESR. Experts recommend checking either
ESR or CRP, because there is no evidence that measuring both in the
same patient with FUO is clinically useful.

1657

Blood cultures should be obtained aerobically. Anaerobic blood cultures have an extremely low yield and should be obtained only if there
are specific reasons to suspect anaerobic infection. Multiple or repeated
blood cultures may be required to detect bacteremia associated with
infective endocarditis, osteomyelitis, or deep-­seated abscesses. Polymicrobial bacteremia suggests factitious or self-­induced infection or
gastrointestinal (GI) pathology. The isolation of leptospires, Francisella, or Yersinia requires selective media or specific conditions not
routinely used. Therefore it is important to inform the laboratory what
organisms are suspected in a particular case. Urine culture should be
obtained in all cases. Next-­generation sequencing of tissue or whole
blood or plasma may identify undetected or unculturable bacteria,
fungi, or viruses.
Tuberculin skin testing (TST) should be performed with intradermal placement of 5 units of purified protein derivative that has been
kept appropriately refrigerated. In children >2 years old, it is reasonable
to test for tuberculosis using an interferon-­γ release assay (IGRA).
Imaging studies of the chest, sinuses, mastoids, or GI tract may
be indicated by specific historical or physical findings. Radiographic
evaluation of the GI tract for IBD may be helpful in evaluating selected
children with FUO and no other localizing signs or symptoms.
Examination of the bone marrow can reveal leukemia; metastatic
neoplasm; mycobacterial, fungal, or parasitic infection; histiocytosis;
hemophagocytosis; or storage diseases. If a bone marrow aspirate is
performed, cultures for bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungi should be
obtained.
Serologic tests can aid in the diagnosis of EBV infection, CMV
infection, toxoplasmosis, salmonellosis, tularemia, brucellosis, leptospirosis, cat-­scratch disease, Lyme disease, rickettsial disease, and on
some occasions JIA. The clinician should be aware that the reliability
and the sensitivity and specificity of these tests vary; for example, serologic tests for Lyme disease outside of reference laboratories have been
generally unreliable.
MRI scans may be helpful in detecting abdominal abscesses and
osteomyelitis, especially if the focus cannot be localized to a specific
limb or multifocal disease is suspected. 18F-­fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET) combined with MRI or CT is a helpful imaging modality and contributed to an ultimate diagnosis in 48%
of children in a Dutch study. Echocardiograms can demonstrate vegetation on the leaflets of heart valves, suggesting infective endocarditis.
Ultrasonography (US) can identify intraabdominal abscesses of the
liver, subphrenic space, pelvis, or spleen.
Total-­body CT or MRI (both with contrast) is usually the first imaging study of choice; both permit detection of neoplasms and collections
of purulent material without the use of surgical exploration or radioisotopes. CT and MRI are helpful in identifying lesions of the head,
neck, chest, retroperitoneal spaces, liver, spleen, intraabdominal and
intrathoracic lymph nodes, kidneys, pelvis, and mediastinum. CT-­or
US-­guided aspiration or biopsy of suspicious lesions has reduced the
need for exploratory laparotomy or thoracotomy. MRI is particularly
useful for detecting osteomyelitis or myositis if there is concern about
a specific limb. Diagnostic imaging can be helpful in confirming or
evaluating a suspected diagnosis. With CT scans, however, the child
is exposed to large amounts of radiation. PET-­CT or MRI may help
localize an occult tumor.
Biopsy is occasionally helpful in establishing a diagnosis of FUO.
Bronchoscopy, laparoscopy, mediastinoscopy, and GI endoscopy can
provide direct visualization and biopsy material when organ-­specific
manifestations are present. When employing any of the more invasive
testing procedures, the risk/benefit ratio for the patient must always
be considered before proceeding further. A diagnostic approach to an
FUO is noted in Figure 222.2.

MANAGEMENT

The ultimate treatment of FUO is tailored to the underlying diagnosis.
Fever and infection in children are not synonymous, and antimicrobial agents should only be used when there is evidence of infection,
with avoidance of empirical trials of medication. An exception may
be the use of antituberculous treatment in critically ill children with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1658 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
FEVER t38.3qC for t14 Days
Thorough history
Physical examination
including growth chart

Identify:
Pneumonia
UTI

Screening laboratory
studies:
CBC, CRP, ESR, UA + culture,
blood culture, chest x-ray
Consider history, physical, and screening
labs for clues to diagnosis

Clues absent or
nonspecific
and fever still present

Clues present

Repeat history and physical exam
Repeat screening labs: CBC, ESR,
CRP, UA, blood culture, urine culture
• LFTs, LDH, uric acid, BUN, creatinine
• Stool heme
• PPD, interferon-J release assay
• Tube to hold
• Next generation sequencing on tissue or blood for
pathogen genome
Consider EBV, Bartonella, other serologies
Consider abdominal CT, STIR MRI or MRI/PET scan
Consider genetic testing for HLH, recurrent fever syndrome
Avoid empiric antibiotic therapy without
clear indication

Pursue

Clues present

Clues absent or nonspecific and
fever still present

Consider: hospitalization if:
• Clinically worrisome
• Labs worrisome
• Fever history suspect
• Need for evaluation by
multiple subspecialists
Perform serial physical exams
Consider as appropriate:
Pediatric infectious diseases consult
Hematology/oncology consult
Rheumatology consult

suspected disseminated tuberculosis. Empirical trials of other antimicrobial agents may be dangerous and can obscure the diagnosis of
infective endocarditis, meningitis, parameningeal infection, or osteomyelitis. After a complete evaluation, antipyretics may be indicated to
control fever associated with adverse symptoms.

PROGNOSIS

Children with FUO have a better prognosis than adults. The outcome
in a child depends on the primary disease process. In many cases, no
diagnosis can be established, and fever abates spontaneously. In as
many as 25% of children in whom fever persists, the cause of the fever
remains unclear even after thorough evaluation.

Fig. 222.2 Algorithmic approach to the evaluation

of fever of unknown origin (FUO). EBV, Epstein-­Barr
virus; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; LDH,
lactate dehydrogenase; LFT, liver function test; PPD,
purified protein derivative; STIR, short tau inversion
recovery rapid MRI; UTI, urinary tract infection. (Modified from Huppler AR. Fever. In Kliegman RM, Toth H,
Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­
Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023,
Fig. 52.2, p. 982.)

In a series of 69 patients referred for “prolonged” unexplained fever,
10 were not actually having fever, and 11 had diagnoses that were
readily apparent at the initial visit. The remaining 48 were classified as
having FUO. The median duration of reported fever for these patients
was 30 days. Fifteen received a diagnosis, and 10 (67%) had confirmed
infections: acute EBV or CMV infection (n = 5; with 1 patient developing hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis), cat-­scratch disease (3), and
histoplasmosis (2). The other 5 patients had inflammatory conditions
(systemic JIA, 2; IBD, 1), central fever (1), or malignancy (acute lymphoblastic leukemia, 1).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 223 u Infections in Immunocompromised Persons

Chapter 223

Infections in
Immunocompromised
Persons
Marian G. Michaels, Hey Jin Chong, and
Michael Green
Infection develops when the host immune system fails to protect adequately against potential pathogens (see also Chapters 165, 166, and
180). For individuals with an intact immune system, infection occurs
in the setting of naïveté to the microbe and absence of or inadequate
preexisting microbe-­specific immunity, or when protective barriers of
the body such as the skin have been breached. Healthy children are
able to meet the challenge of most infectious agents with an immunologic armamentarium capable of preventing significant disease. Once
an infection begins to develop, an array of immune responses is set into
action to control the disease and prevent it from reappearing. In contrast, immunocompromised children might not have this same capability. Depending on the level and type of immune defect, the affected
child might not be able to contain the pathogen or develop an appropriate immune response to prevent recurrence.
Primary immunodeficiencies are compromised states that result
from genetic defects affecting one or more arms of the immune system.
Acquired, or secondary, immunodeficiencies may result from infection (e.g., infection with HIV), from malignancy, or as a consequence
of immunomodulating or immunosuppressing medications. The latter include medications that affect T cells (corticosteroids, calcineurin
inhibitors, tumor necrosis factor [TNF] inhibitors, chemotherapy),
neutrophils (myelosuppressive agents, idiosyncratic or immune-­
mediated neutropenia), specific immunoregulatory cells (TNF blockers, interleukin-­2 inhibitors), or all immune cells (chemotherapy).
Perturbations of the mucosal and skin barriers or the normal microbial
flora can also be characterized as secondary immunodeficiencies, predisposing the host to infections, if only temporarily.
The pathogens causing infections among immunocompetent hosts
are also responsible for infections among children with immunodeficiencies. In addition, less virulent or opportunistic organisms, including
normal skin flora, commensal bacteria of the oropharynx or gastrointestinal (GI) tract, environmental fungi, and common community
viruses of low-­level pathogenicity, can cause severe, life-­threatening
illnesses in immunocompromised patients (Table 223.1). Close communication with the diagnostic laboratory is critical to ensure that the
laboratory does not disregard normal flora and organisms normally
considered contaminants as being unimportant.

223.1 Infections Occurring with Primary
Immunodeficiencies
Marian G. Michaels, Hey Jin Chong, and
Michael Green
Currently, more than 450 genes involving inborn errors of immunity
have been identified, accounting for a wide array of diseases presenting
with susceptibility to infection, allergy, autoimmunity, and autoinflammation, as well as malignancy (see Chapters 165 and 166).

ABNORMALITIES OF THE PHAGOCYTIC SYSTEM

Children with abnormalities of the phagocytic and neutrophil system
have problems with bacteria and environmental fungi. Disease manifests as recurrent infections of the skin, mucous membranes, lungs,

1659

Table 223.1  Most Common Causes of Infections in
Immunocompromised Children
BACTERIA, AEROBIC
Acinetobacter
Bacillus
Burkholderia cepacia
Citrobacter
Corynebacterium
Enterobacter spp.
Enterococcus faecalis
Enterococcus faecium
Escherichia coli
Klebsiella spp.
Listeria monocytogenes
Mycobacterium spp.
Neisseria meningitidis
Nocardia spp.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus, coagulase-­negative
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Streptococcus, viridans group
BACTERIA, ANAEROBIC
Bacillus
Clostridium
Fusobacterium
Peptococcus
Peptostreptococcus
Propionibacterium
Veillonella
FUNGI
Aspergillus
Candida albicans
Other Candida spp.
Cryptococcus neoformans
Fusarium spp.
Pneumocystis jirovecii
Zygomycoses (Mucor, Rhizopus, Rhizomucor)
VIRUSES
Adenoviruses
Cytomegalovirus
Epstein-­Barr virus
Herpes simplex virus
Human herpesvirus 6
Polyomavirus (BK)
Respiratory and enteric community-­acquired viruses
Varicella-­zoster virus
PROTOZOA
Cryptosporidium parvum
Giardia lamblia
Toxoplasma gondii

liver, and bones. Dysfunction of this arm of the immune system can
be a result of inadequate numbers, abnormal movement properties, or
aberrant function of neutrophils (see Chapter 168).
Neutropenia is defined as an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of
<1,000 cells/mm3 and can be associated with significant risk for developing severe bacterial and fungal disease, particularly when prolonged
or when the ANC is <500 cells/mm3. Although acquired neutropenia
secondary to bone marrow suppression from a virus or medication
is common, practitioners should be cognizant of genetic causes of
neutropenia. Primary congenital neutropenia most often manifests
during the first year of life with cellulitis, perirectal abscesses, or stomatitis from Staphylococcus aureus or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Episodes of severe disease, including bacteremia or meningitis, are also
possible. Bone marrow evaluation shows a failure of maturation of
myeloid precursors. Many of the neutropenic syndromes respond to
colony-­stimulating factor. Cyclic neutropenia can be associated with
autosomal dominant inheritance or de novo sporadic gene variations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1660 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
and manifests as fixed cycles of severe neutropenia between periods of
normal granulocyte numbers. Often the ANC has normalized by the
time the patient presents with symptoms, thus hampering the diagnosis. The cycles classically occur every 21 days (range: 14-­36 days), with
neutropenia lasting 3-­6 days. Most often the disease is characterized
by recurrent aphthous ulcers and stomatitis during the periods of neutropenia. However, life-­threatening necrotizing myositis or cellulitis
and systemic disease can occur, especially with Clostridium septicum
or Clostridium perfringens.
Leukocyte adhesion deficiencies (LADs) are caused by defects of
neutrophil aggregation and attachment to endothelial surfaces, rendering them unable to enter sites of infection (see Chapter 168). In the most
severe form, there is a total absence of CD18, seen in LAD type 1, but
genetic defects in fucose metabolism (LAD type 2) and FERMT3 (LAD
type 3) have also been described. Generally, children with LAD have a
history of delayed cord separation and recurrent infections of the skin,
oral mucosa, and genital tract beginning early in life. Ecthyma gangrenosum also occurs. Because the defect involves leukocyte migration and
adherence, the ANC in the peripheral blood is usually extremely elevated,
but a key hallmark of LAD is that pus is not found at the site of infection. The mainstay of treatment is aggressive antibiotic use, with curative
therapy being hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is an inherited neutrophil dysfunction syndrome, which can be either X-­linked or autosomal recessive, although spontaneous genetic changes can also occur
(see Chapter 170). Neutrophils and other myeloid cells have defects in
their nicotinamide-­adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase function,
decreasing superoxide production and thereby impairing intracellular
killing. Accordingly, microbes that destroy their own hydrogen peroxide (S. aureus, Serratia marcescens, Burkholderia cepacia, Nocardia spp.,
Aspergillus) cause recurrent infections in these children. Less common
but considered pathognomonic are Granulibacter bethesdensis, Francisella philomiragia, Chromobacterium violaceum, and Paecilomyces
infections. Infections have a predilection to involve the lungs, liver, and
bone. Mulch pneumonitis can be seen in patients with known CGD
but also can be a unique presenting feature in adults with autosomal
recessive CGD. Mulch pneumonitis can resemble hypersensitivity
pneumonitis, and bronchoscopy may yield Aspergillus but often may
not identify a clear organism. Treatment with antifungals and corticosteroids for the inflammation is recommended. S. aureus abscesses can
occur in the liver despite prophylaxis. In addition, these children can
present with recurrent abscesses affecting the skin, perirectal region, or
lymph nodes. Sepsis can occur but is more common with certain gram-­
negative organisms such as C. violaceum and F. philomiragia.
Prophylaxis with trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­
SMX),
recombinant human interferon-­
γ, and oral antifungal agents with
activity against Aspergillus spp., such as itraconazole or newer azoles,
substantially reduces the incidence of severe infections. Patients with
life-­threatening infections are also reported to benefit from aggressive
treatment with white blood cell transfusions along with antimicrobial
agents directed against the specific pathogen. In addition, HSCT can be
curative, and gene therapy trials are also a consideration. It is important
to remember that patients with CGD do not make pus, and thus drainage alone for liver abscesses is not effective. Instead, patients should be
treated with intravenous (IV) antibiotics as well as IV corticosteroids,
with surgical resection considered if these measures fail.

DEFECTIVE SPLENIC FUNCTION, OPSONIZATION,
OR COMPLEMENT ACTIVITY

Children who have congenital asplenia or splenic dysfunction associated with polysplenia or hemoglobinopathies, such as sickle cell disease,
as well as those who have undergone splenectomy are at risk for serious
infections from encapsulated bacteria and blood-­borne protozoa such
as Plasmodium and Babesia. Prophylaxis against bacterial infection with
penicillin or amoxicillin should be considered for these patients, particularly children <5 years of age. The most common causative bacterial
organisms include Staphylococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae
type b (Hib), and Salmonella, which can cause sepsis, pneumonia, meningitis, and osteomyelitis. Defects in the early complement components,
particularly C2 and C3, may also be associated with severe infection

from these bacteria. Terminal complement defects (C5, C6, C7, C8, and
C9) are associated with recurrent infections with Neisseria. Patients with
complement deficiency also have an increased incidence of autoimmune
disorders. Vaccines for S. pneumoniae, Hib, and N. meningitidis should
be administered to all children with abnormalities in opsonization or
complement pathways (see Chapters 173 and 174).

B-­CELL DEFECTS (HUMORAL
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES)

Antibody deficiencies account for the majority of primary immunodeficiencies among humans (see Chapters 165 and 166). Patients with
defects in the B-­cell arm of the immune system fail to develop appropriate antibody responses, with abnormalities that range from complete
agammaglobulinemia to isolated failure to produce antibody against a
specific antigen or organism. Complete antibody deficiencies found in
children with X-­linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) or other rarer
autosomal recessive agammaglobulinemia predispose to infections
with encapsulated organisms such as S. pneumoniae and Hib. Other bacteria can also be problematic in these children (see Table 223.1). Patients
with XLA can also have neutropenia, with one case series showing 12 of
13 patients with XLA having neutropenia as part of the initial presentation. Because of the neutropenia, patients with XLA can present with
Pseudomonas septicemia. Viral infections can also occur, with rotavirus
leading to chronic diarrhea. Enteroviruses can disseminate and cause a
chronic meningoencephalitis syndrome in these patients. Paralytic polio
can develop after immunization with live polio vaccine. Protozoan infections such as giardiasis can be severe and persistent.
Children with agammaglobulinemia are usually asymptomatic until
5-­6 months of age, when maternally derived antibody levels begin to
wane. Around 6 months of age these children begin to develop recurrent episodes of otitis media, bronchitis, pneumonia, bacteremia, and
meningitis. Many of these infections respond quickly to antibiotics,
delaying the recognition of antibody deficiency, with studies showing
some patients diagnosed in their teens. Children with B-­cell defects
can develop bronchiectasis over time after chronic or recurrent pulmonary infections and require lifelong IgG replacement therapy. Careful
physical examination identifies lack of tonsils in these children, and
lymphocyte subsets should confirm the lack of circulating B cells.
Selective IgA deficiency is the most common antibody deficiency
and leads to a lack of production of secretory antibody at the mucosal membranes (see Chapter 166). Even though most patients have
no increased risk for infections, some have mild to moderate disease
at sites of mucosal barriers. Accordingly, recurrent sinopulmonary
infection and GI disease are the major clinical manifestations. These
patients also have an increased incidence of allergies and autoimmune
disorders compared with the normal population.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is considered an
antibody deficiency, with ∼30% of cases found to have a monogenic
cause. Diagnosis can be made in children over the age of 4, with low
IgG as well as low IgM or IgA and lack of protective vaccine titers.
These patients develop sinopulmonary and GI infections with common organisms, although they can have more severe presentations than
their immunocompetent counterparts. They also have increased risk of
autoimmunity and malignancy and often require IgG replacement.
Hyper-­IgM syndrome encompasses a group of genetic defects associated with immunoglobulin class-­switch recombination. The most common type is caused by a defect in the CD40 ligand on the T cell, leading
to inability of the B cell to class-­switch (see Chapter 166). Similar to other
patients with humoral defects, these patients are at risk for bacterial
sinopulmonary infections. However, unlike a true pure antibody defect,
besides being important in T-­cell–B-­cell interactions, CD40 ligand is
also important in the interaction between T cells and macrophages/
monocytes, predisposing to opportunistic infections such as Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) and Cryptosporidium intestinal infection.

T-­CELL DEFECTS (CELL-­MEDIATED
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES)

Children with primary T-­
cell–mediated immunodeficiencies can
present early in life and are susceptible to viral, fungal, and protozoan infections. Clinical manifestations include chronic diarrhea,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 223 u Infections in Immunocompromised Persons

1661

mucocutaneous candidiasis, and recurrent pneumonia, rhinitis, and
otitis media. In thymic hypoplasia (DiGeorge syndrome), hypoplasia
or aplasia of the thymus and parathyroid glands occurs during fetal
development in association with the presence of other congenital
abnormalities. Hypocalcemia and cardiac anomalies can be the presenting features of DiGeorge syndrome, which should prompt evaluation of the T-­cell system.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) is a group of immunodeficiencies leading to susceptibility to fungal infections of the
skin, nails, oral cavity, and genitals. Most frequently caused by Candida spp., dermatophyte infections with Microsporum, Epidermophyton, and Trichophyton have also been described. Interestingly, patients
with CMC do not have an increased risk for histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, or coccidioidomycosis. Despite chronic cutaneous and mucosal infection with Candida spp., these patients often lack a delayed
hypersensitivity to skin tests for Candida antigen. Several gene defects
have been identified in people with CMC, including STAT1 gain-­of-­
function pathologic gene variations, IL17R defects, CARD9 deficiency,
and ACT1 deficiency. Although patients with CMC generally do not
develop invasive candidiasis, patients with CMC as a feature of an
inborn error or immunity certainly do develop invasive Candida infection. Endocrinopathies, autoimmunity, and life-­threatening vascular
abnormalities can be seen as well, making genetic testing important in
the prognosis and management of patients with CMC.

STAT3 HIES should receive prophylaxis against S. aureus with aggressive management of eczema as well.

COMBINED B-­CELL AND T-­CELL DEFECTS

ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY FROM
INFECTIOUS AGENTS

Patients with defects in both the B-­cell and T-­cell components of the
immune system have variable manifestations depending on the extent
of the defect (see Chapter 165). Complete or almost complete immunodeficiency is found with severe combined immunodeficiency disorder (SCID), whereas partial defects can be present in such states as
ataxia-­telangiectasia, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, hyper-­IgE syndrome, and X-­linked lymphoproliferative disorder. Rather than one
disorder, SCID represents a heterogeneous group of genetic defects
that present in the first year of life with recurrent and typically severe
infections caused by a variety of bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Failure
to thrive, chronic diarrhea, mucocutaneous or systemic candidiasis,
PJP, or cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections are common early in life.
Passive maternal antibody is relatively protective against the bacterial
pathogens during the first few months of life, but thereafter patients
are susceptible to both gram-­positive and gram-­negative organisms.
Exposure to live-­virus vaccines can also lead to disseminated disease;
accordingly, the use of live vaccines (including rotavirus vaccine) is
contraindicated in patients with suspected or proven SCID. Without
stem cell transplantation or gene therapy, most affected children succumb to infections within the first year of life.
Children with ataxia-­telangiectasia develop recurrent sinopulmonary infections from both bacteria and respiratory viruses and are
particularly susceptible to chronic lung infections because of their
immunodeficiency and their muscular weakness leading to poor airway clearance. In addition, these children experience an increased
incidence of malignancies and neurologic complications, with most
patients being wheelchair bound by the second decade of life. Wiskott-­
Aldrich syndrome is an X-­linked recessive disease associated with
eczema, thrombocytopenia, reduced number of CD3 lymphocytes,
moderately suppressed mitogen responses, and impaired antibody
response to polysaccharide antigens. Accordingly, infections with S.
pneumoniae or Hib can be seen.
Hyper-­IgE syndrome (HIES) is characterized by elevated levels of
IgE, infections, and eczema, with the most common cause being the
result of dominant negative gene variation in STAT3. Pathogenic gene
variants in TYK2, PGM3, ZNF341, CARD11, and IL6ST have also been
reported to cause this phenotype. Patients can present with recurrent
episodes of S. aureus abscesses of the skin, lungs, and musculoskeletal system. These abscesses were initially described as “cold” in that
they did not have the characteristic warmth and rubor typically seen
in immunocompetent patients and thereby are easily missed, delaying
therapy. Patients can also develop infections caused by Candida and,
depending on the gene defect, severe viral infections. Patients with

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

223.2 Infections Occurring with Acquired
Immunodeficiencies
Marian G. Michaels, Hey Jin Chong, and
Michael Green
Immunodeficiencies can be secondarily acquired from infections or
other underlying disorders, such as malignancy, cystic fibrosis, diabetes mellitus, sickle cell disease, or malnutrition. Immunosuppressive
medications used to prevent rejection after organ transplantation, to
prevent graft-­versus-­host disease (GVHD) after stem cell transplantation, or to treat malignancies may also leave the host vulnerable to
infections. Similarly, medications used to control rheumatologic or
other autoimmune diseases may be associated with an increased risk
for developing infection. Surgical removal of the spleen likewise puts
a person at increased risk for infections. Further, any process that
disrupts the normal mucosal and skin barriers (e.g., burns, surgery,
indwelling catheters) may lead to an increased risk for infection.

Infection with HIV, the causative agent of AIDS, remains globally an
important infectious cause of acquired immunodeficiency (see Chapter 322). Left untreated, HIV infection has profound effects on many
parts of the immune system but in particular T-­cell–mediated immunity that leads to susceptibility to the same types of infections as with
primary T-­cell immunodeficiencies.
Other organisms can also lead to temporary alterations of the
immune system. Very rarely, transient neutropenia associated with
community-­acquired viruses can lead to significant disease with bacterial infections. Secondary infections can occur because of impaired
immunity or disruption of normal mucosal immunity, as exemplified
by the increased risk for pneumonia from S. pneumoniae or S. aureus
after influenza infection and group A streptococcal cellulitis and fasciitis after varicella.

MALIGNANCIES

The immune systems of children with malignancies are compromised
by the therapies used to treat the cancer and, at times, by direct effects
of the cancer itself. The type, duration, and intensity of anticancer
therapy remain the major risk factors for infections in these children
and often affect multiple arms of the immune system. The presence of
mucous membrane abnormalities, indwelling catheters, malnutrition,
prolonged exposure to antibiotics, and frequent hospitalizations adds
to the risk for infection in these children.
Even though several arms of the immune system can be affected, the
major abnormality predisposing to infection in children with cancer is
neutropenia. The depth and duration of neutropenia are the primary
predictors of the risk of infection in children being treated for cancer.
Patients are at particular risk for bacterial and fungal infections if the
ANC decreases to <500 cells/mm3, and the risk is highest in those with
counts <100 cells/mm3. Counts of >500 cells/mm3 but <1,000 cells/mm3
incur some increased risk for infection, but not nearly as great. The
lack of neutrophils can lead to a diminution of inflammatory response,
limiting the ability to localize sites of infection and potentially leaving
fever as the only manifestation of infection. Accordingly, the absence
of physical signs and symptoms does not reliably exclude the presence of infection, resulting in the need for empirical antibiotics (Fig.
223.1). Because patients with fever and neutropenia might only have
subtle signs and symptoms of infection, the presence of fever warrants
an intensive investigation, including a thorough physical examination
with careful attention to the oropharynx, lungs, perineum and anus,
skin, nailbeds, and intravascular catheter insertion sites (Table 223.2).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1662 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Fever (38.3C) and Neutropenia (500/mm3)
Evaluate
Is vancomycin needed?
No indications

Indications
• Severe mucositis
• Quinolone prophylaxis
• Colonized with:
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
• Obvious catheter-related infection
• Hypotension

Monotherapy

Duotherapy

Sefepimeor
Cefepime
Ceftazidimeor
Ceftazidime
Carbapenem
Carbapenem

Aminoglycoside*

Antipseudomonal
-lactam

Vancomycin  Ceftazidime,
Cefepime, or Carbapenem
Reassess after 3 days

A comprehensive laboratory evaluation, including a complete blood
cell count, serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, and serum transaminases, should be obtained. Blood cultures should be taken from
each port of any central venous catheter (CVC) and from a peripheral
vein and repeated if the original culture is negative. Although peripheral vein sampling is often omitted with continued fevers and neutropenia, it should be obtained before the initial antibiotic administration
and reconsidered in children with one or more positive cultures from a
CVC, facilitating localization (line vs systemic) of the source of the infection. Other microbiologic studies should be done if there are associated
clinical symptoms, including a nasal aspirate for viruses in patients with
upper respiratory findings; stool for viruses such as rotavirus or norovirus and for Clostridium difficile toxin in patients with diarrhea; urinalysis and culture in young children or in older patients with symptoms
of urgency, frequency, dysuria, or hematuria; and biopsy and culture of
cutaneous lesions. Chest radiographs should be obtained in any patient
with lower respiratory tract symptoms, although pulmonary infiltrates
may be absent in children with severe neutropenia. Sinus films should
be obtained for children >2 years of age if rhinorrhea is prolonged.
Abdominal CT scans should also be considered in children with profound neutropenia and abdominal pain to evaluate for the presence of
typhlitis. Chest CT scan should be considered for children not responding to broad-­spectrum antibiotics who have continued fever and neutropenia for >96 hours. Although some have considered the use of fungal
biomarkers (e.g., galactomannan, β-­d-­glucan, fungal polymerase chain
reaction [PCR]), these assays have poor positive predictive values, and
their use is not routinely recommended. Biopsies for cytology, Gram
stain, and culture should be considered if abnormalities are found during
endoscopic procedures or if lung nodules are identified radiographically.
Past studies demonstrated that before the routine institution of
empirical antimicrobial therapy for fever and neutropenia, 75% of
children with fever and neutropenia were ultimately found to have a
documented site of infection, suggesting that most children with fever
and neutropenia will have an underlying infection (see Table 223.2).
Current data suggest that bacteremia is present in ∼20% of febrile
neutropenic pediatric patients with leukemia; ∼90% have bacterial
disease (Fig. 223.2). Currently, gram-­positive cocci are the most common pathogens identified in these patients; however, gram-­negative
organisms such as P. aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella can
cause life-­threatening infection and must be considered in the empirical treatment regimen. Other multidrug-­resistant Enterobacterales are
increasingly recovered in these children. Although coagulase-­negative
staphylococci often cause infections in these children in association
with CVCs, these infections are typically indolent, and a short delay in
treatment usually does not lead to a detrimental outcome. Other gram-­
positive bacteria, such as S. aureus and S. pneumoniae, can cause more
fulminant disease and require prompt institution of therapy. Viridans
streptococci are particularly important potential pathogens in patients
with the oral mucositis that is often associated with use of cytarabine
and in patients who experience selective pressure from treatment with
certain antibiotics such as quinolones. Infection caused by this group

Fig. 223.1 Algorithm for the initial management of the
febrile neutropenic patient. Monotherapy can be considered with cefepime, imipenem/cilastatin, meropenem,
piperacillin-­tazobactam, or ticarcillin–clavulanic acid. *Aminoglycoside antibiotics should be avoided if the patient
is also receiving nephrotoxic, ototoxic, or neuromuscular
blocking agents; has renal or severe electrolyte dysfunction; or is suspected of having meningitis (because of poor
blood-­brain perfusion). (Adapted from Freifeld AG, Bow EJ,
Sepkowitz KA, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the use
of antimicrobial agents in neutropenic patients with cancer:
2010 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.
Clin Infect Dis. 2011;52:e56–e93.)

of organisms can present with an acute septic shock syndrome. Also,
patients with prolonged neutropenia are at increased risk for opportunistic fungal infections (fungemia or tissue invasion), with Candida
spp. and Aspergillus spp. being the most commonly identified fungi.
Other fungi that can cause serious disease in these children include
zygomycetes, Fusarium spp., and dematiaceous molds. In patients
with repeatedly negative blood cultures but persistent fevers, next-­
generation sequencing in blood or plasma may help identify bacterial,
viral, fungal, or protozoan pathogens.

FEVER AND NEUTROPENIA

The use of empirical antimicrobial treatment as part of the management
of fever and neutropenia decreases the risk of progression to sepsis, septic shock, acute respiratory distress syndrome, organ dysfunction, and
death. In 2017 the International Pediatric Fever and Neutropenia Guideline Panel updated a comprehensive guideline for the management of
neutropenic children with cancer or after HSCT (see Fig. 223.1).
First-­line antimicrobial therapy should take into consideration the
types of microbes anticipated and the local resistance patterns encountered at each institution as well as the level of risk for severe infection associated with a given patient. In addition, antibiotic choices may be limited
by specific circumstances, such as the presence of drug allergy and renal
or hepatic dysfunction. Guidelines for the management of fever and neutropenia in children with cancer and/or undergoing HSCT conclude that
the use of oral antimicrobial therapy as either initial or stepdown therapy
can be considered in low-­risk children who can tolerate oral antibiotics
and in whom careful monitoring can be ensured. However, the guideline emphasizes that oral medication use may present major challenges in
children, including the availability of liquid formulations of appropriate
antibiotics, cooperation of young children, and the presence of mucositis
potentially interfering with absorption. Accordingly, decisions to implement this approach should be reserved for a select subset of these children
presenting with fever and neutropenia and institutions with an appropriate infrastructure to follow them as outpatients.
The decision to initially use IV monotherapy versus an expanded
regimen of antibiotics depends on the severity of illness of the patient,
history of previous colonization with resistant organisms, and obvious
presence of catheter-­related infection. Glycopeptide addition (such as
vancomycin) to the initial empirical regimen should be implemented if
the patient has hypotension or other evidence of septic shock, an obvious catheter-­related infection, a history of colonization with methicillin-­
resistant S. aureus, or the patient is at high risk for infection with
viridans streptococci (severe mucositis, acute myelogenous leukemia,
or prior use of quinolone prophylaxis). Otherwise, use of monotherapy
with an antipseudomonal β-­lactam, such as piperacillin-­tazobactam,
a fourth-­generation cephalosporin, or a carbapenem can be considered. Ceftazidime should not be used as monotherapy if concern exists
for gram-­positive organisms or resistant gram-­negative bacteria. The
addition of a second anti–gram-­negative bacterial agent (e.g., aminoglycoside) for empirical therapy can be considered in patients who are
clinically unstable when multidrug-­resistant organisms are suspected.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 223 u Infections in Immunocompromised Persons

1663

Table 223.2  Host Defense Defects and Common Pathogens by Time After Bone Marrow or Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Transplantation
TIME PERIOD

HOST DEFENSE DEFECTS

CAUSES

COMMON PATHOGENS

Pretransplant

Neutropenia
Abnormal anatomic barriers

Underlying disease
Prior chemotherapy

Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli

Preengraftment

Neutropenia
Abnormal anatomic barriers

Chemotherapy
Radiation
Indwelling catheters

Aerobic gram-­positive cocci
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli
Candida
Aspergillus
Herpes simplex virus (in previously
infected patients)
Community-­acquired viral pathogens

Postengraftment

Abnormal cell-­mediated immunity
Abnormal anatomic barriers

Chemotherapy
Immunosuppressive medications
Radiation
Indwelling catheters
Unrelated cord blood donor

Gram-­positive cocci
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli
Cytomegalovirus
Adenoviruses
Community-­acquired viral pathogens
Pneumocystis jirovecii

Late posttransplant

Delayed recovery of immune function
(cell-­mediated, humoral, and abnormal
anatomic barriers)

Time required to develop
donor-­related immune function
Graft-­versus-­host disease

Varicella-­zoster virus
Streptococcus pneumoniae

Unclassified
13.8%

Others
1.8%

Viruses
3.2%
Gram +
42.1%

Fungi
4.8%

Gram 34.3%

Fig. 223.2 Pathogens involved in the microbiologically documented

infections in pediatric oncology patients with febrile neutropenia. (From
Boeriu E, Borda A, Dumitru D, et al. Diagnosis and management of
febrile neutropenia n pediatric oncology patients – a systematic review.
Diagnostics. 2022;12:1800.)

Regardless of the regimen chosen initially, it is critical to evaluate
the patient carefully and continually for response to therapy, development of secondary infections, and adverse effects. Management recommendations for these children are evolving. Patients who have negative
blood cultures at 48 hours, who have been afebrile for at least 24 hours,
and who have evidence of bone marrow recovery can have all antibiotics discontinued. However, if symptoms persist or evolve, IV antibiotics should be continued. Continuation of antibiotics in children
whose fever has abated and who are clinically well but continue to have
depression of neutrophils is more controversial. Pediatric guidelines
advocate for discontinuing antibiotics in low-­risk patients at 72 hours
for children who have negative blood cultures and who have been afebrile for at least 24 hours regardless of bone marrow recovery, as long
as careful follow-­up is ensured.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) during episodes of fever and
neutropenia may enhance pathogen detection when blood cultures
and other tests are negative. NGS has the advantage of detecting bacteria, fungi, viruses and polymicrobial infections. When fever persists
despite empiric antibiotics, NGS results may help modify antimicrobial
therapy based on the pathogens identified.
Patients without an identified etiology but with persistent
fever should be reassessed daily. At day 3-­5 of persistent fever and

neutropenia, those remaining clinically well may continue on the same
regimen, although consideration should be given to discontinuing vancomycin or double gram-­negative bacterial coverage if they were included
initially. Patients who remain febrile with clinical instability warrant escalation of therapy with the addition of a glycopeptide, if it was not included
initially and risk factors exist, and modification of the empirical antibacterial regimen to cover potential antimicrobial resistance and anaerobic
infections in these children. If fever persists for >96 hours, the addition of
an antifungal agent with antimold activity should be considered, particularly for those at high risk for invasive fungal infection (those with acute
myelogenous leukemia or relapsed acute lymphocytic leukemia or who
are receiving highly myelosuppressive chemotherapies for other cancers
or with allogeneic HSCT). Liposomal amphotericin products and echinocandins have been studied in children; voriconazole, itraconazole, and
posaconazole have been successfully used in adults, with increasing experience in children. Azoles may have substantial drug-­drug interactions;
however, their use has not been thoroughly evaluated. Studies comparing
caspofungin with liposomal amphotericin for children with malignancies
and fever and neutropenia have shown that caspofungin is noninferior.
The use of antiviral agents in children with fever and neutropenia is
not warranted without specific evidence of viral disease. Active herpes
simplex or varicella-­zoster lesions merit treatment to decrease the time
of healing; even if these lesions are not the source of fever, they are potential portals of entry for bacteria and fungi. CMV is a rare cause of fever
in children with cancer and neutropenia. If CMV infection is suspected,
assays to evaluate viral load in the blood and organ-­specific infection
should be obtained. Ganciclovir, foscarnet, or cidofovir may be considered while evaluation is pending, although ganciclovir can cause bone
marrow suppression and foscarnet and cidofovir can be nephrotoxic. If
influenza is identified, specific treatment with an antiviral agent (oseltamivir, zanamivir) should be administered. The possibility of severe
acute respiratory syndrome–coronavirus type 2 (SARS-­CoV-­2) infection
should be evaluated by PCR, and treatment should be considered based
on current recommendations and local availability of antiviral therapies.
The use of hematopoietic growth factors shortens the duration of
neutropenia but has not been proved to reduce morbidity or mortality.
Accordingly, guidelines do not endorse the routine use of hematopoietic
growth factors in patients with established fever and neutropenia, although
the recommendations do note that hematopoietic growth factors can be
considered as prophylaxis in those with neutropenia at high risk for fever.
Prophylaxis with levofloxacin has been shown to decrease bacteremia for children with acute leukemia receiving intensive chemotherapy
and may also be effective in those undergoing allogenic HSCT. However, monitoring for breakthrough bacteremia and for quinolone resistance is important.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1664 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
FEVER WITHOUT NEUTROPENIA

Infections occur in children with cancer in the absence of neutropenia.
Most often, these infections are viral in etiology. However, P. jirovecii
can cause pneumonia regardless of the neutrophil count. Administration of prophylaxis against Pneumocystis is an effective preventive
strategy and should be provided to all children undergoing active
treatment for malignancy. First-­line therapy remains TMP-­SMX, with
second-­line alternatives including pentamidine, atovaquone, dapsone,
or dapsone-­pyrimethamine. Environmental fungi such as Cryptococcus, Histoplasma, and Coccidioides can also cause disease. Toxoplasma
gondii is an uncommon but occasional pathogen in children with cancer. Infections caused by pathogens encountered in healthy children (S.
pneumoniae, group A streptococcus) can also occur in children with
cancer regardless of the granulocyte count.

TRANSPLANTATION

Transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells and solid organs (including heart, liver, kidney, lungs, pancreas, and intestines) is increasingly used as therapy for a variety of disorders. Children undergoing
transplantation are at risk for infections caused by many of the same
microbial agents that cause disease in children with primary immunodeficiencies. Although the types of infections after transplantation
generally are similar among all recipients of these procedures, some
differences exist between patients depending on the type of transplantation performed, the type and amount of immunosuppression given,
and the child’s preexisting immunity to specific pathogens.

Stem Cell Transplantation

Infections after HSCT can be classified as occurring during the pretransplantation period, preengraftment period (0-­
30 days after
transplantation), postengraftment period (30-­100 days), or late posttransplantation period (>100 days). Specific defects in host defenses
predisposing to infection vary within each of these periods (see Table
223.2). In addition, risk is affected by type of transplant (autologous,
allogeneic, T-­
cell depleted, cord blood) along with the quality of
the donor-­recipient match. Neutropenia and abnormalities in cell-­
mediated and humoral immune function occur predictably during
specific periods after transplantation. In contrast, breaches of anatomic
barriers caused by indwelling catheters and mucositis secondary to
radiation or chemotherapy create defects in host defenses that may be
present any time after transplantation.

Pretransplantation Period

Children come to HSCT with a heterogeneous history of underlying
diseases, chemotherapy exposure, degree of immunosuppression, and
previous infections. Approximately 12% of all infections among adult
HSCT recipients occur during the pretransplantation period. These
infections are often caused by aerobic gram-­negative bacilli and manifest as localized infections of the skin, soft tissue, and urinary tract.
Importantly, the development of infection during this period does not
delay or adversely affect the success of engraftment.

Preengraftment Period

Bacterial infections predominate in the preengraftment period (0-­30
days). Bacteremia is the most common documented infection and
occurs in as many as 50% of all HSCT recipients during the first 30 days
after transplantation. Bacteremia is typically associated with the presence of either mucositis or an indwelling catheter but may also be seen
with pneumonia. Similarly, >40% of children undergoing HSCT experience one or more infections in the preengraftment period. Gram-­
positive cocci, gram-­negative bacilli, yeast, and, less frequently, other
fungi cause infection during this period. Aspergillus has been identified
in 4–20% of HSCT recipients, most often after 3 weeks of neutropenia. Infections caused by the emerging fungal pathogens Fusarium and
Pseudallescheria boydii are associated with the prolonged neutropenia
during the preengraftment period.
Viral infections also occur during the preengraftment period.
Among adults, reactivation of herpes simplex virus (HSV) is the
most common viral disease observed, but this is less common among
children. A history of HSV infection or seropositivity indicates the

need for prophylaxis. Nosocomial exposure to community-­acquired
viral pathogens, including SARS-­CoV-­2, respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV), influenza virus, adenovirus, rotavirus, and norovirus, represents another important source of infection during this period. There
is growing evidence that community-­acquired viruses cause increased
morbidity and mortality for HSCT recipients during this period. Adenovirus is a particularly important viral pathogen that can occur early,
although it typically presents after engraftment.

Postengraftment Period

The predominant defect in host defenses in the postengraftment period
is altered cell-­mediated immunity. Accordingly, organisms historically
categorized as opportunistic pathogens predominate during this period.
The risk is especially accentuated 50-­100 days after transplantation,
when host immunity is lost and donor immunity is not yet established.
P. jirovecii presents during this period if patients are not maintained
on appropriate prophylaxis. Reactivation of T. gondii, a rare cause of
disease among HSCT recipients, can also occur after engraftment.
Hepatosplenic candidiasis often presents during the postengraftment
period, although seeding likely occurs during the neutropenic phase.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is an important cause of morbidity and mortality among HSCT recipients. Unlike patients undergoing solid organ
transplantation (SOT), where primary infection from the donor causes the
greatest harm, CMV reactivation in an HSCT recipient whose donor is
naïve to the virus can also cause severe disease. Disease risk from CMV
after HSCT is also increased in recipients of cord blood transplants or
matched unrelated T-­cell–depleted transplants and those with GVHD.
Adenovirus, another important viral pathogen, has been recovered from
up to 5% of adult and pediatric HSCT recipients and causes invasive disease in approximately 20% of cases. Children receiving matched unrelated
donor organs or unrelated cord blood cell transplants have an incidence
of adenovirus infection as high as 14% during this early postengraftment
period. Polyomaviruses such as BK virus have been increasingly recognized as a cause of renal dysfunction and hemorrhagic cystitis after bone
marrow transplantation. Infections with other herpesviruses (Epstein-­Barr
virus [EBV] and human herpesvirus 6) as well as community-­acquired
pathogens are associated with excess morbidity and mortality during this
period, similar to the preengraftment period.

Late Posttransplantation Period

Infection is unusual after 100 days in the absence of chronic GVHD.
However, the presence of chronic GVHD significantly affects anatomic
barriers and is associated with defects in humoral, splenic, and cell-­
mediated immune function. Viral infections, including primary infection
with or reactivation of varicella-­zoster virus (VZV), are responsible for
>40% of infections during this period. This may decrease over time, as the
Oka varicella vaccine strain has a lower rate of reactivation than wild-­type
varicella. Pandemic SARS-­CoV-­2 has also been noted to have more severe
outcomes in children after HSCT. Bacterial infections, particularly of the
upper and lower respiratory tract, account for approximately 30% of
infections. These infections may be associated with deficiencies in immunoglobulin production, especially IgG2. Fungal infections account for
<20% of confirmed infections during the late posttransplantation period.

Solid Organ Transplantation

Factors predisposing to infection after organ transplantation include
those that either existed before transplantation or are secondary to intraoperative events or posttransplantation therapies (Table 223.3). Some of
these additional risks cannot be prevented, and some risks acquired during or after the operation depend on decisions or actions of members
of the transplant team. Organ recipients are at risk for infection from
potential exposure to pathogens in the donor organ. Although some
donor-­derived infections can be anticipated through donor screening,
many pathogens are not routinely screened for, and strategies defining
when and how to screen for all but a small subset of potential pathogens have not been identified or implemented. Similar to other children
who have undergone surgical procedures, surgical site infections are a
frequent cause of infection early after transplantation. Beyond this, the
need for immunosuppressive agents to prevent rejection is the major
factor predisposing to infection after transplantation. Despite efforts to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 223 u Infections in Immunocompromised Persons
Table 223.3  Risk Factors for Infections After Solid Organ
Transplantation in Children

Table 223.4  Timing of Infectious Complications After
Solid Organ Transplantation

PRETRANSPLANTATION FACTORS
Age of patient
Underlying disease, malnutrition
Specific organ transplanted
Previous exposures to infectious agents
Previous immunizations
Presence of infection in the donor

EARLY PERIOD (0-­30 DAYS)
Bacterial Infections
Gram-­negative enteric bacilli
• Small bowel, liver, neonatal heart
Pseudomonas, Burkholderia, Stenotrophomonas, Alcaligenes
• Cystic fibrosis lung
Gram-­positive organisms
• All transplant types

INTRAOPERATIVE FACTORS
Duration of transplant surgery
Exposure to blood products
Technical problems
Organisms transmitted with donor organ
POSTTRANSPLANTATION FACTORS
Immunosuppression
Induction immunosuppression type
Maintenance immunosuppression
Augmented treatment for rejection
Indwelling catheters
Nosocomial exposures
Community exposures

optimize immunosuppressive regimens to prevent or treat rejection with
minimal impairment of immunity, all current regimens interfere with
the ability of the immune system to prevent infection. The primary target
of the majority of these immunosuppressive agents in organ recipients
is the cell-­mediated immune system, but regimens can and do impair
many other aspects of the transplant recipient’s immune system as well.

Timing

The timing of specific types of infections is generally predictable,
regardless of which organ is transplanted. Infectious complications typically develop in one of three intervals: early (0-­30 days after transplantation), intermediate (30-­180 days), or late (>180 days); most infections
present in the first 180 days after transplantation. Table 223.4 should be
used as a general guideline to the types of infections encountered, but
the timing of the presentation may be modified with the introduction
of newer immunosuppressive therapies and by the use of prophylaxis.
Early infections are usually the result of a complication of the transplant surgery itself, the unexpected acquisition of a bacterial or fungal
pathogen from the donor, or the presence of an indwelling catheter. In
contrast, infections during the intermediate period typically result from a
complication of the immunosuppression, which tends to be at its greatest
intensity during the first 6 months after transplantation. This is the period
of greatest risk for infections caused by opportunistic pathogens such as
CMV, EBV, and P. jirovecii. Anatomic abnormalities, such as bronchial
stenosis and biliary stenosis, that develop as a result of the transplant surgery can also predispose to recurrent infection in this period.
Infections developing late after transplantation typically result from
uncorrected anatomic abnormalities, chronic rejection, or exposure
to community-­
acquired pathogens. Augmented immunosuppression as treatment for late acute cellular rejection or chronic rejection can increase the risk for late presentations with CMV, EBV, and
other potential opportunistic infections. Acquisition of infection from
community-­acquired pathogens such as RSV can result in severe infection secondary to the immunocompromised state of the transplant
recipient during the early and intermediate periods. Compared with
the earlier periods, community-­acquired infections in the late period
are usually benign because immunosuppression is typically maintained
at significantly lower levels. However, certain pathogens such as VZV
and EBV may be associated with severe disease even at this late period.

Bacterial and Fungal Infections

Although there are important graft-­specific considerations for bacterial and fungal infections after transplantation, some principles are
generally applicable to all transplant recipients. Bacterial and fungal
infections after organ transplantation are usually a direct consequence
of the surgery, a breach in an anatomic barrier, a foreign body, or an

1665

Fungal Infections
• All transplant types
Viral Infections
Herpes simplex virus
• All transplant types
Nosocomial respiratory viruses
• All transplant types
MIDDLE PERIOD (1-­6 MO)
Viral Infections
Cytomegalovirus
• All transplant types
• Seronegative recipient of seropositive donor
Epstein-­Barr virus
• All transplant types (small bowel the highest-­risk group)
• Seronegative recipient
Varicella-­zoster virus
• All transplant types
• Opportunistic infections
Pneumocystis jirovecii
• All transplant types
Toxoplasma gondii
• Seronegative recipient of cardiac transplant from a seropositive
donor are highest risk group
Bacterial Infections
Pseudomonas, Burkholderia, Stenotrophomonas, Alcaligenes
• Cystic fibrosis lung
Gram-­negative enteric bacilli
• Small bowel
LATE PERIOD (>6 MO)
Viral Infections
Epstein-­Barr virus
• All transplant types, but less risk than middle period
Varicella-­zoster virus
• All transplant types
Community-­acquired viral infections
• All transplant types
Bacterial Infections
Pseudomonas, Burkholderia, Stenotrophomonas, Alcaligenes
• Cystic fibrosis lung
• Lung transplants with chronic rejection
Gram-­negative bacillary bacteremia
• Small bowel
Fungal Infections
Aspergillus
• Lung transplants with chronic rejection
Adapted from Green M, Michaels MG. Infections in solid organ transplant recipients.
In: Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious
Diseases, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 95-­1.

abnormal anatomic narrowing or obstruction. With the exception of
infections related to the use of indwelling catheters, sites of bacterial
infection tend to occur at or near the transplanted organ. Infections
after abdominal transplantation (liver, intestine, or renal) usually occur
in the abdomen or at the surgical wound. The pathogens are typically enteric gram-­negative bacteria, Enterococcus, and occasionally
Candida. Infections after thoracic transplantation (heart, lung) usually
occur in the lower respiratory tract or at the surgical wound. Pathogens
associated with these infections include S. aureus and gram-­negative
bacteria. Patients undergoing lung transplantation for cystic fibrosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1666 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
experience a particularly high rate of infectious complications because
they are often colonized with P. aeruginosa or Aspergillus before transplantation. Even though the infected lungs are removed, the sinuses
and upper airways remain colonized with these pathogens, and subsequent reinfection of the transplanted lungs can occur. Children
receiving organ transplants are often hospitalized for long periods and
receive many antibiotics; thus recovery of multidrug-­resistant bacteria
is common after all types of organ transplantation. Infections caused by
Aspergillus are less common but occur after all types of organ transplantation and are associated with high rates of morbidity and mortality.

Viral Infections

Viral pathogens, especially herpesviruses, are a major source of morbidity and mortality after SOT. In addition, BK virus is a major cause
of renal disease after kidney transplantation. Although SARS-­CoV-­2
has affected pediatric SOT recipients less than adult recipients, disease
severity is increased compared with nonimmunosuppressed children.
The patterns of disease associated with individual viral pathogens are
generally similar among all organ transplant recipients. However, the
incidence, mode of presentation, and severity differ according to the
type of organ transplanted and, for many viral pathogens, pretransplant serologic status of the recipient.
Viral pathogens can be generally categorized as latent pathogens,
which cause infection through reactivation in the host or acquisition
from the donor (e.g., CMV, EBV) or as community-­acquired viruses
(e.g., SARS-­CoV-­2, RSV, influenza). For CMV and EBV, primary infection occurring after transplantation is associated with the greatest
degree of morbidity and mortality. The highest risk is seen in a naïve
host who receives an organ from a donor who previously was infected
with one of these viruses. This mismatched state is frequently associated with severe disease. However, even if the donor is negative for
CMV and EBV, primary infection can be acquired from a close contact or through blood products. Secondary infections (reactivation of a
latent strain within the host or superinfection with a new strain) tend to
result in milder illness unless the patient is highly immunosuppressed,
which can occur in the setting of treatment of significant rejection.
CMV is one of the most commonly recognized transplant viral pathogens. Disease from CMV has decreased significantly with the use of
preventive strategies, including antiviral prophylaxis, most commonly
using ganciclovir or oral valganciclovir, as well as viral load monitoring
to inform preemptive antiviral therapy. Some centers have implemented
a sequential approach where surveillance viral load monitoring follows
a relatively short period of chemoprophylaxis. Clinical manifestations of
CMV disease can range from a syndrome of fatigue and fever to tissue-­
invasive disease that most often affects the liver, lungs, and GI tract.
Infection caused by EBV is another important complication of SOT.
Clinical symptoms range from a mild mononucleosis syndrome to
disseminated posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD).
EBV-­associated PTLD is more common among children than adults,
because primary EBV infection in the immunosuppressed host is more
likely to lead to uncontrolled proliferative disorders, including posttransplant lymphoma.
Other viruses, such as adenovirus, also have the capacity to be donor
associated, but appear to be less common. The unexpected development of donor-­associated viral pathogens, including hepatitis B virus,
hepatitis C virus, and HIV, is rare today because of intensive donor
screening. However, the changing epidemiology of some viruses (e.g.,
dengue, chikungunya, Zika) raises concerns for the donor-­derived
transmission of these emerging viral pathogens.
Community-­acquired viruses, including those associated with respiratory tract infection (SARS-­CoV-­2, RSV, influenza virus, adenovirus,
parainfluenza virus) and GI infection (enteroviruses, norovirus, and
rotavirus), can cause important disease in children after organ transplantation. In general, risk factors for more severe infection include
young age, acquisition of infection early after transplantation, and
augmented immune suppression. Infection in the absence of these
risk factors frequently results in a clinical illness that is comparable to
that seen in immunocompetent children. However, some community-­
acquired viruses, such as adenovirus, can be associated with graft dysfunction even when acquired late after transplantation.

Although children with SARS-­CoV-­2 infection after transplantation
fare better than adult counterparts, they are at risk for more severe symptoms early after transplant and if they have comorbidities. Immunization
remains one of the best preventive strategies against severe disease even
though efficacy is less compared to nonimmunosuppressed children.

Opportunistic Pathogens

Children undergoing SOT are also at risk for symptomatic infections
from pathogens that do not usually cause clinical disease in immunocompetent hosts. Although these typically present in the intermediate period, these infections can also occur late in patients, requiring
prolonged and high levels of immunosuppression. P. jirovecii is a well-­
recognized cause of pneumonia after SOT, although routine prophylaxis has essentially eliminated this problem. T. gondii can complicate
cardiac transplantations because of tropism of the organism for cardiac
muscle and risk for donor transmission; less often, it complicates other
types of organ transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

223.3 Prevention of Infection in
Immunocompromised Persons
Marian G. Michaels, Hey Jin Chong, and
Michael Green
Although infections cannot be completely prevented in children who
have defects in one or more arms of their immune system, measures
can be taken to decrease the risks for infection. Replacement immunoglobulin is a benefit to children with primary B-­cell deficiencies. Interferon (IFN)-­γ, TMP-­SMX, and oral antifungal agents have long been
used to reduce the number of infections occurring in children with
CGD, although the relative benefit of INF-­γ has been questioned. Children who have depressed cellular immunity resulting from primary
diseases, advanced HIV infection, or immunosuppressive medications
benefit from prophylaxis against P. jirovecii. Strategies for safe living for
all children with immunocompromising conditions should be emphasized, including hand hygiene, avoidance of community members with
communicable infections, and attention to local environmental risk
factors. These strategies were stressed and employed during the era
of pandemic SARS-­CoV-­2 circulation. Immunizations prevent many
infections and are particularly important for children with compromised immune systems who do not have a contraindication or inability to respond. For children rendered immunocompromised because
of medication or splenectomy, immunizations should be administered
before treatment whenever possible. This timing allows for superior
response to vaccine antigens, avoids the risk of live vaccines, which may
be contraindicated depending on the immunosuppression, and importantly, provides protection before the immune system is compromised.
Although immunodeficient children are a heterogeneous group,
some principles of prevention are generally applicable. The use of inactivated vaccines does not lead to an increased risk for adverse effects,
although their efficacy may be reduced because of an impaired immune
response. In most cases, children with immunodeficiencies should
receive all the recommended inactivated vaccines. Live-­attenuated vaccinations can cause disease in some children with immunologic defects,
and therefore alternative immunizations should be used whenever possible, such as inactivated influenza vaccine rather than live-­attenuated
influenza vaccine or inactivated typhoid vaccine rather than the oral live
typhoid vaccine for travelers. In general, live-­virus vaccines should not
be used in children with primary T-­cell abnormalities; efforts should be
made to ensure that close contacts are all immunized to decrease the
risk of exposure. In some patients in whom wild-­type viral infection can
be severe, immunizations, even with live-­virus vaccine, are warranted in
the immunosuppressed child. For example, children with HIV infection
and a CD4 level of >15% should receive vaccinations against measles and
varicella. In addition, growing evidence suggests that select transplant
recipients can safely receive live vaccines as well. Some vaccines should
be given to children with immunodeficiencies in addition to routine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 224 u Infection Associated with Medical Devices
vaccinations. As an example, children with asplenia or splenic dysfunction should receive meningococcal vaccine and both the conjugate and
the polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccines. Influenza and SARS-­CoV-­2
vaccination is recommended for all eligible individuals (>6 months old
for influenza) and should be emphasized for immunocompromised children and all household contacts to minimize risk for transmission to the
immunocompromised child.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 224

Infection Associated with
Medical Devices
Hana Hakim and Joshua Wolf
Use of implanted synthetic and prosthetic devices has revolutionized
pediatric practice by providing long-­term venous access, limb-­salvage
surgery, and successful treatment of hydrocephalus, urinary retention, and renal failure. However, infectious complications of these
devices remain a major concern and account for a significant number
of healthcare-­acquired infections (HAIs) and attributable morbidity
and mortality among hospitalized patients. Several federal and hospital programs in the United States and elsewhere focus on prevention
initiatives to reduce device-­related HAI rates, most frequently central
line–associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI), catheter-­associated
urinary tract infection (CAUTI), and ventilator-­associated pneumonia
(VAP). HAIs are typically defined as infections that occur at least 2 days
after admission to the hospital and that were not incubating at the time
of admission. Device-­associated infections are related to the development of biofilms, organized communities of microorganisms on the
device surface protected from the immune system and from antimicrobial therapy. A number of factors are important to the development of
infection, including host susceptibility, device composition, duration of
implantation, and exposure to colonizing or contaminating organisms.

INTRAVASCULAR ACCESS DEVICES

Intravascular access devices range from short, stainless steel needles
or plastic cannulae inserted for brief periods to multilumen, implantable, synthetic plastic catheters that are expected to remain in use for
years. Infectious complications include local skin and soft tissue infections, such as exit site, tunnel tract, and device pocket infections, and
catheter-­related bloodstream infections (CRBSIs). The use of central
venous devices has improved the quality of life of high-­risk patients but
has also increased the risk of infection.

Catheter Types

Short-­
term peripheral cannulae are most often used in pediatric
patients, and infectious complications occur infrequently. The rate of
peripheral CRBSIs in children is <0.15%. Patient age <1 year, duration of use >144 hours (6 days), and some infusates are associated with
increased risk for catheter-­related infection. Catheter-­associated phlebitis is more common (1–6%) but is rarely infective and can be treated
conservatively by cannula removal.
Central venous catheters (CVCs), which terminate in a central
vein such as the superior or inferior vena cava, are widely used in
both adult and pediatric patients and are responsible for the majority of catheter-­related infections. These catheters are frequently used
in patients with chronic illnesses such as oncologic, gastrointestinal,
and cardiovascular diseases and in critically ill patients, including
neonates, who have many other risk factors for nosocomial infection. Patients in an intensive care unit (ICU) with a CVC in place

1667

have a fivefold greater risk for developing a nosocomial bloodstream
infection than those without. Other risk factors that have been
associated with increased incidence of CLABSIs include prolonged
hospital stay, total parenteral nutrition, use of multiple concurrent CVCs or a CVC with multiple lumens, and use of short-­term
nontunneled CVC.
The use of peripherally inserted central catheters, which are inserted
into a peripheral vein and terminate in a central vein, has increased
in pediatric patients. Infection rates seem to be similar to long-­term
tunneled CVCs, ranging between 2.0 and 3.51 per 1,000 catheter-­days,
but other complications such as fracture, dislodgment, and occlusion
are more common.
When prolonged intravenous (IV) access is required, a cuffed silicone rubber (Silastic) or polyurethane catheter may be inserted into the
superior vena cava through the subclavian, cephalic, or jugular vein.
The extravascular segment of the catheter passes through a subcutaneous (SC) tunnel before exiting the skin, usually on the superior aspect of
the chest (e.g., Broviac or Hickman catheter). A cuff around the catheter
near the exit site induces a fibrotic reaction to seal the tunnel. Totally
implanted devices comprise a tunneled central catheter attached to an
SC reservoir or port with a self-­sealing silicone septum immediately
under the skin that permits repeated percutaneous needle access.
The incidence of local (exit site, tunnel, and pocket) infection with
long-­term catheters is 0.2-­2.8/1,000 catheter-­days. The incidence of
external tunneled CRBSI is 0.5-­11.0/1,000 catheter-­days. The incidence of CRBSI in implantable devices is much lower at 0.3-­1.8/1,000
catheter-­
days; however, treatment with total parenteral nutrition
(TPN) eliminates this risk reduction because of a much greater relative increase in infection rate in ports. The risk for CRBSI is increased
among premature infants, young children, and TPN patients.

Catheter-­Associated Skin and Soft Tissue Infection

A number of local infections can occur in the presence of a CVC. The clinical manifestations of local infection include erythema, tenderness, and
purulent discharge at the exit site or along the SC tunnel tract of the catheter. Exit site infection denotes infection localized to the exit site, without significant tracking along the tunnel, often with purulent discharge.
Tunnel tract infection indicates infection in the SC tissues tracking along
a tunneled catheter, which may also include serous or serosanguineous
discharge from a draining sinus along the path. Pocket infection indicates suppurative infection of an SC pocket containing a totally implanted
device. Bloodstream infection may coexist with local infection.
The diagnosis of local infection is established clinically, but a Gram-­
stained smear and culture of any exit site drainage should be performed
to identify the microbiologic cause. The source is usually contamination by skin or gastrointestinal flora, and the most common organisms
are Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase-­negative staphylococci, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Candida spp., and mycobacteria. Green discharge is
strongly suggestive of mycobacterial infection, and appropriate stains
and culture should be performed.
Treatment of local infection related to a short-­term CVC should
include device removal. Exit site infection may resolve with device
removal alone, but systemic symptoms should initially be managed
with antimicrobial therapy. In the case of long-­term CVCs, exit site
infections usually respond to local care with topical or systemic antibiotics alone. However, tunnel or pocket infections require removal
of the catheter and systemic antibiotic therapy in almost all cases.
When a tunneled CVC is removed as a result of tunnel infection, the
cuff should also be removed and sent for culture if possible. In cases
of mycobacterial infection, wide surgical debridement of the tissues is
usually required for cure.

Catheter-­Related Bloodstream Infection

CRBSI occurs when microorganisms attached to the CVC are shed
into the bloodstream, leading to bacteremia. The term catheter-­related
bloodstream infection is reserved for a bloodstream infection that is
demonstrated by CVC tip culture or other techniques to have been
caused by colonization of the device. In contrast, the more general term
central line–associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI) is typically

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1668 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
used for surveillance and can refer to any bloodstream infection that
occurs in a patient with a CVC, unless there is an identified alternative
source. On the device, the organisms are embedded in biofilms as organized communities. Colonization may be present even in the absence
of symptoms or positive cultures.
Organisms may contaminate the external surface of the CVC during insertion or the intraluminal surface through handling of the catheter hub or contaminated infusate. Most cases of CRBSI appear to be
caused by intraluminal colonization, but external colonization may
play a greater role in infections related to recently inserted (<30 days)
catheters or in immunocompromised patients. In most populations,
gram-­positive cocci predominate, with about half of infections caused
by coagulase-­negative staphylococci. Gram-­negative enteric bacteria
are isolated in approximately 20–30% of episodes, and fungi account
for 5–10% of episodes.
Fever without an identifiable focus is the most common clinical presentation of CRBSI; local soft tissue symptoms and signs are usually
absent. Onset of fever or rigors during or soon after flushing of a catheter is highly suggestive of CRBSI. Symptoms and signs of complicated
infection, such as septic thrombophlebitis, endocarditis, and ecthyma
gangrenosum, may also be present.
Blood cultures collected before beginning antibiotic therapy are generally positive from both the CVC and the peripheral blood. It is important not to collect cultures unless infection is suspected, as blood culture
contamination may occur and can lead to inappropriate therapy. To help
interpret positive cultures with common skin contaminants, blood cultures should be collected from at least two sites, preferably including all
lumens of a CVC, before initiation of antibiotic therapy.
Tests to differentiate CRBSI from other sources of bacteremia in the
presence of a CVC include culture of the catheter tip, quantitative blood
cultures, and differential time to positivity of blood cultures drawn
from different sites. Definitive diagnosis of CRBSI can be important
to identify those patients who might benefit from catheter removal.
Although CVC tip culture can identify CRBSI, it precludes salvage of
the catheter. The most readily available technique to confirm CRBSI
without catheter removal is calculation of differential time to positivity
between blood cultures drawn through a catheter and from a peripheral vein or separate lumen. During CRBSI, blood obtained through
the responsible lumen will usually indicate growth at least 2-­3 hours
before peripheral blood or uncolonized lumens because of a higher
intraluminal microorganism burden. Identical volumes of blood must
be collected simultaneously from each site, and a continuously monitored blood culture system is required. Specificity of this test is good
(94–100%), and sensitivity is good when a peripheral blood culture is
available (approximately 90%) but poorer when comparing two lumens
of a CVC (64%). Where available, quantitative blood culture showing
at least a threefold higher number of organisms from central compared
with peripheral blood is similarly diagnostic.
Treatment of CRBSI related to long-­term vascular access devices
(e.g., Hickman, Broviac, totally implantable devices) with systemic
antibiotics is successful for many bacterial infections without removal
of the device. Antibiotic therapy should be directed to the isolated
pathogen and given for a total of 10-­14 days from the date of blood culture clearance. Until pathogen identification and susceptibility testing
are available, empirical therapy, based on local antimicrobial susceptibility data and usually including vancomycin plus an antipseudomonal
aminoglycoside (e.g., gentamicin), penicillin (e.g., piperacillin-­
tazobactam), or cephalosporin (e.g., ceftazidime or cefepime), is generally indicated. An echinocandin or azole antifungal should be initiated
if fungemia is suspected. Patients who have a recent history of CRBSI
with a resistant organism treated without CVC removal who subsequently develop severe sepsis should generally receive initial empirical
therapy directed against that organism, because relapse is common.
Antibiotic lock or dwell therapy, with administration of solutions
of high concentrations of antibiotics or ethanol that remain in the catheter for up to 24 hours, has been proposed to improve outcomes when
used as an adjuvant to systemic therapy. Antibiotic locks are recommended in patients receiving dialysis who may not have antibiotics
frequently delivered through the CVC, but evidence does not suggest

that routine use of lock therapy is beneficial in other patient populations, and it may cause harm. Ethanol lock therapy increases the risk
of CVC occlusion, and lock therapy can result in delays to necessary
CVC removal.
If blood cultures remain positive after 72 hours of appropriate therapy, or if a patient deteriorates clinically, the device should be removed.
Failure of CRBSI salvage therapy is common and can be serious in
infections caused by S. aureus (approximately 50%), Candida spp.
(>70%), and Mycobacterium spp. (>70%). Other indications for removing a long-­term catheter include severe sepsis, suppurative thrombophlebitis, and endocarditis. Prolonged therapy (4-­6 weeks) is indicated
for persistent bacteremia or fungemia after catheter removal, because
this may represent unrecognized infective endocarditis or thrombophlebitis. The decision to attempt catheter salvage should weigh the
risk and clinical impact of persistent or relapsed infection against the
risk of surgical intervention.
CRBSI may be complicated by other intravascular infections such
as septic thrombophlebitis or endocarditis. The presence of these conditions may be suggested by preexisting risk factors (e.g., congenital
heart disease), signs and symptoms, or persistent bacteremia or fungemia 72 hours after device removal and appropriate therapy. Screening
for these complications in otherwise low-­risk children, even those with
S. aureus infection, is not recommended, because the overall frequency
is low, and the tests can be difficult to interpret and may lead to inappropriate therapy.

Prevention of Infection

Consistent implementation of evidence-­based prevention bundles has
been essential to reduce HAI CLABSI rates. Prevention of CLABSI starts
with preinsertion planning for the type and number of CVC lumens and
selection of the venous site for CVC insertion. Insertion bundle elements
include meticulous hand hygiene, aseptic skin preparation using 2%
chlorhexidine gluconate, and use of maximal sterile barrier precautions
in an operating room–like environment. Maintenance bundles guide the
daily safe care of CVCs to prevent infections, including protecting the
CVC from gross contamination with excretions or body fluids, evidence-­
based techniques to access and scrub the CVC hub and connectors, and
assessing and changing the CVC site dressing. Regular assessment of
the need for the catheter should be part of the daily medical and nursing care team discussions. In general, children with external CVCs are
discouraged from swimming because of concern of subsequent CRBSI.
However, existing evidence regarding risk of CRBSI related to swimming
is limited. It is important to educate patient caregivers about the potential risk and the importance of maintaining a secured CVC with water-­
resistant dressing if patients choose to swim. Catheters should routinely
be removed as soon as they are no longer needed. Although prevalence
of infection increases with prolonged duration of catheter use, routine
replacement of a required CVC, either at a new site or over a guide wire,
results in significant morbidity and is not recommended. Other practices
that have been associated with reduction in CLABSI rates include use of
a chlorhexidine-­impregnated sponge at the exit site and daily bathing of
ICU patients with 2% chlorhexidine gluconate. Use of antibiotic, taurolidine, or ethanol lock solutions; heparin with preservatives; and alcohol-­
impregnated caps, as well as antimicrobial-­impregnated/coated catheters
may be appropriate in high-­risk populations. There is no evidence that
routine replacement of short-­term peripheral catheters prevents phlebitis or other complications in children, so they should only be replaced
when clinically indicated (e.g., phlebitis, dysfunction, dislodgment).

URINARY CATHETERS

Urinary catheters are a frequent cause of HAIs, with approximately
14 infections per 1,000 admissions, resulting in increasing duration
of hospitalization, cost of patient care, morbidity, and mortality. Rates
of CAUTI are highest among ICU patients. As with other devices,
microorganisms adhere to the urinary catheter surface and establish a
biofilm that allows proliferation. The physical presence of the catheter
reduces the normal host defenses by preventing complete emptying of
the bladder, thus providing a medium for growth, distending the urethra, and blocking periurethral glands. Almost all patients catheterized

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 224 u Infection Associated with Medical Devices
for >30 days develop bacteriuria. The mechanism of the infection can be
either from organisms colonizing the patient’s perineal or rectal area or
from organisms contaminating the hands of healthcare providers or contaminating equipment such as a collection bag. The organism burden in
CAUTI is typically ≥100,000 colony-­forming units/mL. Lower thresholds
may be used where there is a high index of suspicion, but these episodes
usually represent colonization rather than infection. Urine culture should
only be performed in catheterized patients when infection is suspected,
because asymptomatic colonization is ubiquitous and may lead to overtreatment and subsequent development of bacterial resistance. Gram-­
negative bacilli and Enterococcus spp. are the predominant organisms
isolated in CAUTI; coagulase-­negative staphylococci are implicated in
approximately 15% of cases. Symptomatic UTIs should be treated with
antibiotics and catheter removal. Catheter colonization with Candida
spp. is common but rarely leads to invasive infection, and treatment does
not have a long-­term impact on colonization. Treatment for asymptomatic candiduria or bacteriuria is not recommended, except in neonates,
immunocompromised patients, and those with urinary tract obstruction.
All urinary catheters introduce a risk for infection and thus should
be used only when necessary and for the minimum required duration.
Existing evidence supports the benefit of using alternatives to indwelling urethral catheters to prevent CAUTI, including external catheters
in male patients, intermittent catheterization, or suprapubic catheters
in selected patients. Hand hygiene and aseptic technique are part of
the insertion bundles of interventions aimed at preventing CAUTI.
Evidence-­based urinary catheter maintenance practices are essential to
prevent hospital-­acquired CAUTI, including perineal hygiene, a closed
drainage system, maintenance of unobstructed urine flow, and keeping
the collection bag below the level of the bladder. Technologic advances
have led to the development of silver-­or antibiotic-­impregnated urinary catheters that are associated with lower rates of infection. Prophylactic antibiotics do not significantly reduce the infection rates
for long-­term catheters but clearly increase the risk for infection with
antibiotic-­resistant organisms.

MECHANICAL VENTILATORS

Endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation are lifesaving
technologies to support patients with respiratory failure and patients
undergoing surgical procedures. However, VAP has contributed to
prolonged hospital stay and increased costs in patients in medical and
surgical ICUs. VAP is more frequently reported in adult than in pediatric patients. The mechanism of VAP is through microaspiration of
colonizing oropharyngeal organisms to the lower respiratory tract and
its associated host inflammatory response. Common pathogens causing VAP include gram-­negative bacilli (e.g., Escherichia coli, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Enterobacter spp., and P. aeruginosa) and gram-­positive
cocci (e.g., S. aureus and Streptococcus spp.). Risk factors for VAP
include medications that increase gastric pH (e.g., H2 blockers, antacids, proton pump inhibitors), decreased level of consciousness, use of
paralytics or muscle relaxant agents, and prolonged intubation. Progressive or acute-­onset respiratory deterioration requiring increased
mechanical setting support in a patient who has been intubated for
more than 2 days should raise the suspicion of VAP. Chest diagnostic
imaging and cultures of lower respiratory specimens (e.g., endotracheal aspiration or bronchoalveolar lavage) should be considered.
Evidence-­based practices to prevent VAP include use of noninvasive
ventilation (e.g., continuous positive airway pressure [CPAP], bilevel
positive airway pressure [BiPAP]) when possible to avoid endotracheal
intubation and prevention of microaspiration by elevating the head
of the bed, controlling cuff pressure, minimizing and early weaning
of sedation, and maintaining closed ventilator circuits. Oral care with
chlorhexidine gluconate for oropharyngeal decontamination has been
included as an element in several VAP prevention bundles. Evidence
regarding the efficacy and safety of other interventions such as use of
probiotics or silver-­coated endotracheal tubes has been inconclusive.

CEREBROSPINAL FLUID SHUNTS

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shunting is required for the treatment
of many children with hydrocephalus. The usual procedure uses a

1669

silicone rubber device with a proximal portion inserted into the ventricle, a unidirectional valve, and a distal segment that diverts the CSF
from the ventricles to either the peritoneal cavity (ventriculoperitoneal [VP] shunt) or right atrium (ventriculoatrial [VA] shunt). The
incidence of shunt infection ranges from 1% to 20% (average, 10%).
The highest rates are reported in young infants, patients with prior
shunt infections, and certain etiologies of hydrocephalus. Most infections result from intraoperative contamination of the surgical wound
by skin flora. Accordingly, coagulase-­negative staphylococci are isolated in more than half the cases. S. aureus is isolated in approximately
20% and gram-­negative bacilli in 15% of cases.
Four distinct clinical syndromes have been described: colonization
of the shunt, infection associated with wound infection, distal infection
with peritonitis, and infection associated with meningitis. The most
common type of infection is colonization of the shunt, with nonspecific symptoms that reflect shunt malfunction as opposed to frank
infection. Symptoms associated with colonized VP shunts include lethargy, headache, vomiting, a full fontanel, and abdominal pain. Fever
is often absent or may be low-­grade (<39°C or 102.2°F). Symptoms
usually occur within months of the surgical procedure. Colonization
of a VA shunt results in more severe systemic symptoms, and specific
symptoms of shunt malfunction are often absent. Septic pulmonary
emboli, pulmonary hypertension, and infective endocarditis are frequently reported complications of VA shunt colonization. Chronic
VA shunt colonization may cause hypocomplementemic glomerulonephritis from antigen-­antibody complex deposition in the glomeruli,
commonly called shunt nephritis; clinical findings include hypertension, microscopic hematuria, elevated blood urea nitrogen and serum
creatinine levels, and anemia.
Diagnosis is by Gram stain, microscopy, biochemistry, and culture
of CSF. CSF should be obtained by direct aspiration of the shunt before
administration of antibiotics, because CSF obtained from either lumbar or ventricular puncture is often sterile. It is unusual to observe
signs of ventriculitis, and CSF findings can be only minimally abnormal. Blood culture results are usually positive in VA shunt colonization
but negative in cases of VP colonization.
Wound infection presents with obvious erythema, swelling, discharge, or dehiscence along the shunt tract and most often occurs
within days to weeks of the surgical procedure. S. aureus is the most
common isolate. In addition to the physical findings, fever is common,
and signs of shunt malfunction eventually ensue in most cases.
Distal infection of VP shunts with peritonitis presents with abdominal symptoms, usually without evidence of shunt malfunction. The
pathogenesis is likely related to perforation of the bowel at VP shunt
placement or translocation of bacteria across the bowel wall. Thus
gram-­negative isolates predominate, and mixed infection is common.
The infecting organisms are often isolated from only the distal portion
of the shunt.
Common pathogens responsible for community-­acquired meningitis, including Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, and
Haemophilus influenzae type b, cause bacterial meningitis in patients
with shunts only rarely, and the clinical presentation is similar to that
for acute bacterial meningitis in other children (see Chapter 643.1).
Treatment of shunt colonization includes removal of the shunt and
systemic antibiotic therapy directed against the isolated organisms.
Treatment without removal of the shunt is rarely successful and should
not be routinely attempted. After collection of appropriate samples for
culture, empirical therapy is usually with vancomycin plus an antipseudomonal agent with relatively good CSF penetration, such as ceftazidime or meropenem. Definitive therapy should be directed toward the
isolate and should account for poor penetration of most antibiotics into
the CSF across noninflamed meninges. Accordingly, intraventricular
antibiotics may be indicated but are usually reserved unless there is
evidence of treatment failure. If the isolate is susceptible, a parenteral
antistaphylococcal penicillin with or without intraventricular vancomycin is the treatment of choice. If the organism is resistant to penicillins, systemic vancomycin and possibly intraventricular vancomycin
are recommended. In gram-­negative infections, a third-­generation
cephalosporin with or without an intraventricular aminoglycoside is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1670 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
optimal. When using intraventricular antibiotics, monitoring CSF levels is necessary to avoid toxicity.
Removal of the colonized device is required for cure, and final
replacement should be delayed until clearance of CSF cultures is documented. Many neurosurgeons immediately remove the shunt and place
an external ventricular drain to relieve intracranial pressure (ICP), with
a second-­stage shunt replacement once CSF sterilization has been confirmed. Others opt initially to exteriorize the distal end of the shunt and
replace the shunt in a single-­stage procedure once CSF cultures remain
sterile for 48-­72 hours. Daily CSF cultures should be collected until clearance has been documented on two to three consecutive specimens, and
antibiotics should be continued for at least 10 days after documented
sterilization of the CSF. Gram-­negative organisms may require a longer
duration of therapy (up to 21 days). The CSF white cell count generally
increases for the first 3-­5 days of appropriate therapy, and that alone
should not prompt concern for treatment failure. Distal shunt infection
with peritonitis and wound infection are managed in a similar fashion.
Treatment of bacterial meningitis with typical community-­acquired
pathogens such as meningococcus or pneumococcus usually requires
only systemic antibiotic therapy. Shunt replacement is not required in
the absence of device malfunction, poor clinical response, persistent
CSF culture positivity, or relapse of infection after antibiotic therapy.

Prevention of Infection

Prevention of shunt infection includes meticulous cutaneous preparation and surgical technique. Systemic and intraventricular antibiotics,
antibiotic-­impregnated shunts, and soaking the shunt tubing in antibiotics are used to reduce the incidence of infection, with varying success.
Systemic prophylactic antibiotics given before and during shunt insertion
can reduce the risk for infection and should be used routinely but should
not be continued for more than 24 hours postoperatively. Antibiotic-­
impregnated catheters also appear to reduce the risk of infection and
may be used in high-­risk patients where the devices are available.

PERITONEAL DIALYSIS CATHETERS

During the first year of peritoneal dialysis for end-­stage renal disease,
65% of children will have one or more episodes of peritonitis. Bacterial
entry comes from luminal or periluminal contamination of the catheter
or by translocation across the intestinal wall. Hematogenous infection
is rare. Infants and young children who are in diapers are at highest risk
for peritoneal dialysis catheter–associated infections. Infections can be
localized at the exit site or associated with peritonitis, or both. Organisms responsible for peritonitis include coagulase-­negative staphylococci
(30–40%), S. aureus (10–20%), streptococci (10–15%), E. coli (5-­10%),
Pseudomonas spp. (5–10%), other gram-­
negative bacteria (5–15%),
Enterococcus spp. (3–6%), and fungi (2–10%). S. aureus is more common
in localized exit site or tunnel tract infections (42%). Most infectious episodes are caused by a patient’s own flora, and carriers of S. aureus have
increased rates of infection compared with noncarriers.
The clinical manifestations of peritonitis may be subtle and include
low-­grade fever with mild abdominal pain or tenderness. Cloudy
peritoneal dialysis fluid may be the first and predominant sign. With
peritonitis, the peritoneal fluid cell count is usually >100 white blood
cells/μL. When peritonitis is suspected, the effluent dialysate should be
submitted for a cell count, Gram stain, and culture. The Gram stain is
positive in up to 40% of cases of peritonitis.
Patients with cloudy fluid and clinical symptoms should receive
empirical therapy, preferably guided by results of a Gram stain. If no
organisms are visualized, vancomycin and either an aminoglycoside
or a third-­or fourth-­generation cephalosporin with antipseudomonal
activity should be given by the intraperitoneal route. Blood levels
should be measured for glycopeptides and aminoglycosides. Patients
without cloudy fluid and with minimal symptoms may have therapy
withheld pending culture results. Once the cause is identified by culture, changes in the therapeutic regimen may be needed. Oral rifampin
may be added as adjunctive therapy for susceptible S. aureus isolates
but should not be used as a standalone agent and must prompt consideration of drug interactions. Candidal peritonitis should be treated
with catheter removal and intraperitoneal or oral fluconazole or an IV

echinocandin such as caspofungin or micafungin, depending on the
Candida spp.; catheter retention has been associated with almost inevitable relapse and higher risk of mortality in adult studies. The duration
of therapy for peritonitis is a minimum of 14 days, with longer treatment of 21-­28 days for episodes of S. aureus, Pseudomonas spp., and
resistant gram-­negative bacteria and 28-­42 days for fungi. Repeat episodes of peritonitis with the same organism within 4 weeks of previous
therapy should lead to consideration of catheter removal or attempt at
salvage with administration of a fibrinolytic agent and a longer course
of up to 6 weeks of antibiotic therapy.
In all cases, if the infection fails to clear after appropriate therapy or
if a patient’s condition is deteriorating, the catheter should be removed.
Exit site and tunnel tract infections may occur independently of peritonitis or may precede it. Appropriate antibiotics should be administered
on the basis of Gram stain and culture findings and are typically given
systemically only, unless peritonitis is also present. Some experts recommend that the peritoneal catheter be removed if Pseudomonas spp.
or fungal organisms are isolated.

Prevention of Infection

In addition to usual hygienic practices such as hand hygiene and aseptic
care of the catheter exit site, regular application of mupirocin or gentamicin cream to the catheter exit site reduces exit site infections and
peritonitis. Some practitioners recommend against the use of gentamicin cream because of the risk of infection with gentamicin-­resistant
bacteria. Systemic antibiotic prophylaxis should be considered at catheter insertion, if there is accidental contamination, and at dental procedures. Antifungal prophylaxis with oral nystatin or fluconazole should
be considered during antibiotic therapy to prevent fungal infection.

IMPLANTABLE ORTHOPEDIC DEVICES

Implantable orthopedic devices are used infrequently in children.
Orthopedic device infection most often follows introduction of
microorganisms at surgery through airborne contamination or direct
inoculation, hematogenous spread, breakdown of overlying skin, or
contiguous spread from an adjacent infection. Early postoperative
infection occurs within 2-­4 weeks of surgery, with manifestations typically including fever, pain, and local symptoms of wound infection.
Chronic infection presents >1 month after surgery and is often caused
by organisms of low virulence that contaminated the implant at surgery
or by failure of wound healing. Typical manifestations include pain and
deterioration in function. Local symptoms such as erythema, swelling,
or drainage may also occur. Acute hematogenous infections are most
often observed ≥2 years after surgery and may be more common in
children with immunocompromise. Options for treatment include
conservative management with operative debridement and irrigation
and retention of the prosthesis, followed by a 3-­to 6-­month course of
antimicrobial therapy, or more radical intervention with removal and
replacement of all hardware—as either a one-­or two-­stage exchange
with a shorter course of antibiotic therapy (2-­6 weeks). If the prosthesis is retained, suppressive oral antibiotic therapy may be considered
after an initial treatment course, especially in patients who are undergoing intensive time-­limited treatment such as chemotherapy. As with
other long-­term implanted devices, the most common organisms are
coagulase-­negative staphylococci and S. aureus. With prior antibiotic
therapy, the prosthesis culture may be negative; in these situations,
molecular techniques to identify the organism are available, but sensitivity and specificity are poorly understood.
Orthopedic hardware such as screws and plates are more commonly
encountered in children than true implantable orthopedic devices. The
management of infections associated with these kinds of hardware is
similar to other orthopedic device infections, but because the hardware is typically temporary, it should generally be removed as soon as
feasible.
Systemic antibiotic prophylaxis, antibiotic-­containing bone cement,
and operating rooms fitted with laminar airflow have been proposed to
reduce infection. To date, results from clinical studies are conflicting.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 225 u Principles of Antibacterial Therapy

Section 3

Antibiotic Therapy
Chapter 225

Principles of Antibacterial
Therapy
Mark R. Schleiss
Antibacterial therapy in infants and children presents many challenges.
A daunting problem is the paucity of pediatric data regarding pharmacokinetics and optimal dosages; as a consequence, pediatric recommendations are frequently extrapolated from adult studies. A second
challenge is the need for the clinician to consider important differences
among pediatric age-­groups with respect to the pathogenic species
most often responsible for bacterial infections. Age-­appropriate antibiotic dosing and toxicities must be considered, taking into account the
developmental status and physiology of infants and children. Finally,
the style of how a pediatrician uses antibiotics in children, particularly
young infants, has some important differences compared with how
antibiotics are used in adult patients.
Specific antibiotic therapy is optimally driven by a microbiologic
diagnosis, predicated on isolation of the pathogenic organism from
a sterile body site and supported by antimicrobial susceptibility testing. However, given the inherent difficulties that can arise in collecting
specimens from pediatric patients and given the high risk of mortality
and disability associated with serious bacterial infections in very young
infants, much of pediatric infectious diseases practice is based on clinical diagnoses and empirical use of antibacterial agents, often administered before and/or without identification of the specific pathogen.
Although there is an ever-­increasing emphasis on antimicrobial stewardship, driven by the importance of using empirical therapy sparingly
(to avoid selecting for resistant organisms), there are some settings in
which antimicrobials must be administered before the presence of a
specific bacterial pathogen is proven. This is particularly relevant to
the care of the febrile or ill-­appearing neonate or young infant under
30 days of age.
Several key considerations influence decision-­making regarding the
appropriate empirical use of antibacterial agents in infants and children. It is important to know the age-­specific differential diagnosis
with respect to likely pathogens. This information affects the choice
of antimicrobial agent and also the dose, dosing interval, and route of
administration (oral vs parenteral). A complete history and physical
examination, combined with appropriate laboratory and radiographic
studies, are necessary to identify specific diagnoses, information that in
turn affects the choice, dosing, and degree of urgency of administration
of antimicrobial agents. The vaccination history may confer reduced
risk for some invasive infections (i.e., Haemophilus influenzae type
b, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis), but a history of
vaccination does not necessarily eliminate risk. The threat of serious
bacterial infection in pediatric practice is also affected by the child’s
immunologic status, which may be compromised by immaturity (neonates), underlying disease, and immunosuppressive medications used
to treat other disorders (see Chapter 223). Infections in immunocompromised children may result from bacteria that are not considered
pathogenic in immunocompetent children. The presence of foreign
bodies (medical devices) also increases the risk of bacterial infections
(see Chapter 224). The likelihood of central nervous system (CNS)
involvement must be considered in all pediatric patients with serious

1671

bacterial infections, because many bacteremic pathogens in childhood
carry a significant risk of hematogenous spread to the CNS.
The patterns of antimicrobial resistance in the community and for
the potential causative pathogen being empirically covered must also
be considered. Resistance to penicillin and cephalosporins is frequent
among strains of S. pneumoniae, often necessitating the use of other
classes of antibiotics. Similarly, the striking emergence of community-­
acquired methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections has complicated antibiotic choices, both when this pathogen is
isolated in culture and for empirical coverage of skin and soft tissue
infections. Extended-­spectrum β-­lactamase (ESBL)–producing gram-­
negative bacteria (Enterobacteriaceae) have reduced the effectiveness
of penicillins and cephalosporins. Furthermore, carbapenem-­resistant
Enterobacteriaceae (CRE) are an increasing problem among hospitalized patients, particularly in children with an epidemiologic connection to regions of the world, such as India, where such strains are
frequently encountered.
Antimicrobial resistance occurs through many modifications of
the bacterial genome (Tables 225.1 and 225.2). Mechanisms include
enzyme inactivation of the antibiotic, decreased cell membrane permeability to intracellularly active antibiotics, efflux of antibiotics out of
the bacteria, protection or alteration of the antibiotic target site, excessive production of the target site, and bypassing the antimicrobial site
of action. CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats) elements in bacteria have also been shown to be related to
emergence of antimicrobial resistance. CRISPRs are detectable in many
bacterial genomes, protecting their genomes from attack by foreign
DNA during transformation, phage invasion, or plasmid insertion. The
mechanism of protection is mediated by insertion of small sequences
of the invading DNA between palindromic repeats within the CRISPR
element. Upon re-­exposure to similar DNA sequences from phage or
invading bacteria, the existing sequence within the CRISPR is transcribed into a small RNA that associates with CRISPR-­
associated
nucleases, blocking integration of the targeted foreign DNA. Deletion of CRISPR elements in Enterococcus is inversely related to antibiotic resistance, and CRISPR-­deficient strains are selected for in the
context of healthcare-­associated infections. CRISPR deficiency allows
for evolution of significantly larger genomes, and the attendant insertion of large sequences of DNA in turn enables expression of multiple
antibiotic-­resistance genes.
Antimicrobial resistance has reached crisis proportions, driven
by the emergence of new resistance mechanisms (e.g., carbapenemases, including Klebsiella pneumoniae–associated carbapenemases, or KPCs) and by overuse of antibiotics, both in healthcare
and in other venues, such as agribusiness and animal husbandry.
This increase in antibiotic resistance has rendered some bacterial
infections encountered in clinical practice virtually untreatable.
Accordingly, there is an urgent need to develop new antimicrobials
and to rediscover some older antibiotics that have been out of use
in recent decades but still retain activity against resistant organisms. It is vital that practitioners use antibiotics only when truly
indicated, with the narrowest feasible antimicrobial spectrum, to
help thwart emergence of resistance. In addition, advocacy for
vaccines, particularly conjugate pneumococcal vaccine, can also
decrease the selective pressure that excessive antimicrobial use
exerts on resistance.
Effective antibiotic action requires achieving therapeutic levels of
the drug at the site of infection. Other factors to consider include the
impact of pH on antibiotic activity; for example, an antibiotic may penetrate an abscess with adequate levels but may be inactive in the acidic
milieu of the abscess cavity. Although measuring the level of antibiotic at the site of infection is not always possible, one may measure
the serum level and use this level as a surrogate marker to achieve the
desired effect at the tissue level. Various target serum levels are appropriate for different antibiotic agents and are assessed by the peak and
trough serum levels and the area under the therapeutic drug level
curve (Fig. 225.1). These levels in turn are a reflection of the route of
administration, drug absorption (IM, PO), volume of distribution, and
drug elimination half-­life, as well as drug-­drug interactions that might

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1672 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
enhance or impede enzymatic inactivation of an antibiotic or result in
antimicrobial synergism or antagonism (Fig. 225.2).

AGE-­AND RISK-­SPECIFIC USE OF ANTIBIOTICS IN
CHILDREN
Neonates

The causative pathogens associated with neonatal infections are typically acquired around the time of delivery. Thus empirical antibiotic
selection must take into account the importance of these organisms
(see Chapter 148). Among the causes of neonatal sepsis in infants,
group B Streptococcus (GBS) is the most common. Although intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis administered to women at increased risk for
transmission of GBS to the infant has greatly decreased the incidence
of this infection in neonates, particularly with respect to so-­called
early-­onset disease, GBS infections are still frequently encountered in
clinical practice (see Chapter 230). Gram-­negative enteric organisms
acquired from the maternal birth canal, in particular Escherichia coli,
are also common causes of neonatal sepsis. Although less common,
Listeria monocytogenes is an important pathogen to consider, in particular because this organism is intrinsically resistant to cephalosporin
antibiotics, which are often used as empirical therapy for serious bacterial infections in young children. Salmonella bacteremia and meningitis on a global basis is a well-­recognized infection in infants. All these
organisms can be associated with meningitis in the neonate; therefore
lumbar puncture should always be considered in the setting of bacteremic infections in this age-­group, and antibiotic management should
include agents capable of crossing the blood-­brain barrier if meningitis
cannot be excluded.

against Hib remains important in many clinical settings, particularly if
meningitis is a consideration. Other important pathogens to consider
in this age-­group include E. coli, S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, and
S. aureus. Strains of S. pneumoniae that are resistant to penicillin and
cephalosporin antibiotics are frequently encountered in clinical practice. Similarly, MRSA is highly prevalent in children in the outpatient
setting. Antibiotic resistance in S. pneumoniae and MRSA is a result
of mutations that confer alterations in penicillin-­binding proteins, the
molecular targets of penicillin and cephalosporin activity (see Table
225.1).
Depending on the specific clinical diagnosis, other pathogens
encountered among older children include Moraxella catarrhalis,
nontypeable (nonencapsulated) strains of H. influenzae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae, which cause upper respiratory tract infections
and pneumonia; group A Streptococcus, which causes pharyngitis, skin
and soft tissue infections, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, and rarely,
bacteremia with toxic shock syndrome; Kingella kingae, which causes
bone and joint infections and bacteremia; viridians group streptococci
and Enterococcus, which cause endocarditis; and Salmonella spp.,
which cause enteritis, bacteremia, osteomyelitis, and septic arthritis.
Vector-­borne bacterial infections, including infections with Borrelia
burgdorferi, Rickettsia rickettsii, and Anaplasma phagocytophilum, are
increasingly recognized in certain regions, with an emerging increase
in prevalence related to global climate change. Zoonotic exposures, pet
ownership, and uncommon dietary intake may suggest less common
pathogens such as Coxiella burnetii, Brucella abortus, Bartonella henselae, Yersinia pestis, L. monocytogenes, and Francisella tularensis, all of
which have unique antibiotic susceptibility profiles. These complexities

Older Children

Antibiotic choices in toddlers and young children were once driven by
the high risk of this age-­group to invasive disease caused by H. influenzae type b (Hib; see Chapter 240). With the advent of conjugate vaccines against Hib, invasive disease has declined dramatically. However,
outbreaks still occur and have been observed in the context of parental
refusal of vaccines. Therefore the use of antimicrobials that are active

Table 225.2  Aminoglycoside-­Modifying Enzymes*

ENZYMES

USUAL
ANTIBIOTICS
MODIFIED

COMMON GENERA

PHOSPHORYLATION
APH(2″)

K, T, G

SA, SR

Table 225.1  Mechanisms of Resistance to β-­Lactam
Antibiotics

APH(3′)-­I

K

E, PS, SA, SR

APH(3′)-­III

K±A

E, PS, SA, SR

I.	Alter target site (PBP)
A.	Decrease affinity of PBP for β-­lactam antibiotic
1.	Modify existing PBP
a.	Create mosaic PBP
(1)	Insert nucleotides obtained from neighboring
bacteria (e.g., penicillin-­resistant Streptococcus
pneumoniae)
(2)	Mutate structural gene of PBP(s) (e.g., ampicillin-­
resistant β-­lactamase–negative Haemophilus
influenzae)
2.	Import new PBP (e.g., mecA in methicillin-­resistant
Staphylococcus aureus)
II.	Destroy β-­lactam antibiotic
A.	Increase production of β-­lactamases, carbapenemases
1.	Acquire more efficient promoter
a.	Mutate existing promoter
b.	Import new promoter
2.	Deregulate control of β-­lactamase production
a.	Mutate regulator genes (e.g., ampD in “stably
derepressed” Enterobacter cloacae)
B.	Modify structure of resident β-­lactamase
1.	Mutate structural gene (e.g., ESBLs in Klebsiella
pneumoniae)
C.	Import new β-­lactamase(s) with different spectrum of activity
III.	Decrease concentration of β-­lactam antibiotic inside cell
A.	Restrict its entry (loss of porins)
B.	Pump it out (efflux mechanisms)

ACETYLATION
AAC(2′)

G

PR

AAC(3)-­I

±T, G

E, PS

AAC(3)-­III, -­IV, or -­V

K, T, G

E, PS

AAC(6′)

K, T, A

E, PS, SA

ADENYLATION
ANT(2″)

K, T, G

E, PS

ANT(4′)

K, T, A

SA

ESBLs, Extended-­spectrum β-­lactamases; PBP, penicillin-­binding protein.
Adapted from Opal SM, Pop-­Vicas A. Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance in
bacteria. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles
and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 18-­4.

BIFUNCTIONAL ENZYMES
AAC(6′)-­APH(2″)
G, Ar

SA, Ent

AAC(6′)-­lbcr

E

G, K, T, FQ*

*Aminoglycoside-­modifying enzymes confer antibiotic resistance through three general
reactions: N-­acetylation, O-­nucleotidylation, and O-­phosphorylation. For each of
these general reactions, there are several different enzymes that attack a specific
amino or hydroxyl group. The nomenclature for these enzymes lists the molecular site
where the modification occurs after the type of enzymatic activity. An aminoglycoside
acetyltransferase (AAC) that acts at the 3′ site is designated AAC(3′).There may
be more than one enzyme that catalyzes the same reaction, however, and Roman
numerals may be necessary (e.g., AAC[3′]-­IV).
A, Amikacin; AAC, aminoglycoside acetyltransferase; ANT, aminoglycoside
nucleotidyltransferase; APH, aminoglycoside phosphotransferase; Ar, arbekacin, E,
Enterobacteriaceae; Ent, enterococci, FQ, fluoroquinolone (acetylates the piperazine
ring in some fluoroquinolones), G, gentamicin; K, kanamycin; PR, Providencia-­
Proteus; PS, pseudomonads; SA, staphylococci; SR, streptococci; T, tobramycin.
Adapted from Opal SM, Pop-­Vicas A. Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance
in bacteria. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s
Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table
18-­5.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 225 u Principles of Antibacterial Therapy
Antibiotic A, i.v. (half life  6 hrs)

Resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(MIC  2.0)
Susceptible
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(MIC  0.1)

0.1

2

Susceptible
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(MIC  0.1)

0.1

4

4

6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Time after administration (hrs)

Antibiotic C, p.o. (half life  1 hr)

10.0
Resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(MIC
 2.0)
AUC for
antibiotic C

1.0

Susceptible
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(MIC  0.1)

0.1

2

No antibiotic (control)

Antibiotic 1
Log (colony-forming units/mL)

Log (colony-forming units/mL)

2

6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Time after administration (hrs)

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0

Susceptible
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(MIC  0.1)

0.1

100.0

Resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(MIC  2.0)

1.0

4

Resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(MIC  2.0)

1.0

6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Time after administration (hrs)

10.0

2

10.0

8

12
16
Time (hours)

20

6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Time after administration (hrs)

4

B

8

Fig. 225.1 Area under the curve
(AUC; shaded area) for different antibiotics. The AUC provides a measure of antibiotic exposure to bacterial
pathogens. The greatest exposure
comes with antibiotics that have a
long serum half-­life and are administered parenterally (upper left panel,
antibiotic A). The lowest exposure
occurs with oral administration (lower
right panel, antibiotic C). Dosing of
antibiotic B once a day (upper right
panel) provides far less exposure
than dosing the same antibiotic every
6 hr (lower left panel). MIC, Minimal inhibitory concentration. (From
Pong AL, Bradley JS. Guidelines for
the selection of antibacterial therapy
in children. Pediatr Clin North Am.
2005;52:869–894.)

Antibiotic 2

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0

24

4

Antibiotic 1 + 2
Log (colony-forming units/mL)

Antibiotic concentration mg/mL

4

Antibiotic B, i.v. (admin. every 6 hrs)

100.0

A

Antibiotic concentration mg/mL

10.0

1.0

Antibiotic B, i.v. (half life  1 hr)

100.0

Antibiotic concentration mg/mL

Antibiotic concentration mg/mL

100.0

1673

12
16
Time (hours)

20

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

24

0

C

4

8

12
16
Time (hours)

20

24

Fig. 225.2 Antibacterial effects of antibiotic combinations. A, Combination of antibiotics 1 and 2 is indifferent; killing by antibiotic 2 is unchanged
when antibiotic 1 is added. B, Combination of antibiotics 1 and 2 results in synergy; killing by antibiotic 2 is significantly enhanced when antibiotic 1
is added at a subinhibitory concentration. C, Combination of antibiotics 1 and 2 is antagonistic; killing by antibiotic 2 is diminished in the presence
of antibiotic 1. (From Eliopoulos GM, Moellering RC Jr. Principles of anti-­infective therapy. In: Bennett JF, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas,
and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Fig 17-­1.)

underscore the importance of formulation of a complete differential diagnosis in children with suspected severe bacterial infections,
including an assessment of the severity of the infection in parallel with
consideration of local epidemiologic disease trends. Knowledge of the
antimicrobial susceptibility patterns in the community is also critically
important in devising an antibiotic treatment strategy.

Immunocompromised and Hospitalized Patients

It is important to consider the risks associated with immunocompromising conditions (malignancy, solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, immunodeficiencies) and the risks conferred by conditions leading to prolonged hospitalization (intensive care, trauma,
burns). Influenza infection can also predispose to invasive bacterial
infections, especially those caused by S. aureus. Measles infection is
well-­known to predispose to serious bacterial infection, particularly
with Mycobacteria. Infection with SARS-­CoV-­2 can also be associated

with bacterial and fungal opportunistic infections. Immunocompromised children are predisposed to develop a wide range of bacterial,
viral, fungal, or parasitic infections. Prolonged hospitalization can lead
to nosocomial infections, often associated with indwelling catheters
and caused by highly antibiotic-­resistant gram-­negative enteric organisms. In addition to bacterial pathogens already discussed, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and enteric organisms, including E. coli, K. pneumoniae,
Enterobacter, and Serratia, are important opportunistic pathogens in
these settings.
The so-­called ESKAPE pathogens are a group of six highly virulent
and antibiotic-­resistant organisms that are being increasingly recognized
in hospitalized patients, including Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus
aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species. Selection of appropriate antimicrobials is challenging because of the diverse causes and scope of antimicrobial resistance exhibited by these organisms. Many strains of enteric

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1674 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
organisms have resistance because of ESBLs (see Table 225.1). Class B
metallo-­β-­lactamases (also known as New Delhi metallo-­β-­lactamases)
that hydrolyze all β-­lactam antibiotics except aztreonam and KPCs that
confer resistance to carbapenems are increasingly being described. CRE
are different from other multidrug-­resistant microorganisms in that they
are susceptible to few (if any) antibacterial agents.
Other modes of antimicrobial resistance exist that complicate
management of common hospital-­acquired infections. P. aeruginosa
encodes proteins that function as efflux pumps to eliminate multiple
classes of antimicrobials from the cytoplasm or periplasmic space.
In addition to these gram-­negative pathogens, infections caused by
Enterococcus faecalis and E. faecium are inherently difficult to treat.
Isolates of E. faecalis are typically susceptible to ampicillin, whereas
most E. faecium are resistant to ampicillin, with resistance mediated
by alterations in either the stoichiometry or sequence of a specific
penicillin binding protein (PBP). These organisms may cause urinary
tract infection (UTI) or infective endocarditis in immunocompetent children and may be responsible for a variety of syndromes in
immunocompromised patients, especially in the setting of prolonged
intensive care. The emergence of infections caused by vancomycin-­
resistant enterococcus (VRE) has further complicated antimicrobial
selection in high-­risk patients and has necessitated the development
of newer antimicrobials that target these highly resistant gram-­
positive bacteria.

Infections Associated with Medical Devices

A special situation affecting antibiotic use is the presence of an
indwelling medical device, such as a venous catheter, ventriculoperitoneal shunt, stent, or other catheter (see Chapter 224). In addition
to S. aureus, coagulase-­negative staphylococci are a major consideration. Coagulase-­negative staphylococci seldom cause serious disease
in the absence of risk factors such as indwelling catheters. Empirical
antibiotic regimens must take this risk into consideration. In addition
to appropriate antibiotic therapy, removal or replacement of the colonized prosthetic material is usually required for cure.

ANTIBIOTICS, INCLUDING NEWER AGENTS AND
THERAPIES COMMONLY USED IN PEDIATRIC
PRACTICE

Table 225.3 lists selected antibiotic medications, including recently
licensed agents. Not all agents have formal pediatric indications,
but dosage considerations for infants and children are provided, as
available.

Penicillins

Although there has been ever-­increasing emergence of resistance to
penicillins, these agents remain valuable and are commonly used for
management of many pediatric infectious diseases.
Penicillins remain the drugs of choice for pediatric infections caused
by group A and group B streptococci, Treponema pallidum (syphilis),
L. monocytogenes, and N. meningitidis. The semisynthetic penicillins (nafcillin, cloxacillin, dicloxacillin) are useful for management
of susceptible (non-­MRSA) staphylococcal infections. The aminopenicillins (ampicillin, amoxicillin) were developed to provide broad-­
spectrum activity against gram-­negative organisms, including E. coli
and H. influenzae, but the emergence of resistance (typically mediated
by a β-­lactamase) has limited their utility in many clinical settings.
The carboxypenicillins (ticarcillin) and ureidopenicillins (piperacillin, mezlocillin, azlocillin) also have bactericidal activity against most
strains of P. aeruginosa.
Resistance to penicillin is mediated by a variety of mechanisms (see
Table 225.1). The production of β-­lactamase is a common mechanism
exhibited by many organisms that may be overcome, with variable
success, by including a β-­lactamase inhibitor in the therapeutic formulation with the penicillin. Such combination products (ampicillin-­
sulbactam, amoxicillin-­
clavulanate, ticarcillin–clavulanic acid [no
longer available in the United States], piperacillin-­tazobactam) are
potentially very useful for management of resistant isolates, but only
if the resistance is β-­
lactamase mediated. Notably, MRSA and S.

pneumoniae mediate resistance to penicillins through mechanisms
other than β-­
lactamase production, rendering these combination
agents of little value for the management of these infections. Cephalosporin (ceftazidime/avibactam, ceftolozane/tazobactam) and carbapenem (meropenem/vaborbactam, and imipenem/relebactam)
antibiotics combined with β-­lactamase inhibitors have also been
recently licensed by the FDA (described later). In addition, the FDA
has recently approved a novel β-lactam-β-lactamase inhibitor combination, sulbactam-durlobactam (SUL-DUR), designed specifically
for the treatment of carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii
infections, in particular, those associated with hospital-acquired and
ventilator-associated pneumonias.
Table 225.4 lists adverse reactions to penicillins.

Cephalosporins

Cephalosporins differ structurally from penicillins insofar as the
β-­lactam ring exists as a six-­member ring, compared with the five-­
member ring structure of the penicillins. These agents are widely used
in pediatric practice, both in oral and parenteral formulations (Table
225.5). The first-­generation cephalosporins (e.g., cefazolin, a parenteral formulation, and cephalexin, an oral equivalent) are commonly
used for management of skin and soft tissue infections caused by susceptible strains of S. aureus and group A streptococcus. The second-­
generation cephalosporins (e.g., cefuroxime, cefoxitin) have better
activity against gram-­negative bacterial infections than first-­generation
cephalosporins and are used to treat respiratory tract infections, UTIs,
and skin and soft tissue infections. A variety of orally administered
second-­generation agents (cefaclor, cefprozil, loracarbef, cefpodoxime)
are commonly used in the outpatient management of sinopulmonary
infections and otitis media. The agents cefoxitin and cefotetan are also
referred to as cephamycins, because they were originally isolated from
actinomycetes (although synthetic versions also have been developed).
The third-­generation cephalosporins (cefotaxime [no longer available], ceftriaxone, and ceftazidime) are typically used for serious pediatric infections, including meningitis and sepsis. Oral third-­generation
cephalosporins have been developed, including cefixime, ceftibuten,
cefdinir, cefpodoxime, and cefditoren. Ceftazidime is highly active
against most strains of P. aeruginosa, making this a useful agent for
febrile, neutropenic oncology patients. The FDA approved the combination of ceftazidime and the novel β-­lactamase inhibitor avibactam in
2015. Current indications include complicated intraabdominal infections and UTIs. The combination may also be useful for the treatment
of infection caused by KPCs. Pediatric experience is limited. Ceftriaxone should not be mixed or reconstituted with a calcium-­containing
product, such as Ringer or Hartmann solution or parenteral nutrition
containing calcium, because particulate formation can result. Cases of
fatal reactions with ceftriaxone-­calcium precipitates in the lungs and
kidneys in neonates have been reported.
Cefepime is a fourth-­generation cephalosporin and has activity
against P. aeruginosa along with good activity against methicillin-­
susceptible S. aureus. Phase 3 studies of two new formulations of
cefepime (one combined with a β-­lactamase inhibitor, taniborbactam,
and the other with a penicillanic acid sulfone β-­lactamase inhibitor, enmetazobactam) are ongoing. Cefpirome is a fourth-­generation
cephalosporin with activity against P. aeruginosa and methicillin-­
sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) and is licensed for complicated UTIs and
ventilator-­associated pneumonia in adults, but no data on pediatric
use are available. Ceftizoxime is a fourth-­generation cephalosporin
that is no longer in use in the United States. Cefiderocol is a novel
cephalosporin that is classified as a siderophore antibiotic and is used
for treatment of resistant gram-­negative organisms, particularly P.
aeruginosa, associated with complicated UTIs. It also recently received
FDA approval for the treatment of hospital-­acquired bacterial pneumonia caused by resistant gram-­negative organisms. Its mechanism
of action involves binding to iron, followed by active transport into
bacterial cells. It was the first siderophore antibiotic to be approved by
the FDA. It is approved for ages 18 and older, so pediatric experience
is limited. Some classification schemes have classified it as a fourth-­
generation cephalosporin.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 225 u Principles of Antibacterial Therapy

1675

Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Amikacin sulfate
Amikin
Injection: 50 mg/mL,
250 mg/mL

Aminoglycoside antibiotic active against gram-­negative bacilli,
especially Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, Enterobacter,
Serratia, and Pseudomonas
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days, weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 7.5 mg/
kg q12-­18h IV or IM; weight >2,000 g: 10 mg/kg q12h IV or IM;
postnatal age >7 days, weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 7.5 mg/kg q8-­12h
IV or IM; weight >2,000 g: 10 mg/kg q8h IV or IM
Children: 15-­25 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h IV or IM
Adults: 15 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h IV or IM

Cautions: Anaerobes, Streptococcus
(including S. pneumoniae) are resistant.
May cause ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity.
Monitor renal function. Drug eliminated
renally. Administered IV over 30-­60 min.
Drug interactions: May potentiate other
ototoxic and nephrotoxic drugs.
Target serum concentrations: Peak 25-­40
mg/L; trough <10 mg/L.

Amoxicillin
Amoxil, Polymox
Capsule: 250, 500 mg
Tablet: chewable: 125, 250 mg
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL, 250
mg/5 mL
Drops: 50 mg/mL

Penicillinase-­susceptible β-­lactam: gram-­positive pathogens
except Staphylococcus; susceptible gram-­negatives, including
Salmonella, Shigella, Neisseria species, E. coli, and Proteus
mirabilis
Children: 20-­50 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h PO; higher dose of
80-90 mg/kg 24 hr PO for otitis media
Adults: 250-­500 mg q8-­12h PO

Cautions: Rash, diarrhea, abdominal
cramping. Drug eliminated renally.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Amoxicillin-­clavulanate
Augmentin
Oral
Tablet: 250, 500, 875 mg
Tablet, chewable: 125, 200,
250, 400 mg
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL, 200
mg/5 mL, 250 mg/5 mL, 400
mg/5 mL

Cautions: Drug dosed on amoxicillin
β-­Lactam (amoxicillin) combined with β-­lactamase inhibitor
component. May cause diarrhea, rash.
(clavulanate) enhances amoxicillin activity against penicillinase-­
Drug eliminated renally.
producing bacteria. S. aureus (not methicillin-­resistant
Drug interaction: Probenecid.
organism), Streptococcus, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella
Comment: Higher dose may be active
catarrhalis, E. coli, Klebsiella, Bacteroides fragilis
against penicillin-­tolerant/resistant
Neonates: 30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO
S. pneumoniae.
Children: 20-­45 mg/kg 24 hr divided q8-­12h PO; higher dose 80-­
90 mg/kg/24 hr PO for otitis media

Ampicillin
Polycillin, Omnipen
Capsule: 250, 500 mg
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL, 250
mg/5 mL, 500 mg/5 mL
Injection
Oral

β-­Lactam with same spectrum of antibacterial activity as
amoxicillin
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days weight ≤2,000 g: 50 mg/kg/24
hr IV or IM q12h (meningitis: 100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV
or IM); weight >2,000 g: 75 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM
(meningitis: 150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM). Postnatal
age >7 days weight <1,200 g: 50 mg/kg/24 hr IV or IM q12h
(meningitis: 100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM); weight
1,200-­2,000 g: 75 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM (meningitis:
150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8hr IV or IM); weight >2,000 g: 100
mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h IV or IM (meningitis: 200 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q6h IV or IM)
Children: 100-­200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h IV or IM (meningitis:
200-­400 mg/kg/24 hr divided q4-­6h IV or IM)
Adults: 250-­500 mg q4-­8h IV or IM

Cautions: Less bioavailable than
amoxicillin, causing greater diarrhea.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Ampicillin-­sulbactam
Unasyn
Injection

β-­Lactam (ampicillin) and β-­lactamase inhibitor (sulbactam)
enhances ampicillin activity against penicillinase-­producing
bacteria: S. aureus, H. influenzae, M. catarrhalis, E. coli,
Klebsiella, B. fragilis
Children: 100-­200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q4-­8h IV or IM
Adults: 1-­2 g q6-­8h IV or IM (max daily dose: 8 g)

Cautions: Drug dosed on ampicillin
component. May cause diarrhea, rash.
Drug eliminated renally.
Note: Higher dose may be active against
penicillin-­tolerant/resistant
S. pneumoniae.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Azithromycin
Zithromax
Tablet: 250 mg
Suspension: 100 mg/5 mL, 200
mg/5 mL

Azalide antibiotic with activity against S. aureus, Streptococcus,
H. influenzae, Mycoplasma, Legionella, Chlamydia trachomatis,
Babesia microti
Children: 10 mg/kg PO on day 1 (max dose: 500 mg) followed by
5 mg/kg PO q24h for 4 days
Group A streptococcus pharyngitis: 12 mg/kg/24 hr PO (max
dose: 500 mg) for 5 days
Adults: 500 mg PO on day 1, followed by 250 mg for 4 days
Uncomplicated C. trachomatis infection: single 1 g dose PO

Note: Very long half-­life permitting
once-­daily dosing. No metabolic-­based
drug interactions (unlike erythromycin
and clarithromycin), limited GI distress.
Shorter-­course regimens (e.g., 1-­3 days)
under investigation. For a 3-­day course of
therapy, use dose of (10 mg/kg/24 hr × 3
days); single-­dose therapy, 30 mg/kg (not
for streptococcal pharyngitis).

Aztreonam
Azactam
Injection

β-­Lactam (monobactam) antibiotic with activity against
gram-­negative aerobic bacteria, Enterobacteriaceae, and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days weight ≤2,000 g: 60 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q12h IV or IM; weight >2,000 g: 90 mg/kg/24 hr divided
q8h IV or IM; postnatal age >7 days weight <1,200 g: 60 mg/
kg/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM; weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 90 mg/
kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM; weight >2,000 g: 120 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q6-­8h IV or IM
Children: 90-­120 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h IV or IM. For cystic
fibrosis, up to 200 mg/kg/24 hr IV
Adults: 1-­2 g IV or IM q8-­12h (max dose: 8 g/24 hr)

Cautions: Rash, thrombophlebitis,
eosinophilia. Renally eliminated.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1676 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Cefadroxil
Generic
Capsule: 500 mg
Tablet: 1,000 mg
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL, 250
mg/5 mL, 500 mg/5 mL

First-­generation cephalosporin active against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, E. coli, Klebsiella, and Proteus
Children: 30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO (max dose: 2 g)
Adults: 250-­500 mg q8-­12h PO

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated. Long
half-­life permits q12-­24h dosing.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Cefazolin
Ancef, Kefzol
Injection

First-­generation cephalosporin active against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, E. coli, Klebsiella, and Proteus
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days 40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV
or IM; >7 days 40-­60 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM
Children: 50-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM
Adults: 0.5-­2g q8h IV or IM (max dose: 12 g/24 hr)

Caution: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated. Does
not adequately penetrate CNS.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Cefdinir
Omnicef
Capsule: 300 mg
Oral suspension: 125 mg/5 mL

Extended-­spectrum, semisynthetic cephalosporin
Children 6 mo-­12 yr: 14 mg/kg/24 hr in 1 or 2 doses PO (max
dose: 600 mg/24 hr)
Adults: 600 mg q24h PO

Cautions: Reduce dosage in renal
insufficiency (creatinine clearance
<60 mL/min). Avoid taking concurrently
with iron-­containing products and
antacids because absorption is markedly
decreased; take at least 2 hr apart.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Cefepime
Maxipime
Injection

Expanded-­spectrum, fourth-­generation cephalosporin active
against many gram-­positive and gram-­negative pathogens,
including P. aeruginosa and many multidrug-­resistant
pathogens
Children: 100-­150 mg/kg/24 hr q8-­12h IV or IM
Adults: 2-­4 g/24 hr q12h IV or IM

Adverse events: Diarrhea, nausea, vaginal
candidiasis.
Cautions: β-­lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Cefiderocol
Fetroja
Injection
1 g vials

Expanded-­spectrum, classified in some classifications as a
fourth-­generation cephalosporin; novel siderophore antibiotic;
mechanism of action is mediated by binding to iron, followed
by active transport into bacterial cells
Indicated for treatment of complicated urinary tract infections,
including pyelonephritis, caused by susceptible gram-­negative
microorganisms and for hospital-­acquired and ventilator-­
associated pneumonia
Adults: 2 g IV q8hr for 7-­14 days
Children: dose not established

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated. Not
indicated for meningitis (in contrast with
cefepime).

Cefixime
Suprax
Oral
Tablet: 200, 400 mg
Suspension: 100 mg/5 mL

Third-­generation cephalosporin active against streptococci,
H. influenzae, M. catarrhalis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Serratia
marcescens, and Proteus vulgaris
No antistaphylococcal or antipseudomonal activity
Children: 8 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12-­24h PO
Adults: 400 mg/24 hr divided q12-­24h PO

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated. Does
not adequately penetrate CNS.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Cefoperazone sodium
Cefobid
Injection

Third-­generation cephalosporin active against many gram-­positive
and gram-­negative pathogens
Neonates: 100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM
Children: 100-­150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h IV or IM
Adults: 2-­4 g/24 hr divided q8-­12h IV or IM (max dose: 12 g/24 hr)

Cautions: Highly protein-­bound
cephalosporin with limited potency
reflected by weak antipseudomonal
activity. Variable gram-­positive activity.
Primarily hepatically eliminated in bile.
Drug interaction: Disulfiram-­like reaction
with alcohol.

Cefotaxime sodium
Claforan
Injection

Third-­generation cephalosporin active against gram-­positive and
gram-­negative pathogens. No antipseudomonal activity
Neonates: ≤7 days: 100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM; >7
days: weight <1,200 g 100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM;
weight >1,200 g: 150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM
Children: 150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h IV or IM (meningitis: 200
mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h IV)
Adults: 1-­2 g q8-­12h IV or IM (max dose: 12 g/24 hr)

Cefotetan disodium
Cefotan
Injection

Second-­generation cephalosporin active against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, H. influenzae, E. coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, and
Bacteroides. Inactive against Enterobacter
Children: 40-­80 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM
Adults: 2-­4 g/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM (max dose: 6 g/24 hr)

Cautions: Highly protein-­bound
cephalosporin, poor CNS penetration;
β-­lactam safety profile (rash, eosinophilia),
disulfiram-­like reaction with alcohol.
Renally eliminated (∼20% in bile).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 225 u Principles of Antibacterial Therapy

1677

Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Cefoxitin sodium
Mefoxin
Injection

Second-­generation cephalosporin active against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, H. influenzae, E. coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, and
Bacteroides. Inactive against Enterobacter
Neonates: 70-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h IV or IM
Children: 80-­160 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h IV or IM
Adults: 1-­2 g q6-­8h IV or IM (max dose: 12 g/24 hr)

Cautions: Poor CNS penetration; β-­lactam
safety profile (rash, eosinophilia). Renally
eliminated. Painful given intramuscularly.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Cefpirome
Cefrom
Keiten
Broact
Cefir

Fourth-­generation cephalosporin; indicated for complicated
urinary tract infections, including pyelonephritis, caused by
susceptible gram-­negative microorganisms; indicated for
hospital-­acquired and ventilator-­associated pneumonia
Adults: 2 g IV q 8hr for 7-­14 days
Children: Dose not established

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated. Not
indicated for meningitis (in contrast with
cefepime).

Cefpodoxime proxetil
Vantin
Tablet: 100 mg, 200 mg
Suspension: 50 mg/5 mL, 100
mg/5 mL

Third-­generation cephalosporin active against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, H. influenzae, M. catarrhalis, N. gonorrhoeae,
E. coli, Klebsiella, and Proteus
No antipseudomonal activity
Children: 10 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO
Adults: 200-­800 mg/24 hr divided q12h PO (max dose:
800 mg/24 hr)
Uncomplicated gonorrhea: 200 mg PO as single-­dose therapy

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated. Does
not adequately penetrate CNS. Increased
bioavailability when taken with food.
Drug interaction: Probenecid; antacids and
H2 receptor antagonists may decrease
absorption.

Cefprozil
Cefzil
Tablet: 250, 500 mg
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL, 250
mg/5 mL

Second-­generation cephalosporin active against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, H. influenzae, E. coli, M. catarrhalis, Klebsiella,
and Proteus spp.
Children: 30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h PO
Adults: 500-­1,000 mg/24 hr divided q12h PO (max dose: 1.5 g/24
hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated. Good
bioavailability; food does not affect
bioavailability.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Ceftaroline fosamil
Teflaro
Injection
400 mg/vial (20 mg/mL
reconstituted)
600 mg/vial (30 mg/mL
reconstituted)

Fifth-­generation cephalosporin active against S. aureus
(including MRSA when used for skin and soft tissue infection),
S. pyogenes, S. agalactiae, E. coli, K. pneumoniae, H.
influenzae, and K. oxytoca
Children: skin/skin structure infections or community-­acquired
pneumonia, 24 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV (2-­23 mo old) ×5-­14
days; 36 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV (weight ≤33 kg) ×5-­14 days;
400 mg q8h IV (weight >33 kg)
Adults: 600 mg q12h IV

Caution: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia).
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Ceftazidime
Fortaz, Ceptaz, Tazicef,
Tazidime
Injection

Third-­generation cephalosporin active against gram-­positive and
gram-­negative pathogens, including P. aeruginosa
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days: 100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h
IV or IM; >7 days weight ≤1,200 g: 100 mg/kg/24 hr divided
q12h IV or IM; weight >1,200 g: 150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV
or IM
Children: 150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM (meningitis: 150
mg/kg/24 hr IV divided q8h)
Adults: 1-­2 g q8-­12h IV or IM (max dose: 8-­12 g/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated.
Increasing pathogen resistance
developing with long-­term, widespread
use.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Ceftazidime/avibactam
Avycaz
Injection
(2 g/0.5 g)/vial: 2.5 g
Equivalent to 2.635 g of
ceftazidime and 0.551 g of
avibactam sodium

Third-­generation cephalosporin active against gram-­positive and
gram-­negative pathogens, including P. aeruginosa; addition
of β-­lactamase; inhibits K. pneumoniae carbapenemases and
AmpC-­type β-­lactamases that are resistant to β-­lactamases,
tazobactam, and clavulanic acid
Useful for complicated intraabdominal infections, urinary tract
infections, and pneumonia
Adults: 2.5 g (2 g/0.5 g) IV q8h infused over 2 hr for 7-­14 days
Children:
3 mo to <2 yr: 62.5 mg/kg (ceftazidime 50 mg/kg and avibactam
12.5 mg/kg) IV q8h for 5-­14 days
2 yr to <18 yr: 62.5 mg/kg (ceftazidime 50 mg/kg and avibactam
12.5 mg/kg) IV q8h for 5-­14 days; not to exceed 2.5 g
(ceftazidime 2 g and avibactam 0.5 g)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated.
Increasing pathogen resistance
developing with long-­term, widespread
use.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1678 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Ceftolozane/tazobactam
Zerbaxa
Injection

Fifth-­generation cephalosporin (with β-­lactamase inhibitor)
indicated for complicated intraabdominal infections; acute
pyelonephritis; complicated urinary tract infections;
hospital-­acquired and ventilator-­associated bacterial pneumonia
Adults: Community-­acquired pneumonia, skin and soft tissue
infections
600 mg IV q12 h ×5-­7 days
Children:
Birth to <2 mo: 6 mg/kg IV q8h ×5-­14 days
2 mo to <2 yr: 8 mg/kg IV q8h ×5-­14 days
2 yr to <18 yr (≤33 kg): 12 mg/kg IV q8h ×5-­14 days
2 yr to <18 yr (>33 kg): 400 mg q8h OR 600 mg q12h IV ×5-­14 days

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Ceftriaxone sodium
Rocephin
Injection

Third-­generation cephalosporin widely active against gram-­positive
and gram-­negative pathogens
No antipseudomonal activity
Neonates: 50-­75 mg/kg q24h IV or IM
Children: 50-­75 mg/kg q24h IV or IM (meningitis: 75 mg/kg dose
once then 80-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12-­24h IV or IM)
Adults: 1-­2 g q24h IV or IM (max dose: 4 g/24 hr)
Gonorrhea: 500 mg IM, single dose

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Eliminated via kidney
(33–65%) and bile; can cause sludging.
Long half-­life and dose-­dependent protein
binding favors q24h rather than q12h
dosing. Can add 1% lidocaine for IM
injection.
Drug interaction: Probenecid. In neonates,
co-­administration with calcium-­containing
products can result in severe precipitation
and attendant embolic complications.

Cefuroxime (cefuroxime axetil
for oral administration)
Ceftin, Kefurox, Zinacef
Injection
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL
Tablet: 125, 250, 500 mg

Second-­generation cephalosporin active against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, H. influenzae, E. coli, M. catarrhalis, Klebsiella,
and Proteus
Neonates: 40-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM
Children: 200-­240 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM; PO
administration: 20-­30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h PO
Adults: 750-­1,500 mg q8h IV or IM (max dose: 6 g/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated. Food
increases PO bioavailability.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Cephalexin
Keflex, Keftab
Capsule: 250, 500 mg
Tablet: 500 mg, 1 g
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL, 250
mg/5 mL, 100 mg/mL drops

First-­generation cephalosporin active against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, E. coli, Klebsiella, and Proteus
Children: 25-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h PO
Adults: 250-­500 mg q6h PO (max dose: 4 g/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Cephradine
Velosef
Capsule: 250, 500 mg
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL, 250
mg/5 mL

First-­generation cephalosporin active against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, E. coli, Klebsiella, and Proteus
Children: 50-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­12h PO
Adults: 250-­500 mg q6-­12h PO (max dose: 4 g/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Ciprofloxacin
Cipro
Tablet: 100, 250, 500, 750 mg
Injection
Ophthalmic solution and
ointment
Otic suspension
Oral suspension: 250 and 500
mg/5 mL

Quinolone antibiotic active against P. aeruginosa, Serratia,
Enterobacter, Shigella, Salmonella, Campylobacter, N.
gonorrhoeae, H. influenzae, M. catarrhalis, some S. aureus,
and some Streptococcus
Neonates: 10 mg/kg q12h PO or IV
Children: 15-­30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO or IV; cystic fibrosis:
20-­40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h PO or IV
Adults: 250-­750 mg q12h; 200-­400 mg IV q12h PO (max dose: 1.5
g/24 hr)

Cautions: Concerns of joint destruction
in juvenile animals but not seen in
humans; tendonitis, superinfection,
dizziness, confusion, crystalluria, some
photosensitivity.
Drug interactions: Theophylline;
magnesium-­, aluminum-­, or calcium-­
containing antacids; sucralfate;
probenecid; warfarin; cyclosporine.

Clarithromycin
Biaxin
Tablet: 250, 500 mg
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL, 250
mg/5 mL

Macrolide antibiotic with activity against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, H. influenzae, Legionella, Mycoplasma, and C.
trachomatis
Children: 15 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO
Adults: 250-­500 mg q12h PO (max dose: 1 g/24 hr)

Cautions: Adverse events less than
erythromycin; GI upset, dyspepsia,
nausea, cramping.
Drug interactions: Same as erythromycin:
astemizole, carbamazepine, terfenadine,
cyclosporine, theophylline, digoxin,
tacrolimus.

Clindamycin
Cleocin
Capsule: 75, 150, 300 mg
Suspension: 75 mg/5 mL
Injection
Topical solution, lotion, and
gel
Vaginal cream

Protein synthesis inhibitor active against most gram-­positive
aerobic and anaerobic cocci except Enterococcus
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days weight <2,000 g; 10 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q12h IV or IM; weight >2,000 g: 15 mg/kg/24 hr divided
q8h IV or IM; >7 days weight <1,200 g: 10 mg/kg/24 hr IV or IM
divided q12h; weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 15 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h
IV or IM; weight >2,000 g: 20 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM
Children: 10-­40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h IV, IM, or PO
Adults: 150-­600 mg q6-­8h IV, IM, or PO (max dose: 5 g/24 hr IV or
IM or 2 g/24 hr PO)

Cautions: Diarrhea, nausea, Clostridium
difficile–associated colitis, rash.
Administer slow IV over 30-­60 min.
Topically active as an acne treatment.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 225 u Principles of Antibacterial Therapy

1679

Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Cloxacillin sodium
Tegopen
Capsule: 250, 500 mg
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL

Penicillinase-­resistant penicillin active against S. aureus and
other gram-­positive cocci except Enterococcus and ­
coagulase-­negative staphylococci
Children: 50-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h PO
Adults: 250-­500 mg q6h PO (max dose: 4 g/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Primarily hepatically
eliminated; requires dose reduction
in renal disease. Food decreases
bioavailability.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Colistin (colistimethate
sodium; polymyxin E)
Injection
Inhalation

Treatment of multidrug-­resistant gram-­negative organisms
(Enterobacteriaceae including extended-­spectrum β-­
lactamase– and carbapenemase-­producing strains)
Children: 2.5-­5 mg/kg/day divided in 2-­4 divided doses IV
Adults: 300 mg/day in 2-­4 divided doses IV

Cautions: Nephrotoxicity (∼3% in young
children; higher rates in adolescents and
adults); adjust dose for renal insufficiency;
neurotoxicity (headaches, paresthesia,
ataxia).
Drug interactions: Should not be
administered concomitantly with
polymyxins or aminoglycosides.

Co-­trimoxazole (trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole; TMP-­
SMX)
Bactrim, Cotrim, Septra,
Sulfatrim
Tablet: SMX 400 mg and TMP
80 mg
Tablet DS: SMX 800 mg and
TMP 160 mg
Suspension: SMX 200 mg and
TMP 40 mg/5 mL
Injection

Antibiotic combination with sequential antagonism of bacterial
folate synthesis with broad antibacterial activity: Shigella,
Legionella, Nocardia, Chlamydia, Pneumocystis jiroveci
Dosage based on TMP component
Children: 6-­20 mg TMP/kg/24 hr or IV divided q12h PO
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia: 15-­20 mg TMP/kg/24 hr divided
q12h PO or IV
P. carinii prophylaxis: 5 mg TMP/kg/24 hr or 3 times/wk PO
Adults: 160 mg TMP q12h PO

Cautions: Drug dosed on TMP
(trimethoprim) component. Sulfonamide
skin reactions: rash, erythema multiforme,
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, nausea,
leukopenia. Renal and hepatic
elimination; reduce dose in renal failure.
Drug interactions: Protein displacement
with warfarin, possibly phenytoin,
cyclosporine.

Dalbavancin
Dalvance
500 mg/vial (20 mg/mL after
reconstitution)
Injection

Glycopeptide antibiotic; bacteriocidal; disrupts cell wall
synthesis
Indicated for acute bacterial skin and skin structure infections
caused by susceptible gram-­positive bacteria; active against
MRSA
Adult dose:
1-­dose regimen of 1,500 mg IV or 2-­dose regimen of 1000 mg IV
followed 1 wk later by 500 mg IV; infuse IV over 30 min
Pediatric dose:
Not approved for use in children

Rapid IV infusion, as with other
glycopeptide antibacterial agents, can
cause reactions, including upper body
flushing, urticaria, pruritus, back pain, and
rash; stopping or slowing infusion may
result in cessation of these reactions.

Daptomycin
Cubicin
Injection

Disrupts bacterial cell membrane function, causing
depolarization leading to inhibition of protein, DNA, and RNA
synthesis, which results in bacterial cell death
Active against enterococci (including glycopeptide-­resistant
strains), staphylococci (including MRSA), streptococci, and
corynebacteria. Approved for skin and soft tissue infections
Acceptable for bacteremia and right-­sided endocarditis with
susceptible strains
Adults: In skin and soft tissue infections, 4 mg/kg daptomycin IV
once daily. For S. aureus bacteremia or right-­sided endocarditis,
6 mg/kg IV once daily
Children: For skin/skin structure infections, 12-­23 mo, 10 mg/kg
IV q24h; 2-­6 yr, 9 mg/kg IV q24h; 7-­11 yr, 7 mg/kg q24h; 12-­17
yr, 5 mg/kg q24h, all for up to 14 days. For staphylococcal
bacteremia, 1-­6 yr, 12 mg/kg q24h; 7-­11 yr, 9 mg/kg q24h;
12-­17 yr, 7 mg/kg q24h; all for up to 42 days. For staphylococcal
endocarditis, 1-­5 yr, 10 mg/kg IV q24h for at least 6 wk; ≥6 yr,
6 mg/kg IV q24h for at least 6 wk

Cautions: Should not be used for
pneumonia because drug inactivated
by surfactants. Associated with rash,
renal failure, anemia, and headache.
Is reported to cause myopathy,
rhabdomyolysis, and eosinophilic
pneumonia.
Drug interactions: Should not be
administered with statins.

Delafloxacin
Baxdela
Injection
Oral
Injection, lyophilized powder
for reconstitution 300 mg/
vial (equivalent to 433 mg
delafloxacin meglumine)
Tablet, 450 mg (equivalent
to 649 mg delafloxacin
meglumine)

Fluoroquinolone class of drugs; active against MSSA,
MRSA, CoNS, and streptococci; retains activity against
fluoroquinolone-­resistant S. aureus strains.
Approved for skin and soft tissue infections and ­
community-­acquired pneumonia.
Adults:
300 mg IV q12h for 5-­14 days OR
300 mg IV q12h, then switch to a 450-­mg tablet PO q12h for 5-­14
days OR
450 mg PO q12h for 5-­14 days
Children:
No dosage established

Similar to ciprofloxacin.

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1680 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Demeclocycline
Declomycin
Tablet: 150, 300 mg
Capsule: 150 mg

Tetracycline active against most gram-­positive cocci except
Enterococcus, many gram-­negative bacilli, anaerobes, Borrelia
burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Mycoplasma, and Chlamydia
Children: 8-­12 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­12h PO
Adults: 150 mg PO q6-­8h
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion:
900-­1,200 mg/24 hr or 13-­15 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h PO with
dose reduction based on response to 600-­900 mg/24 hr

Cautions: Teeth staining, possibly
permanent (if administered <8 yr old) with
prolonged use; photosensitivity, diabetes
insipidus, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
superinfections.
Drug interactions: Aluminum-­, calcium-­,
magnesium-­, zinc-­ and iron-­containing
food, milk, dairy products may decrease
absorption.

Dicloxacillin
Dynapen, Pathocil
Capsule: 125, 250, 500 mg
Suspension: 62.5 mg/5 mL

Penicillinase-­resistant penicillin active against S. aureus and other
gram-­positive cocci except Enterococcus and coagulase-­negative
staphylococci
Children: 12.5-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h PO
Adults: 125-­500 mg q6h PO

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Primarily renal (65%) and
biliary (30%) elimination. Food may
decrease bioavailability.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Doripenem
Doribax
Injection

Carbapenem antibiotic with broad-­spectrum activity against
gram-­positive cocci and gram-­negative bacilli, including P.
aeruginosa and anaerobes
Children: dose unknown
Adults: 500 mg q8h IV

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile; does
not undergo hepatic metabolism. Renal
elimination (70–75%); dose adjustment
for renal failure.
Drug interactions: Valproic acid,
probenecid.

Doxycycline
Vibramycin, Doxy
Injection
Capsule: 50, 100 mg
Tablet: 50, 100 mg
Suspension: 25 mg/5 mL
Syrup: 50 mg/5 mL

Tetracycline antibiotic active against most gram-­positive cocci
except Enterococcus, many gram-­negative bacilli, anaerobes,
B. burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Mycoplasma, and Chlamydia
Children: 2-­5 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12-­24h PO or IV (max dose:
200 mg/24 hr)
Adults: 100-­200 mg/24 hr divided q12-­24h PO or IV

Cautions: Teeth staining, possibly
permanent (<8 yr old) with prolonged
use; photosensitivity, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, superinfections.
Drug interactions: Aluminum-­, calcium-­,
magnesium-­, zinc-­, iron-­, kaolin-­, and
pectin-­containing products, food, milk,
dairy products may decrease absorption.
Carbamazepine, rifampin, and
barbiturates may decrease half-­life.

Eravacycline
Xerava
50 mg single-­dose vials

Tetracycline-­class antibiotic (glycylcycline) active against
Enterobacteriaceae, including extended spectrum β-­lactamase
producers; streptococci (including VRE); staphylococci
(including MRSA); and CRE
Indicated for treatment of complicated intraabdominal infections
in adults
Dose: 1 mg/kg IV q12h ×4-­14 days; infuse IV over ∼60 min

Contraindications similar to other
tetracyclines, including photosensitivity;
pseudotumor cerebri; concerns for
discoloration of tooth enamel in children
under 8 yr of age.

Erythromycin
E-­Mycin, Ery-­Tab, Eryc, Ilosone
Estolate 125, 500 mg
Tablet EES: 200 mg
Tablet base: 250, 333, 500 mg
Suspension: estolate 125 mg/5
mL, 250 mg/5 mL, EES 200
mg/5 mL, 400 mg/5 mL
Estolate drops: 100 mg/mL;
EES drops: 100 mg/2.5 mL
Available in combination with
sulfisoxazole (Pediazole),
dosed on erythromycin
content

Bacteriostatic macrolide antibiotic most active against
gram-­positive organisms, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, and
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days: 20 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h
PO; >7 days weight <1,200 g: 20 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO;
weight >1,200 g: 30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h PO (give as 5 mg/
kg/dose q6h to improve feeding intolerance)
Children: Usual max dose: 2 g/24 hr
Base: 30-­50 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h PO
Estolate: 30-­50 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h PO
Stearate: 20-­40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h PO
Lactobionate: 20-­40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h IV
Gluceptate: 20-­50 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h IV; usual max dose: 4
g/24 hr IV
Adults: Base: 333 mg PO q8h; estolate/stearate/base: 250-­500 mg
q6h PO

Cautions: Motilin agonist leading to
marked abdominal cramping, nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea. Associated
with hypertrophic pyloric stenosis in
young infants. Many different salts with
questionable tempering of GI adverse
events. Rare cardiac toxicity with IV use.
Dose of salts differs. Topical formulation
for treatment of acne.
Drug interactions: Antagonizes
hepatic CYP 3A4 activity: astemizole,
carbamazepine, terfenadine,
cyclosporine, theophylline, digoxin,
tacrolimus.

Gentamicin
Garamycin
Injection
Ophthalmic solution,
ointment, topical cream

Aminoglycoside antibiotic active against gram-­negative bacilli,
especially E. coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, Enterobacter, Serratia,
and Pseudomonas
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 2.5 mg/
kg q12-­18h IV or IM; weight <2,000 g: 2.5 mg/kg q12h IV or IM;
postnatal age >7 days weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 2.5 mg/kg q8-­12h
IV or IM; weight >2,000 g: 2.5 mg/kg q8h IV or IM
Children: 2.5 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h IV or IM; alternatively,
may administer 5-­7.5 mg/kg/24 hr IV once daily
Intrathecal: Preservative-­free preparation for intraventricular or
intrathecal use: neonate: 1 mg/24 hr; children: 1-­2 mg/24 hr
intrathecal; adults: 4-­8 mg/24 hr
Adults: 3-­6 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM

Cautions: Anaerobes, S. pneumoniae, and
other Streptococcus are resistant. May
cause ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity.
Monitor renal function. Drug eliminated
renally. Administered IV over 30-­60 min.
Drug interactions: May potentiate other
ototoxic and nephrotoxic drugs.
Target serum concentrations: Peak 6-­12
mg/L; trough >2 mg/L with intermittent
daily dose regimens only.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 225 u Principles of Antibacterial Therapy

1681

Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Imipenem-­cilastatin
Primaxin
Injection

Carbapenem antibiotic with broad-­spectrum activity
against gram-­positive cocci and gram-­negative bacilli,
including P. aeruginosa and anaerobes. No activity against
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days weight <1,200 g: 20 mg/kg q18-­
24h IV or IM; weight >1,200 g: 40 mg/kg divided q12h IV or IM;
postnatal age >7 days weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 40 mg/kg q12h IV
or IM; weight >2,000 g: 60 mg/kg q8h IV or IM
Children: 60-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h IV or IM
Adults: 2-­4 g/24 hr divided q6-­8h IV or IM (max dose: 4 g/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia), nausea, seizures. Cilastatin
possesses no antibacterial activity;
reduces renal imipenem metabolism.
Primarily renally eliminated.
Drug interaction: Possibly ganciclovir.

Imipenem/relebactam
(imipenem/cilastatin/
relebactam)
Recarbrio
500 mg/500 mg/250 mg per
vial (i.e., 1.25 g/vial)

Carbapenem antibiotic similar to imipenem/cilastatin; addition
of relebactam restores activity against K. pneumoniae isolates
that encode KPCs; is indicated for treatment of complicated
urinary tract infections and complicated intraabdominal
infections and hospital-­acquired/ventilator-­associated bacterial
pneumonia in adults 18 yr of age and older
Adults: 1.25 g IV q6h ×4-­14 days
Children: No dosing information available

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia), nausea, seizures. Cilastatin
possesses no antibacterial activity;
reduces renal imipenem metabolism.
Primarily renally eliminated.

Linezolid
Zyvox
Tablet: 400, 600 mg
Oral suspension: 100 mg/5 mL
Injection: 100 mg/5 mL

Oxazolidinone antibiotic active against gram-­positive
cocci (especially drug-­resistant organisms), including
Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, E. faecium, and Enterococcus
faecalis. Interferes with protein synthesis by binding to 50S
ribosome subunit
Children: 10 mg/kg q12h IV or PO
Adults: Pneumonia: 600 mg q12h IV or PO; skin infections: 400 mg
q12h IV or PO

Adverse events: Myelosuppression,
pseudomembranous colitis, nausea,
diarrhea, headache, peripheral and optic
neuropathy.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Loracarbef
Lorabid
Generic
Capsule: 200 mg
Suspension: 100 mg/5 mL, 200
mg/5 mL

Carbacephem very closely related to cefaclor (second-­
generation cephalosporin) active against S. aureus,
Streptococcus, H. influenzae, M. catarrhalis, E. coli, Klebsiella,
and Proteus
Children: 30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO (max dose: 2 g)
Adults: 200-­400 mg q12h PO (max dose: 800 mg/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia). Renally eliminated.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Meropenem
Merrem
Injection

Carbapenem antibiotic with broad-­spectrum activity against
gram-­positive cocci and gram-­negative bacilli, including P.
aeruginosa and anaerobes
No activity against S. maltophilia
Children: 60 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV; meningitis: 120 mg/
kg/24 hr (max dose: 6 g/24 hr) q8h IV
Adults: 1.5-­3 g q8h IV

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile; appears
to possess less CNS excitation than
imipenem; 80% renal elimination.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Meropenem/vaborbactam
Vabomere
1 g/1 g vials

Carbapenem antibiotic with broad-­spectrum activity against
gram-­positive cocci and gram-­negative bacilli, including
P. aeruginosa and anaerobes
Vaborbactam protects meropenem from degradation by certain
serine β-­lactamases including K. pneumoniae carbapenemases
(KPCs); added to enhance activity for complicated urinary tract
infections, including pyelonephritis caused by E. coli,
K. pneumoniae, and E. cloacae species complex in adults ≥18 yr
Adults: 4 g (meropenem [2 g]/vaborbactam [2 g]) IV q8h for up to
14 days; infuse over 3 hr.

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile; appears
to possess less CNS excitation than
imipenem; 80% renal elimination.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Metronidazole
Flagyl, Metro I.V.,
Topical gel, vaginal gel
Injection
Tablet: 250, 500 mg

Highly effective in the treatment of infections caused by
anaerobes. Oral therapy of C. difficile colitis
Neonates: weight <1,200 g: 7.5 mg/kg/48 hr PO or IV; postnatal
age ≤7 days weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 7.5 mg/kg/24 hr q24h PO
or IV; weight 2,000 g: 15 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO or IV;
postnatal age <7 days weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 15 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q12h PO or IV; weight >2,000 g: 30 mg/kg/24 hr divided
q12 h PO or IV
Children: 30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h PO or IV
Adults: 30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h PO or IV (max dose: 4 g/24 hr)

Cautions: Dizziness, seizures, metallic
taste, nausea, disulfiram-­like reaction
with alcohol. Administer IV slow over
30-­60 min. Adjust dose with hepatic
impairment.
Drug interactions: Carbamazepine,
rifampin, phenobarbital may enhance
metabolism; may increase levels of
warfarin, phenytoin, lithium.

Mezlocillin sodium
Mezlin
Infection

Extended-­spectrum penicillin active against E. coli,
Enterobacter, Serratia, and Bacteroides; limited
antipseudomonal activity
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days: 150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h
IV; >7 days: 225 mg/kg divided q8h IV
Children: 200-­300 mg/kg/24 hr divided q4-­6h IV; cystic fibrosis
300-­450 mg/kg/24 hr IV
Adults: 2-­4 g/dose q4-­6h IV (max dose: 12 g/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia); painful given intramuscularly;
each gram contains 1.8 mEq sodium.
Interferes with platelet aggregation
with high doses; increases noted in liver
function test results. Renally eliminated.
Inactivated by β-­lactamase enzyme.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1682 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Mupirocin
Bactroban
Ointment

Topical antibiotic active against Staphylococcus and
Streptococcus
Topical application: Nasal (eliminate nasal carriage) and to the
skin 2-­4 times daily

Caution: Minimal systemic absorption
because drug metabolized within the
skin.

Nafcillin sodium
Nafcil, Unipen
Injection
Capsule: 250 mg
Tablet: 500 mg

Penicillinase-­resistant penicillin active against S. aureus
and other gram-­positive cocci, except Enterococcus and
coagulase-­negative staphylococci
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 50 mg/
kg/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM; weight >2,000 g: 75 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q8h IV or IM; postnatal age >7 days weight 1,200-­2,000
g: 75 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h; weight >2,000 g: 100 mg/kg/24
hr divided q6-­8h IV (meningitis: 200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h IV)
Children: 100-­200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q4-­6h IV
Adults: 4-­12 g/24 hr divided q4-­6h IV (max dose: 12 g/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia), phlebitis; painful given
intramuscularly; oral absorption highly
variable and erratic (not recommended).
Adverse effect: Neutropenia.

Nalidixic acid
NegGram
Tablet: 250, 500, 1,000 mg
Suspension: 250 mg/5 mL

Cautions: Vertigo, dizziness, rash. Not for
First-­generation quinolone effective for short-­term treatment
use in systemic infections.
of lower UTIs caused by E. coli, Enterobacter, Klebsiella, and
Drug interactions: Liquid antacids.
Proteus
Children: 50-­55 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h PO; suppressive therapy:
25-­33 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h PO
Adults: 1 g q6h PO; suppressive therapy: 500 mg q6h PO

Neomycin sulfate
Mycifradin
Tablet: 500 mg
Topical cream, ointment
Solution: 125 mg/5 mL

Aminoglycoside antibiotic used for topical application or orally
before surgery to decrease GI flora (nonabsorbable) and
hyperammonemia
Infants: 50 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h PO
Children: 50-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h PO
Adults: 500-­2,000 mg/dose q6-­8h PO

Cautions: In patients with renal dysfunction
because small amount absorbed may
accumulate.
Adverse events: Primarily related to topical
application, abdominal cramps, diarrhea,
rash.
Like any aminoglycoside, ototoxicity and
nephrotoxicity occur if absorbed.

Nitrofurantoin
Furadantin, Furan,
Macrodantin
Capsule: 50, 100 mg
Extended-­release capsule:
100 mg
Macrocrystal: 50, 100 mg
Suspension: 25 mg/5 mL

Effective in treatment of lower UTIs caused by gram-­positive
and gram-­negative pathogens
Children: 5-­7 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h PO (max dose: 400 mg/24
hr); suppressive therapy 1-­2.5 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12-­24h PO
(max dose: 100 mg/24 hr)
Adults: 50-­100 mg/24 hr divided q6h PO

Cautions: Vertigo, dizziness, rash, jaundice,
interstitial pneumonitis. Do not use with
moderate to severe renal dysfunction.
Drug interactions: Liquid antacids.

Ofloxacin
Ocuflox 0.3% ophthalmic
solution: 1, 5, 10 mL
Floxin 0.3% otic solution: 5,
10 mL

Quinolone antibiotic for treatment of conjunctivitis or corneal
ulcers (ophthalmic solution) and otitis externa or chronic
suppurative otitis media (otic solution) caused by susceptible
gram-­positive, gram-­negative, anaerobic bacteria, or C.
trachomatis
Child >1-­12 yr:
Conjunctivitis: 1-­2 drops in affected eye(s) q2-­4h for 2 days, then
1-­2 drops qid for 5 days
Corneal ulcers: 1-­2 drops q30min while awake and at 4-­hr intervals
at night for 2 days, then 1-­2 drops hourly for 5 days while awake,
then 1-­2 drops q6h for 2 days
Otitis externa (otic solution): 5 drops into affected ear bid for 10 days
Chronic suppurative otitis media: treat for 14 days
Child >12 yr and adults: Ophthalmic solution doses same as for
younger children. Otitis externa (otic solution): Use 10 drops bid
for 10 or 14 days as for younger children

Adverse events: Burning, stinging, eye
redness (ophthalmic solution), dizziness
with otic solution if not warmed.

Omadacycline
Nuzyra
Injection
100 mg/single-­dose vial
Oral
150 mg tablet

Omadacycline has comparable adverse
New subclass of tetracyclines; active against MSSA, MRSA
events to other tetracyclines such as
CoNS, streptococci, including pneumococcus, and enterococci,
tooth discoloration, enamel hypoplasia,
including VRE
and inhibition of bone growth. However,
Adults:
no cases of photosensitivity were
200 mg IV once OR
observed in phase 3 studies.
100 mg IV × 2 doses OR
300 mg PO × 2 doses
Follow with maintenance dosing starting on day 2:
Maintenance dose
100 mg IV qday OR
300 mg PO qday
Treatment duration: 7-­14 days
Children: No dosing information available

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 225 u Principles of Antibacterial Therapy

1683

Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Oxacillin sodium
Prostaphlin
Injection
Capsule: 250, 500 mg
Suspension: 250 mg/5 mL

Penicillinase-­resistant penicillin active against S. aureus
and other gram-­positive cocci, except Enterococcus and
coagulase-­negative staphylococci
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 50 mg/kg/24
hr divided q12h IV; weight >2,000 g: 75 mg/kg/24 hr IV divided
q8h IV; postnatal age >7 days weight <1,200 g: 50 mg/kg/24 hr
IV divided q12h IV; weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 75 mg/kg/24 hr divided
q8h IV; weight >2,000 g: 100 mg/kg/24 hr IV divided q6h IV
Infants: 100-­200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q4-­6h IV
Children: PO 50-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q4-­6h IV
Adults: 2-­12 g/24 hr divided q4-­6h IV (max dose: 12 g/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia)
Moderate oral bioavailability (35–65%).
Primarily renally eliminated
Drug interaction: Probenecid
Adverse effect: Neutropenia

Penicillin G
Injection
Tablets

Penicillin active against most gram-­positive cocci; S. pneumoniae
(resistance is increasing), group A Streptococcus, and some
gram-­negative bacteria (e.g., N. gonorrhoeae, N. meningitidis)
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 50,000
units/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM (meningitis: 100,000 U/
kg/24 hr divided q12h IV or IM); weight >2,000 g: 75,000 U/
kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM (meningitis: 150,000 U/kg/24 hr
divided q8h IV or IM); postnatal age >7 days weight ≤1,200 g:
50,000 U/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV (meningitis: 100,000 U/kg/24
hr divided q12h IV); weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 75,000 U/kg/24 hr
q8h IV (meningitis: 225,000 U/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV); weight
>2,000 g: 100,000 U/kg/24 hr divided q6h IV (meningitis: 200,000
U/kg/24 hr divided q6h IV)
Children: 100,000-­250,000 units/kg/24 hr divided q4-­6h IV or IM
(max dose: 400,000 U/kg/24 hr)
Adults: 2-­24 million units/24 hr divided q4-­6h IV or IM

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia), allergy, seizures with
excessive doses particularly in patients
with marked renal disease. Substantial
pathogen resistance. Primarily renally
eliminated
Drug interaction: Probenecid

Penicillin G, benzathine
Bicillin
Injection

Long-­acting repository form of penicillin effective in treatment
of infections responsive to persistent, low penicillin
concentrations (1-­4 wk) (e.g., group A Streptococcus
pharyngitis, rheumatic fever prophylaxis)
Neonates weighing >1,200 g: 50,000 units/kg IM once
Children: 300,000-­1.2 million units/kg q3-­4wk IM (max dose: 1.2-­
2.4 million units/dose)
Adults: 1.2 million units IM q3-­4wk

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia), allergy. Administer by IM
injection only. Substantial pathogen
resistance. Primarily renally eliminated.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Penicillin G, procaine
Crysticillin
Injection

Repository form of penicillin providing low penicillin
concentrations for 12 hr
Neonates with weight >1,200 g: 50,000 units/kg/24 hr IM
Children: 25,000-­50,000 units/kg/24 hr IM for 10 days (max dose:
4.8 million units/dose)
Gonorrhea: 100,000 units/kg (max dose: 4.8 million units/24 hr) IM
once with probenecid 25 mg/kg (max dose: 1 g)
Adults: 0.6-­4.8 million units q12-­24h IM

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia) allergy. Administer by IM
injection only. Substantial pathogen
resistance. Primarily renally eliminated.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Penicillin V
Pen VK, V-­Cillin K
Tablet: 125, 250, 500 mg
Suspension: 125 mg/5 mL, 250
mg/5 mL

Preferred oral dosing form of penicillin, active against most
gram-­positive cocci; S. pneumoniae (resistance is increasing),
other streptococci, and some gram-­negative bacteria (e.g., N.
gonorrhoeae, N. meningitidis)
Children: 25-­50 mg/kg/24 hr divided q4-­8h PO
Adults: 125-­500 mg q6-­8h PO (max dose: 3 g/24 hr)

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile (rash,
eosinophilia), allergy, seizures with
excessive doses particularly in patients
with renal disease. Substantial pathogen
resistance. Primarily renally eliminated.
Inactivated by penicillinase.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Piperacillin
Pipracil
Injection

Extended-­spectrum penicillin active against E. coli,
Enterobacter, Serratia, P. aeruginosa, and Bacteroides
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days 150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h
IV; >7 days; 200 mg/kg divided q6-­8h IV
Children: 200-­300 mg/kg/24 hr divided q4-­6h IV; cystic fibrosis:
350-­500 mg/kg/24 hr IV
Adults: 2-­4 g/dose q4-­6h (max dose: 24 g/24 hr) IV

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile
(rash, eosinophilia); painful given
intramuscularly; each gram contains
1.9 mEq sodium. Interferes with platelet
aggregation/serum sickness–like reaction
with high doses; increases in liver
function test results. Renally eliminated.
Inactivated by penicillinase.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.

Piperacillin-­tazobactam
Zosyn
Injection

Extended-­spectrum penicillin (piperacillin) combined with a
β-­lactamase inhibitor (tazobactam) active against S. aureus,
H. influenzae, E. coli, Enterobacter, Serratia, Acinetobacter, P.
aeruginosa, and Bacteroides
Children: 300-­400 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h IV or IM
Adults: 3.375 g q6-­8h IV or IM

Cautions: β-­Lactam safety profile
(rash, eosinophilia); painful given
intramuscularly; each gram contains
1.9 mEq sodium.
Interferes with platelet aggregation, serum
sickness–like reaction with high doses,
increases in liver function test results.
Renally eliminated.
Drug interaction: Probenecid.
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1684 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Plazomicin
Zemdri
500 mg/10 mL (50 mg/mL) vials
Each vial contains plazomicin
sulfate equivalent to 500 mg
plazomicin free base

Aminoglycoside active against resistant Enterobacteriaceae,
including CRE
Adults: 15 mg/kg IV q24hr infused over 30 min
Duration of therapy should be guided by the severity of infection
and the patient’s clinical status for up to 7 days; usual duration
4-­7 days
Children: no pediatric dose established

May cause ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity.
Monitor renal function. Drug eliminated
renally.
Drug interactions: May potentiate other
ototoxic and nephrotoxic drugs.

Quinupristin/dalfopristin
Synercid
IV injection: powder for
reconstitution, 10 mL
contains 150 mg quinupristin,
350 mg dalfopristin

Streptogramin antibiotic (quinupristin) active against
vancomycin-­resistant E. faecium (VRE) and methicillin-­resistant
S. aureus (MRSA). Not active against E. faecalis
Children and adults: VRE: 7.5 mg/kg q8h IV for VRE; skin
infections: 7.5 mg/kg q12h IV

Adverse events: Pain, edema, or phlebitis
at injection site; nausea; diarrhea.
Drug interactions: Synercid is a potent
inhibitor of CYP 3A4.

Sulfadiazine
Tablet: 500 mg

Sulfonamide antibiotic primarily indicated for treatment of lower
UTIs caused by E. coli, P. mirabilis, and Klebsiella
Toxoplasmosis:
Neonates: 100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO with pyrimethamine
1 mg/kg/24 hr PO (with folinic acid)
Children: 120-­200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h PO with
pyrimethamine 2 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO ≥3 days, then 1
mg/kg/24 hr (max dose: 25 mg/24 hr) with folinic acid
Rheumatic fever prophylaxis: weight ≤30 kg: 500 mg/24 hr q24h
PO; weight >30 kg: 1 g/24 hr q24h PO

Cautions: Rash, Stevens-­Johnson
syndrome, nausea, leukopenia,
crystalluria. Renal and hepatic
elimination; avoid use with renal disease.
Half-­life: ∼10 hr.
Drug interactions: Protein displacement
with warfarin, phenytoin, methotrexate.

Sulfamethoxazole
Gantanol
Tablet: 500 mg
Suspension: 500 mg/5 mL

Sulfonamide antibiotic used for treatment of otitis media,
chronic bronchitis, and lower UTIs caused by susceptible
bacteria
Children: 50-­60 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO
Adults: 1 g/dose q12h PO (max dose: 3 g/24 hr)

Cautions: Rash, Stevens-­Johnson
syndrome, nausea, leukopenia,
crystalluria. Renal and hepatic
elimination; avoid use with renal disease.
Half-­life: ∼12 hr. Initial dose often a
loading dose (doubled).
Drug interactions: Protein displacement
with warfarin, phenytoin, methotrexate.

Sulfisoxazole
Gantrisin
Tablet: 500 mg
Suspension: 500 mg/5 mL
Ophthalmic solution, ointment

Sulfonamide antibiotic used for treatment of otitis media,
chronic bronchitis, and lower UTIs caused by susceptible
bacteria. Also used for Nocardia
Plasmodium falciparum resistant to chloroquine, toxoplasmosis
in combination with pyrimethamine (sulfadiazine preferred).
Children: 120-­150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q4-­6h PO (max dose: 6
g/24 hr)
Adults: 4-­8 g/24 hr divided q4-­6h PO

Cautions: Rash, Stevens-­Johnson
syndrome, nausea, leukopenia,
crystalluria. Renal and hepatic
elimination; avoid use with renal disease.
Half-­life: ∼7-­12 hr. Initial dose often a
loading dose (doubled).
Drug interactions: Protein displacement
with warfarin, phenytoin, methotrexate.

Tedizolid
Sivextro
200 mg vial
200 mg tablet

Oxazolidinone agent; indicated for skin and soft tissue/skin
structure infections caused by susceptible gram-­positive
organisms; active against MSSA, MRSA, streptococci,
enterococci
Adults: 200 mg PO/IV qday for 6 days
Children: Indicated for acute bacterial skin and skin structure
infections in patients age ≥12 yr
<12 yr: Safety and efficacy not established
12-­18 yr: 200 mg PO/IV qday for 6 days

Similar to linezolid.
Adverse events may include
myelosuppression, pseudomembranous
colitis, nausea, diarrhea, headache,
peripheral and optic neuropathy.

Tigecycline
Tygacil
Injection

Tetracycline-­class antibiotic (glycylcycline) active against
Enterobacteriaceae, including extended spectrum β-­lactamase
producers; streptococci (including VRE); staphylococci
(including MRSA); and anaerobes
Children: unknown
Adults: 100 mg loading dose followed by 50 mg q12h IV

Cautions: Pregnancy; children <8 yr old;
photosensitivity; hypersensitivity to
tetracyclines; hepatic impairment (∼60%
hepatic clearance).
Drug interaction: Warfarin; mycophenolate
mofetil.

Tobramycin
Nebcin, Tobrex
Injection
Ophthalmic solution, ointment
Inhalation capsule (28 mg);
inhalation solution (60 mg/
mL; 75 mg/mL)

Aminoglycoside antibiotic active against gram-­negative bacilli,
especially E. coli, Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Serratia, Proteus,
and Pseudomonas
Can be administered by inhalational route
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days, weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 2.5 mg/
kg q12-­18h IV or IM; weight >2,000 g: 2.5 mg/kg q12h IV or IM;
postnatal age >7 days, weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 2.5 mg/kg q8-­12h
IV or IM; weight >2,000 g: 2.5 mg/kg q8h IV or IM
Children: 2.5 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h IV or IM. Alternatively,
may administer 5-­7.5 mg/kg/24 hr IV. Preservative-­free
preparation for intraventricular or intrathecal use: neonate, 1
mg/24 hr; children, 1-­2 mg/24 hr; adults, 4-­8 mg/24 hr
Adults: 3-­6 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV or IM

Cautions: S. pneumoniae, other
streptococcus, and anaerobes are
resistant. May cause ototoxicity and
nephrotoxicity. Monitor renal function.
Drug eliminated renally. Administered IV
over 30-­60 min.
Drug interactions: May potentiate other
ototoxic and nephrotoxic drugs.
Target serum concentrations: Peak 6-­12
mg/L; trough <2 mg/L.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 225 u Principles of Antibacterial Therapy

1685

Table 225.3  Selected Antibacterial Medications (Antibiotics)*—cont’d
DRUG (TRADE NAMES,
FORMULATIONS)

INDICATIONS (MECHANISM OF ACTION) AND DOSING

COMMENTS

Trimethoprim
Proloprim, Trimpex
Tablet: 100, 200 mg

Folic acid antagonist effective in prophylaxis and treatment of
E. coli, Klebsiella, P. mirabilis, and Enterobacter UTIs; P. carinii
pneumonia
Children: For UTI: 4-­6 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h PO
Children >12 yr and adults: 100-­200 mg q12h PO. P. carinii
pneumonia (with dapsone): 15-­20 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6h for
21 days PO

Cautions: Megaloblastic anemia, bone
marrow suppression, nausea, epigastric
distress, rash.
Drug interactions: Possible interactions
with phenytoin, cyclosporine, rifampin,
warfarin.

Vancomycin
Vancocin, Lyphocin
Injection
Capsule: 125 mg, 250 mg
Suspension

Glycopeptide antibiotic active against most gram-­positive
pathogens including staphylococci (including MRSA and
coagulase-­negative staphylococci), S. pneumoniae including
penicillin-­resistant strains, Enterococcus (resistance is
increasing), and C. difficile–associated colitis
Neonates: Postnatal age ≤7 days, weight <1,200 g: 15 mg/kg/24
hr divided q24h IV; weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 15 mg/kg/24 hr divided
q12-­18h IV; weight >2,000 g: 30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12h IV;
postnatal age >7 days, weight <1,200 g: 15 mg/kg/24 hr divided
q24h IV; weight 1,200-­2,000 g: 15 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h IV;
weight >2,000 g: 45 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8h IV
Children: 45-­60 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8-­12h IV; C. difficile–
associated colitis; 40-­50 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-­8h PO

Cautions: Ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity,
particularly when co-­administered with
other ototoxic and nephrotoxic drugs.
Infuse IV over 45-­60 min. Cutaneous and
systemic side effects can be observed
with rapid IV infusions, fever, chills,
phlebitis (central line is preferred for
infusions). Renally eliminated.
Target serum concentrations: Peak (1 hr
after 1 hr infusion) 30-­40 mg/L; trough
5-­10 mg/L.

*In the Drug column, the generic drug name is in bold. In the Indications column, bold indicates major organisms targeted and mechanisms of action.
CNS, Central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal; IM, intramuscular/ly; IV, intravenous/ly; PO, oral/ly; UTIs, urinary tract infections.

Table 225.4  Adverse Reactions to Penicillins
TYPE OF REACTION

FREQUENCY (%)

OCCURS MOST FREQUENTLY WITH

ALLERGIC
Immunoglobulin E antibody

0.04-­0.015

Penicillin G

Rare

Penicillin G

Rare

Penicillin G

2-­5

Ampicillin, amoxicillin

2-­5

Ampicillin

3-­11

Ampicillin

Rare

Ampicillin

HEMATOLOGIC
Hemolytic anemia

Rare

Penicillin G

Neutropenia

10-­17

Penicillin G, nafcillin, oxacillin†

Platelet dysfunction

43-­73

Piperacillin

HEPATIC
Elevated serum aspartate transaminase

0.01-­22

Flucloxacillin, oxacillin

Anaphylaxis*
Early urticaria* (<72 hr)
Cytotoxic antibody
Hemolytic anemia*
Antigen-­antibody complex disease
Serum sickness*
Delayed hypersensitivity
Contact dermatitis*
IDIOPATHIC
Skin rash
Fever
Late-­onset urticaria
GASTROINTESTINAL
Diarrhea
Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium
difficile)–associated colitis

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1686 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 225.4  Adverse Reactions to Penicillins—cont’d
TYPE OF REACTION

FREQUENCY (%)

OCCURS MOST FREQUENTLY WITH

ELECTROLYTE DISTURBANCE
Hypokalemia

Rare

Nafcillin, oxacillin

Hyperkalemia, acute

Rare

Penicillin G

NEUROLOGIC
Seizures

Rare

Penicillin G

Bizarre sensations (Hoigné syndrome)

Rare

Procaine penicillin

RENAL
Interstitial nephritis*

Variable

Any penicillin

*Reaction can occur with any of the penicillins.
†With prolonged therapy.
Adapted from Doi Y. Penicillins and β-­lactamase inhibitors. In Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 9th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 20-­7.

Table 225.5  Classification of Parenteral and Oral Cephalosporins

CEPHALOSPORINS
Parenteral

CEPHAMYCINS

THIRD
GENERATION

FOURTH
GENERATION

FIFTH
GENERATION
(MRSA ACTIVE)

Cefmetazole
(Zefazone)*

Cefoperazone
(Cefobid)*

Cefepime
(Maxipime)

Ceftaroline
(Teflaro)

Cefonicid
(Monocid)*

Cefotetan
(Cefotan)

Cefotaxime
(Claforan)

Cefpirome
(Cefrom)

Ceftobiprole
(Zeftera)*

Cefuroxime
(Kefurox,
Zinacef)

Cefoxitin
(Mefoxin)

Ceftazidime
(Fortaz)

Cefiderocol
(Fetroja;
Siderophore
antibiotic)

Ceftolozane
(combined with
tazobactam;
Zerbaxa)

FIRST
GENERATION

SECOND
GENERATION

Cefazolin (Ancef,
Kefzol)

Cefamandole
(Mandol)*

Cephalothin
(Keflin, Seffin)*
Cephapirin
(Cefadyl)*

Cephradine
(Velosef)*

Ceftizoxime
(Cefizox)*
Ceftriaxone
(Rocephin)
Moxalactam*
Ceftazidime-­
avibactam
(Avycaz)

Oral

Cefadroxil
(Duricef,
Ultracef)
Cephalexin
(Keflex, Biocef,
Keftab)
Cephradine
(Velosef)*

Cefaclor (Ceclor)*
Cefprozil (Cefzil)
Cefuroxime axetil
(Ceftin)
Loracarbef
(Lorabid)*

Cefdinir (Omnicef)
Cefditoren
(Spectracef)
Cefixime (Suprax)
Cefpodoxime
(Vantin)
Ceftibuten
(Cedax)

*Not currently available in the United States.
Adapted from Lepak AJ, Andes DR. Cephalosporins. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 9th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 21-­1.

A fifth-­generation cephalosporin called ceftaroline has been
licensed. Ceftaroline is the active metabolite of the prodrug ceftaroline
fosamil (which is the agent administered to the patient). Ceftaroline
is a broad-­spectrum cephalosporin with bactericidal activity against
resistant gram-­positive organisms, including MRSA, and common
gram-­negative pathogens. It has FDA approval and is licensed for
use in children. Ceftaroline is indicated for MRSA in the treatment
of skin and soft tissue infections. It is also licensed for treatment of
community-­acquired pneumonia but is not indicated for MRSA pneumonia. Ceftaroline’s activity is attributed to its ability to bind to PBP
2a with higher affinity than other β-­lactams. Another fifth-­generation
cephalosporin with a similar spectrum of activity, ceftobiprole, has
been approved for use in Canada and the European Union. A third

fifth-­generation cephalosporin, ceftolozane, has been licensed. It is a
derivative of ceftazidime with improved activity against Pseudomonas spp. It is not stable against most ESBLs or carbapenemases. It is
marketed in combination with the β-­lactam inhibitor tazobactam to
improve its activity against β-­lactamase–producing Enterobacteriaceae. Experience with children is limited.
Table 225.6 lists adverse reactions to cephalosporins.

Carbapenems

The carbapenem group of antibiotics includes imipenem (formulated in combination with cilastatin), meropenem, ertapenem, and
doripenem. The basic structure of these agents is similar to that of
β-­lactam antibiotics, and these drugs have a similar mechanism of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 225 u Principles of Antibacterial Therapy

1687

Table 225.6  Potential Adverse Effects of Cephalosporins
TYPE

SPECIFIC

FREQUENCY

Hypersensitivity

Rash

1–3%

Urticaria

<1%

Serum sickness

<1%

Anaphylaxis

0.01%

Diarrhea

1–19%

Nausea, vomiting

1–6%

Transient transaminase elevation

1–7%

Biliary sludge

20–46%*

Eosinophilia

1–10%

Neutropenia

<1%

Thrombocytopenia

<1–3%

Hypoprothrombinemia

<1%

Impaired platelet aggregation

<1%

Hemolytic anemia

<1%

Renal

Interstitial nephritis

<1–5%

Central nervous system

Seizures

<1%

Encephalopathy

<1%

Coombs positive

3%

Glucosuria

Rare

Serum creatinine

Rare

Drug fever

Rare

Disulfiram-­like reaction†

Rare

Superinfection

Rare

Phlebitis

Rare

Calcium-­antibiotic precipitation*

Unknown; can be associated with embolic
events

Gastrointestinal

Hematologic

False-­positive laboratory

Other

*Ceftriaxone.
†Cephalosporins with thiomethyl tetrazole ring (MTT) side chain.

Adapted from Craig WA, Andes DR. Cephalosporins. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 9th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 21-­6.

action. The carbapenems provide the broadest spectrum of antibacterial activity of any licensed class of antibiotics and are active
against gram-­p ositive, gram-­negative, and anaerobic organisms.
Among the carbapenems, meropenem is the only agent licensed
for treatment of pediatric meningitis. Importantly, MRSA and E.
faecium are not susceptible to carbapenems. Carbapenems also
tend to be poorly active against Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, rendering their use for cystic fibrosis patients who are infected with
this organism problematic. Ertapenem is poorly active against P.
aeruginosa and Acinetobacter species and should be avoided when
these pathogens are encountered. Although imipenem-­cilastatin is
the first carbapenem approved for clinical use and the carbapenem with the greatest clinical experience, this antibiotic unfortunately has a propensity to cause seizures in children, particularly
in the setting of intercurrent meningitis. Accordingly, meropenem is typically more suitable for pediatric use, where meningitis is commonly a consideration. Carbapenems have also been
combined with β-­lactamase inhibitors. One example is meropenem/vaborbactam, where the β-­
lactamase inhibitor vaborbactam extends the spectrum of activity to include some ESBL-­and

carbapenemase-­producing bacteria. No dosage recommendations
exist as yet for pediatric use. Another example is imipenem/relebactam (imipenem/cilastatin/relebactam), which is approved for
complicated urinary tract and intraabdominal infections and for
ventilator-­associated pneumonia.
Other carbapenems in various stages of clinical trials include benapenum, panipenem, biapenem, razupenem, and tomopenem. Tebipenem pivoxil is an orally available prodrug of tebipenem, a carbapenem
with activity against multidrug-­
resistant gram-­
negative pathogens,
including quinolone-­
resistant and ESBL-­
producing Enterobacteriaceae. Sulopenem/sulopenem etzadroxil/probenecid is an oral carbapenem combination. Sulopenem etzadroxil is an oral prodrug form of
sulopenem, a thiopenem with broad-­spectrum antibacterial activity
against most gram-­positive and gram-­negative bacteria, not including
P. aeruginosa. Probenecid is included to prolong half-­life. Panipenem
is a combination agent coformulated with betamipron, which inhibits renal uptake of panipenem (analogous to imipenem/cilastatin).
Panipenem, biapenem, and tebipenem/pivoxil are licensed in Japan.
There is minimal experience with pediatric dosing for all of these
newer carbapenems.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1688 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Glycopeptides

Glycopeptide antibiotics include vancomycin and teicoplanin, the
less commonly available analog. These agents are bactericidal and
act by inhibiting cell wall biosynthesis. The antimicrobial activity
of the glycopeptides is limited to gram-­positive organisms, including S. aureus, coagulase-­
negative staphylococci, pneumococcus,
enterococci, Bacillus, and Corynebacterium. Vancomycin is frequently employed in pediatric practice and is of particular value
for serious infections, including meningitis, caused by MRSA and
penicillin-­ and cephalosporin-­resistant S. pneumoniae. Vancomycin
is also commonly used for infections in the setting of fever and neutropenia in oncology patients, in combination with other antibiotics (see Chapter 223), and for infections associated with indwelling
medical devices (see Chapter 224). Oral formulations of vancomycin are occasionally used to treat pseudomembranous colitis caused
by Clostridium difficile infections; intrathecal therapy may also be
used for selected CNS infections. Vancomycin must be administered with care because of its propensity to produce vancomycin
infusion syndrome, which is a reversible adverse effect that is rare
in young children and can typically be readily managed by slowing
the rate of drug infusion.
Newer FDA-­
approved glycopeptide antibiotics include telavancin, dalbavancin, and oritavancin; pediatric experience is limited. Telavancin is indicated for skin and skin structure infections
caused by S. aureus (including MRSA), group A streptococcus,
and E. faecalis (vancomycin-­susceptible isolates only). It is also
approved for hospital-­
acquired (including ventilator-­
associated)
pneumonia caused by S. aureus. The recommended adult dose
for skin and soft tissue infections, and for nosocomial pneumonia, is 10 mg/kg intravenously (IV) every 24 hours for 7-­21 days.
Telavancin appears to be more nephrotoxic than vancomycin and
has been associated with prolongation of the QT interval. Dalbavancin’s unique characteristic is its long half-­life, 150-­250 hours.
In adults with normal renal function, the dose is 1000 mg IV, followed 1 week later by 500 mg IV. This agent can be considered when
MRSA is confirmed or strongly suggested. Dalbavancin is not active
against vancomycin-­resistant S. aureus. It is FDA-­approved for bacterial skin and soft tissue infections. Oritavancin is a vancomycin
derivative with indications similar to those of dalbavancin. It has
a half-­life of approximately 250 hours. The dosage for adults is a
single 1200-­mg dose administered IV over 3 hours. The FDA has
approved dalbavancin and oritavancin for the treatment of acute
bacterial skin and skin structure infections caused by gram-­positive
bacteria, including MRSA. Cefilavancin is a unique agent spanning
two antimicrobial classes in a single agent. It is a covalently linked
glycopeptide-­cephalosporin heterodimer antibiotic that is highly
active against gram-­positive bacteria and is in a phase 3 study.

Aminoglycosides

Aminoglycoside antibiotics include streptomycin, kanamycin, gentamicin, tobramycin, netilmicin, and amikacin. The most commonly
used aminoglycosides in pediatric practice are gentamicin and
tobramycin. They exert their action by inhibiting bacterial protein
synthesis. Although they are most often used to treat gram-­negative
infections, the aminoglycosides are broad-­
spectrum agents, with
activity against S. aureus and synergistic activity against GBS, L.
monocytogenes, viridans streptococci, Corynebacteria jeikeium, P.
aeruginosa, coagulase-­negative staphylococci, and enterococci when
co-­administered with a β-­lactam agent. Aminoglycoside use has
decreased with the development of alternatives, but they still play a
key role in pediatric practice in the management of neonatal sepsis,
UTIs, gram-­negative bacterial sepsis, and complicated intraabdominal infections; infections in cystic fibrosis patients (including both
parenteral and aerosolized forms of therapy); and oncology patients
with fever and neutropenia. Aminoglycosides, in particular streptomycin, are also important in the management of Francisella tularensis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and nontuberculous mycobacterial
infections.

Toxicities of aminoglycoside therapy include nephrotoxicity and
ototoxicity (cochlear and/or vestibular), and serum levels as well as
renal function and hearing should be monitored in patients on long-­
term therapy. Toxicities of aminoglycosides may be reduced by the use
of once-­daily dosing regimens with appropriate monitoring of serum
levels. Hypokalemia, volume depletion, hypomagnesemia, and other
nephrotoxic drugs may increase the renal toxicity of aminoglycosides.
A rare complication of aminoglycosides is neuromuscular blockade,
which may occur in the presence of other neuromuscular blocking
agents and in the setting of infant botulism.
A novel aminoglycoside, plazomicin, has recently been approved by
the FDA for adult use. It was designed to evade all of the clinically relevant aminoglycoside-­modifying enzymes (Table 225.2) responsible for
aminoglycoside resistance. It is approved for complicated UTIs, including pyelonephritis caused by E. coli, K. pneumoniae, Proteus mirabilis,
and Enterobacter cloacae. FDA approval is pending for bloodstream
infections caused by multidrug-­resistant Enterobacteriaceae, including
CRE.

Tetracyclines

The tetracyclines (tetracycline hydrochloride, doxycycline, minocycline, demeclocycline, eravacycline, omadacycline, and minocycline)
are bacteriostatic antibiotics that exhibit their antimicrobial effect by
binding to the bacterial 30S ribosomal subunit, inhibiting protein
translation. These agents have a broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity against gram-­positive and gram-­negative bacteria, rickettsia, and
some parasites. The oral bioavailability of these agents facilitates oral
dosing for many infections, including Rocky Mountain spotted fever,
anaplasmosis, ehrlichiosis, Lyme disease, and malaria. Tetracyclines
must be prescribed judiciously to children <9 years old, because they
can cause staining of teeth, hypoplasia of dental enamel, and abnormal
bone growth in this age-­group.
Tigecycline, a semisynthetic derivative of minocycline, is a parenteral agent of a new antibiotic class (glycylcyclines) and is licensed
in the United States. It has a broader spectrum of activity (bacteriostatic) than traditional tetracyclines but retains the side effect profile
of tetracyclines. Tigecycline is active against tetracycline-­resistant
gram-­positive and gram-­negative pathogens, including MRSA and
possibly VRE, but not Pseudomonas. Demeclocycline is an orally
administered tetracycline with a similar antimicrobial spectrum as
other agents in this class. A novel tetracycline derivative, eravacycline (a fluorocycline), has recently been approved for treatment of
complicated intraabdominal infections in adults and has the broadest spectrum of any tetracycline, including MRSA and CRE. Omadacycline is another new tetracycline that is similar to that of other
tetracyclines, functioning as an inhibitor of bacterial protein synthesis, but has activity against bacterial strains expressing the two main
forms of tetracycline resistance, specifically, antibiotic efflux and
ribosomal protection.
Complications of tetracyclines include eosinophilia, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia (tetracycline), pseudotumor cerebri,
anorexia, emesis and nausea, hepatitis, photosensitivity, and a
hypersensitivity reaction (urticaria, asthma exacerbation, facial
edema, dermatitis) as well as a systemic lupus erythematosus–like
syndrome (most common with minocycline). The FDA has issued a
“black box” warning regarding tigecycline based on a meta-­analysis
of 10 studies that showed increased mortality among patients receiving this drug.
A salutary side effect of demeclocycline has been identified; it is
occasionally used as an off-­label treatment of hyponatremia resulting
from the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (ADH). The
mechanism of action appears to be inhibition of adenylyl cyclase activation after ADH binds to renal vasopressin receptors.

Sulfonamides

Trimethoprim and the sulfonamides are bacteriostatic agents that
inhibit the bacterial folate synthesis pathway, in the process impairing both nucleic acid and protein synthesis. Sulfonamides interfere

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 225 u Principles of Antibacterial Therapy
with the synthesis of dihydropteroic acid from paraaminobenzoic
acid, whereas trimethoprim acts at a site further downstream, interfering with synthesis of tetrahydrofolic acid from dihydrofolic acid. The
sulfonamides are available in both parenteral and oral formulations.
Although there have historically been a large number of sulfonamide
antibiotics developed for clinical use, relatively few remain available
for pediatric practice. The most important agent is the combination of
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX), used for treatment of
UTIs. TMP-­SMX has also emerged as a commonly prescribed agent for
staphylococcal skin and soft tissue infections, because this antibiotic
generally retains activity against MRSA. TMP-­SMX also plays a unique
role in immunocompromised patients, as a prophylactic and therapeutic agent for Pneumocystis jiroveci infection. Other common sulfonamides include sulfisoxazole, which is useful in the management of
UTIs, and sulfadiazine, which is a drug of choice in the treatment of
toxoplasmosis.
Recently, a novel sulfonamide, iclaprim, demonstrated noninferiority to vancomycin in the treatment of complicated skin and soft tissue
infections. Iclaprim is a diaminopyrimidine with a 20-­fold higher affinity for the target molecule for sulfonamides, dihydrofolate reductase,
than trimethoprim. It was granted orphan drug status by the FDA for
treatment of S. aureus infection in patients with cystic fibrosis but has
not been formally approved for general use.

Macrolides

The macrolide antibiotics most often used in pediatric practice include
erythromycin, clarithromycin, and azithromycin. This class of antimicrobials exerts its antibiotic effect through binding to the 50S subunit
of the bacterial ribosome, producing a block in elongation of bacterial
polypeptides. Clarithromycin is metabolized to 14-­hydroxy clarithromycin, and this active metabolite also has potent antimicrobial activity. The spectrum of antibiotic activity includes many gram-­positive
bacteria. Unfortunately, resistance to these agents among S. aureus and
group A streptococcus is fairly widespread, limiting the usefulness of
macrolides for many skin and soft tissue infections and for streptococcal pharyngitis. Azithromycin and clarithromycin have demonstrated
efficacy for otitis media. All macrolide members have an important
role in the management of pediatric respiratory infections, including
atypical pneumonia caused by M. pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, and Legionella pneumophila, as well as infections caused by
Bordetella pertussis.
Telithromycin, a ketolide antibiotic derived from erythromycin,
was initially FDA-­approved for the treatment in adults of mild to moderate community-­acquired pneumonia, acute exacerbations of chronic
bronchitis, and acute sinusitis, having good activity against the agents
causing these infections (S. pneumoniae, M. pneumoniae, C. pneumoniae, and L. pneumophila for community-­acquired pneumonia; M.
catarrhalis and H. influenzae for sinusitis). Reports of liver failure and
myasthenia gravis from telithromycin prompted the withdrawal of the
drug from the market. Solithromycin is a related next-­generation oral
and IV fluoroketolide in phase 3 clinical development for the treatment
of community-­acquired pneumonia.
Drug interactions are common with erythromycin and to a lesser
extent with clarithromycin. These agents can inhibit the CYP 3A4
enzyme system, resulting in increased levels of certain drugs, such
as astemizole, cisapride, statins, pimozide, and theophylline. Itraconazole may increase macrolide levels, whereas rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin may decrease macrolide levels. There are
few reported adverse drug interactions with azithromycin. Cross-­
resistance may develop between a macrolide and the subsequent use
of clindamycin.

Lincosamides

The prototype of the lincosamide class of antibiotics is clindamycin,
which acts at the ribosomal level to exert its antimicrobial effect.
The 50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome is the molecular target
of this agent. Its spectrum of activity includes gram-­positive aerobes and anaerobes. Clindamycin has no significant activity against

1689

gram-­negative organisms. An important role for clindamycin has
emerged in the management of MRSA infections. Because of its outstanding penetration into body fluids (excluding the CNS) and tissues
and bone, clindamycin can be used for therapy of serious infections
caused by MRSA. Clindamycin is also useful in the management of
invasive group A streptococcus infections and in the management
of many anaerobic infections, often in combination with a β-­lactam.
A form of inducible clindamycin resistance is exhibited by some
strains of MRSA; therefore consultation with the clinical microbiology laboratory is necessary before treating a serious MRSA infection
with clindamycin. Pseudomembranous colitis, a common complication of clindamycin therapy in adults, is seldom observed in pediatric
patients. Clindamycin also plays an important role in the treatment
of malaria and babesiosis (when co-­administered with quinine), P.
jiroveci pneumonia (when co-­administered with primaquine), and
toxoplasmosis.

Quinolones

The fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin,
gemifloxacin, besifloxacin [ophthalmic suspension], ofloxacin, and
delafloxacin) are antimicrobials that inhibit bacterial DNA replication by binding to the topoisomerases of the target pathogen, inhibiting the bacterial enzyme DNA gyrase. This class has broad-­spectrum
activity against both gram-­positive and gram-­negative organisms.
Some fluoroquinolones exhibit activity against penicillin-­resistant S.
pneumoniae as well as MRSA. These agents uniformly show excellent
activity against gram-­negative pathogens, including the Enterobacteriaceae and respiratory tract pathogens such as M. catarrhalis and
H. influenzae. Quinolones are also highly active against pathogens
associated with atypical pneumonia, particularly M. pneumoniae and
L. pneumophila.
Although these agents are not approved for use in children, there is
a reasonable body of evidence that the fluoroquinolones are generally
safe, well tolerated, and effective against a variety of bacterial infections
frequently encountered in pediatric practice. Parenteral quinolones are
appropriate for critically ill patients with gram-­negative infections. The
use of oral quinolones in stable outpatients may also be reasonable for
treatment of infections that would otherwise require parenteral antibiotics (e.g., P. aeruginosa soft tissue infections such as osteochondritis) or selected genitourinary tract infections. However, these agents
should be reserved for situations when no other oral antibiotic alternative is feasible. In 2013 the FDA changed the warning labels for the
fluoroquinolones to better describe the associated risk of permanent
peripheral neuropathy. Additional risks include tendonitis, arrhythmias, and retinal detachment. Moreover, in situations of overuse (e.g.,
typhoid fever, gonococcal infection), organisms have been demonstrated to rapidly develop resistance. The FDA has advised against the
use of quinolones for uncomplicated infections such as sinusitis and
bronchitis. Thus use of fluoroquinolones in pediatric practice should
still be approached with continued caution, and consultation with an
expert is recommended.

Streptogramins and Oxazolidinones

The emergence of highly resistant gram-­
positive organisms, in
particular VRE, has necessitated development of new classes of
antibiotics. One such class especially useful for resistant gram-­
positive infections is the streptogramins. The currently licensed
agent in this category is dalfopristin-­quinupristin, which is available in a parenteral formulation. It is appropriate for treatment of
MRSA, coagulase-­
negative staphylococci, penicillin-­
susceptible
and penicillin-­resistant S. pneumoniae, and vancomycin-­resistant
E. faecium but not E. faecalis.
Another licensed class of antibiotics for highly resistant gram-­
positive infections is the oxazolidinone class. The prototype in this
group is linezolid, available in both oral and parenteral formulations
and approved for use in pediatric patients. Its mechanism of action
involves inhibition of ribosomal protein synthesis. It is indicated for
MRSA, VRE, coagulase-­negative staphylococci, and penicillin-­resistant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1690 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
S. pneumoniae. A related drug, tedizolid phosphate, is also FDA-­
approved for acute bacterial skin and skin structure infections. It is
more potent in vitro than linezolid against MRSA and may be associated with less myelosuppression. It is available in both IV and oral
formulations.
There is little information on streptogramins and oxazolidinones in
the treatment of CNS infections, and neither class is approved for pediatric meningitis. Linezolid can cause significant anemia and thrombocytopenia and is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor.
A novel oxazolidinone, contezolid acefosamil (MRX-­4), was recently
approved for use in China. It is an orally active prodrug of the active antimicrobial metabolite, contezolid (MRX-­I), an oxazolidinone that shows
potent in vitro activity against various multidrug-­resistant gram-­positive
bacteria, including MRSA. It also has activity against M. tuberculosis.

Daptomycin

Daptomycin is a novel member of the cyclic lipopeptide class of antibiotics. Its spectrum of activity includes virtually all gram-­positive
organisms, including E. faecalis and E. faecium (including VRE) and S.
aureus (including MRSA). The structure of daptomycin is a 13-­member
amino acid peptide linked to a 10-­carbon lipophilic tail, which results
in a novel mechanism of action of disruption of the bacterial membrane through the formation of transmembrane channels. These channels cause leakage of intracellular ions, leading to depolarization of
the cellular membrane and inhibition of macromolecular synthesis. A
theoretical advantage of daptomycin for serious infections is its bactericidal activity against MRSA and enterococci. It is administered intravenously; experience in children is limited. Myopathy and elevations
in creatine phosphokinase have been described. An FDA warning has
been issued linking some cases of eosinophilic pneumonitis to the use
of daptomycin. Daptomycin is inactivated by surfactant and should not
be used to treat pneumonia.

Miscellaneous Agents

Metronidazole, which functions by disruption of DNA synthesis, has
a unique role as an antianaerobic agent and also possesses antiparasitic
and anthelmintic activity. In 2017 a related drug, benznidazole, was
approved through the FDA’s orphan drug Accelerated Approval Pathway. This antiprotozoal agent inhibits the synthesis of DNA, RNA, and
proteins within Trypanosoma cruzi and is approved for adult and pediatric use for Chagas disease. Rifampin is a rifamycin antibiotic that
inhibits bacterial RNA polymerase and has a major role in the management of tuberculosis. It is also of value in the management of other
bacterial infections in pediatric patients, usually used as a second (synergistic) agent in the treatment of S. aureus infections or to eliminate
nasopharyngeal colonization of Hib or N. meningitidis. Rifabutin is a
related drug that has an off-­label indication for treatment of tuberculosis, an orphan drug indication for Crohn disease, and an indication for
prevention or treatment of disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex disease in patients with HIV or immune deficiency. Rifaximin is
a nonabsorbed rifamycin that has been used as an adjunct agent to treat
patients with multiple recurrences of C. difficile infection. Fidaxomicin is a first-­in-­class member of a new category of narrow-­spectrum
macrocyclic antibiotic drugs. It is an RNA polymerase inhibitor with
activity against C. difficile infection.
The emerging crisis in antimicrobial resistance has also necessitated
the rediscovery of antimicrobial agents seldom used in clinical practice
in recent decades, such as colistin (colistimethate sodium), a member of the polymyxin family of antibiotics (polymyxin E). The general
structure of polymyxins consists of a cyclic peptide with hydrophobic tails. After binding to lipopolysaccharide in the outer membrane
of gram-­negative bacteria, polymyxins disrupt both outer and inner
membranes, leading to cell death. Colistin is broadly active against
the Enterobacteriaceae family, including P. aeruginosa. It is also active
against ESBL-­and carbapenemase-­producing strains. Toxicities are
chiefly renal and neurologic.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 226

Antimicrobial Stewardship
Kathleen Chiotos and Jeffrey S. Gerber
Antibiotics are the most common class of medications prescribed to
pediatric outpatients, and over 50% of pediatric inpatients receive antibiotics during their hospitalization. It is estimated that between 25%
and 50% of antibiotic prescriptions are inappropriate in drug choice,
dose, or duration or are unnecessary altogether.

THE NEED FOR ANTIMICROBIAL STEWARDSHIP:
HARMS FROM OVERUSE

There are many negative consequences of antibiotic overuse,
including contributing to the dramatic rise in antibiotic resistance
observed over the past 30 years, which has led to antibiotic resistance being named by the World Health Organization (WHO) as
one of the top 10 threats to human health. Antibiotics also carry
with them a risk of individual patient-­level harm, including development of Clostridioides difficile infection and antibiotic adverse
events. For example, 21% of antibiotic courses among pediatric
inpatients are complicated by an adverse event, and each additional
day of antibiotic therapy is associated with 7% greater odds of experiencing an adverse event. Among pediatric outpatients receiving
broad-­versus narrow-­spectrum antibiotics for acute respiratory
tract infections, adverse events are significantly more common in
patients treated with broad-­spectrum therapy. Finally, an emerging area of research is the deleterious impact of antibiotics on the
developing microbiome and its potential influence on future disease states, including childhood obesity, asthma, and other allergic diseases. Collectively, these data highlight the importance of
judicious antibiotic prescribing, both on a societal and individual
patient level.

DEFINING ANTIMICROBIAL STEWARDSHIP AND
AN ANTIMICROBIAL STEWARDSHIP PROGRAM

Antimicrobial stewardship is defined as coordinated interventions
designed to improve the use of antimicrobial agents, such that dose,
duration of therapy, and route of administration are optimized. The
goal of these actions is to achieve the best clinical outcome for the
patient, while minimizing the development of antimicrobial resistance and risk of adverse events. It is paramount to recognize that
simply reducing antimicrobial use is not a primary goal of antimicrobial stewardship. However, because inappropriate antibiotic
use is so common, optimization often results in de-­escalation from a
broader to a narrower spectrum of therapy or discontinuing antibiotics altogether.
Antimicrobial stewardship programs (ASPs) are multidisciplinary
teams designed to improve the safety and quality of patient care by
deploying these coordinated interventions. ASPs are often led or co-­
led by infectious diseases trained physicians and clinical pharmacists
and work in collaboration with the infection prevention and control
department, the clinical microbiology laboratory, and numerous stakeholder groups, including hospital leadership, clinicians, nurses, and
pharmacy. Multiple studies have demonstrated reductions in antibiotic use, decreasing rates of C. difficile infections, and cost avoidance
after the implementation of ASPs, with variable impact on local antibiotic resistance rates. With this growing evidence base and the crisis
of antimicrobial resistance, ASPs are now a Standard from The Joint
Commission and a Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
Condition of Participation. Several guidelines provide evidence-­
based recommendations for implementation of an ASP, including the joint Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 226 u Antimicrobial Stewardship
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA) guideline, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Core
Elements of Hospital Antibiotic Stewardship Programs, the CDC
Core Elements of Outpatient Antibiotic Stewardship, and the WHO
Practical Toolkit for Antimicrobial Stewardship Programmes in
Healthcare Facilities in Low-­and Middle-­Income Countries.

1691

INPATIENT ANTIMICROBIAL STEWARDSHIP
STRATEGIES

Core elements of inpatient antimicrobial stewardship include hospital leadership commitment; accountability through appointment of a
leader or coleaders; pharmacy expertise; implementation of actions
or interventions to improve antibiotic use (Table 226.1); tracking

Table 226.1  Summary of Inpatient Antimicrobial Stewardship Interventions
ACTION

DESCRIPTION

PRIORITY ACTIONS
Preauthorization

Clinician must contact the stewardship program to obtain approval for use of the
antimicrobial before prescribing (see also text and Table 226.2).

Prospective audit and feedback

Antimicrobials are reviewed by the stewardship program after 48-­72 hr and recommendations
for optimization are provided at that point (see also text and Table 226.2).

Facility-­specific treatment guidelines

These local guidelines should establish clear recommendations for commonly
encountered infections based on published data or national guidelines, local
susceptibility data, formulary options, and patient mix. These guidelines should address
diagnostic testing, empiric treatment, and definitive treatment and should be developed
in collaboration with clinician stakeholders.

ADDITIONAL ACTIONS
Antibiotic “time-­outs”

A “time-­out” occurs after a set duration of antimicrobial therapy (e.g., 48-­72 hr) and
involves a clinician-­led reassessment of the need for and choice of antibiotics. This differs
from prospective audit and feedback in that the review is led by the frontline clinician,
not the stewardship program. Time-­outs may augment prospective audit and feedback
led by the ASP but should not be considered an equivalent substitute.

Assessing penicillin allergy

Although penicillin allergies are reported in 10–15% of hospitalized patients, less than 1%
are true serious allergies. Patients with penicillin allergy labels receive broader-­spectrum
antibiotics than would otherwise be recommended, and penicillin allergy labels may
be associated with worse clinical outcomes. Clinicians or stewardship personnel may
be able to “delabel” patients through performing a history and/or administering a
challenge dose of penicillin or amoxicillin.

Documentation of antibiotic indications in orders or
prescriptions

Requiring documentation of an indication for antibiotics can improve antibiotic prescribing
practices. In addition, this facilitates other interventions, such as audit with feedback,
where knowledge of the intended indication is needed.

Intravenous to oral antibiotic therapy

Transitioning from intravenous to oral therapy when an oral antibiotic is available can
reduce the duration of hospitalization, need for long-­term intravenous access, and
improve patient satisfaction.

Pharmacist-­based interventions

Pharmacists are uniquely positioned to optimize antibiotic use through making
recommendations for optimal antibiotic dosing and administration (e.g., extended
infusions of β-­lactam antibiotics, therapeutic drug monitoring for vancomycin and
aminoglycosides, identifying duplicative therapy such as overlapping anaerobic
coverage, and detection/prevention of antibiotic-­related drug-­drug interactions).

Time-­sensitive automatic stop orders

Including a stop date in antibiotic orders, after which the antimicrobial order is removed
from the patient’s active medication orders, can promote timely discontinuation of
antibiotics. This may be particularly valuable for antibiotics where durations are short and
well-­defined (e.g., surgical prophylaxis).

Selective reporting of susceptibility testing results

Microbiology labs can partner with stewardship programs to report select antibiotics
that are consistent with hospital guidelines or use “cascade” reporting in which
susceptibilities to broader-­spectrum agents are reported only if resistance to
narrower-­spectrum drugs is demonstrated.

Comments in microbiology reports

Comments in microbiology reports may guide prescribers to making appropriate antibiotic
decisions, for example, by indicating bacterial growth may reflect contamination or
guiding providers to using specific preferred antibiotics.

Rapid diagnostic tests for bacterial diagnostics

Molecular diagnostic tests (for example, tests using PCR, microarrays, or mass
spectroscopy) may allow more rapid identification of organisms or resistance
determinants than traditional culture-­based techniques. When implemented together
with real-­time stewardship program guidance, assays performed on positive blood
cultures may reduce time to optimal antibiotic therapy and improve patient outcomes.

Nursing-­based interventions

Key opportunities to engage bedside nurses in stewardship activities include optimizing
the appropriate collection of microbiology cultures, encouraging intravenous to oral
transitions, and prompting antibiotic timeouts.

PCR, Polymerase chain reaction.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Core Elements of Hospital Antibiotic Stewardship Programs. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services,
CDC; 2019. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/antibiotic-­use/core-­elements/hospital.html

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1692 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 226.2  Comparing Preauthorization and Prospective
Audit and Feedback
PREAUTHORIZATION

PROSPECTIVE AUDIT AND
FEEDBACK

Allows stewardship oversight
from the point of antimicrobial
initiation.

Stewardship oversight focuses
on antimicrobial duration, de-­
escalation, or discontinuation.

Requires dedicated and expert
personnel for “real-­time”
phone calls or electronic
communication through at
least the majority of the day.

Resource intensive, particularly
if done hospital-­wide, but can
be scaled to available resource
(e.g., focused on a single unit).

Opportunity to counsel provider
on optimal diagnostic testing
before starting antimicrobials.

Culture and susceptibility testing
may be available at the time
the intervention is made, such
that recommendations for
definitive therapy can be made.

Requires a coordinated
process including providers,
pharmacy, and the stewardship
program to ensure approved
antimicrobials are dispensed
promptly and that antimicrobial
requests that are declined are
not dispensed.

Prescribers may or may not
follow the recommendations
made by the stewardship
program.

May be seen as a threat to
autonomy and/or having the
potential to delay therapy.

Generally well-­received by
providers, with high adherence
to recommendations reported.

Only the antimicrobials that are
restricted are affected and only
at the point of initiation.

More flexibility for the
stewardship team regarding
the timing of interventions, as
well as the potential to act on
all antimicrobials prescribed to
an individual patient during a
single discussion.

diseases diagnoses and syndromes is a key activity of ASPs. In pediatrics, key target conditions include community-­acquired pneumonia,
urinary tract infections, intraabdominal infections, skin and soft tissue
infections, and neonatal and pediatric sepsis. Coproduction of these
guidelines with relevant stakeholders, including prescribing clinicians,
offers a unique opportunity to broadly improve antimicrobial prescribing through standardization of evidence-­based practices. Because the
approach is agreed upon a priori, adhering to these recommendations
may also be more appealing to prescribers relative to more “top-­down”
approaches, where the ASP is either unilaterally authorizing antimicrobial use or providing directive feedback.

Education

While educational interventions alone are insufficient to improve antimicrobial use, education is critical to the success of ASPs and should
be integrated along with other strategies. Education can take place in
many forms, including at the point of an individual prescriber-­steward
interaction during preauthorization or prospective audit and feedback;
as part of the implementation of a new local treatment guideline or
other specific improvement intervention; or as a stand-­alone or recurring lecture focused on a topic of relevance, preferably one deemed
important to the learners.

OUTPATIENT ANTIMICROBIAL STEWARDSHIP
STRATEGIES

The majority of antibiotic use in children occurs in the outpatient setting. Effective outpatient antimicrobial stewardship is therefore critical
and requires approaches distinct from the individual-­level preauthorization and prospective audit with feedback that form the foundation of inpatient antimicrobial stewardship. Relative to hospital-­based
stewardship, fewer studies have been conducted in outpatient settings
to inform best practices. However, the CDC provides four elements
to guide outpatient stewardship efforts, which include commitment to optimizing antibiotic prescribing, including appointment of
an accountable leader; actions for policy and practice; tracking and
reporting antibiotic use; and education and expertise.

Commitment
antibiotic use, resistance, and C. difficile rates; reporting antibiotic use
and resistance metrics to prescribers and hospital leaders; and education.

Prospective Audit and Feedback Versus
Preauthorization

Two broad approaches to antimicrobial stewardship are supported by
the IDSA/SHEA guideline and the CDC Core Elements: preauthorization and prospective audit and feedback. Preauthorization is a strategy
in which the clinician must contact the ASP and secure approval for
use of the antimicrobial before prescribing the drug. In contrast, prospective audit and feedback is performed by the ASP 48-­72 hours after
the start of antimicrobial therapy, and recommendations for antimicrobial de-­escalation, discontinuation, transition from intravenous to
oral therapy, change in dose, or changes in duration are made. Each
of these approaches has pros and cons (Table 226.2), and ASPs generally adapt these broad strategies to the local context and availability
of resources, often using a hybrid approach. “Handshake stewardship”
is a specific type of audit and feedback where recommendations from
the ASP are delivered face-­to-­face to prescribers; this approach has
the advantage of developing collaborative relationships but is resource
intensive and therefore may not be feasible in all settings. Regardless
of which strategy is used, it is critical that ASPs view the interaction
with the prescriber as an opportunity to collaboratively optimize antimicrobial therapy and that the guidance provided is evidence-­based
and, whenever available, aligned with local clinical practice guidelines.

Development and Implementation of Local
Guidelines

Creation of evidence-­based local guidelines containing recommendations for empiric and definitive therapy for common infectious

In addition to commitment on the part of practice or system leadership, a written and publicly displayed commitment poster stating that the individual clinician will only prescribe antibiotics when
they are indicated is a powerful tool to reduce unnecessary antibiotic
prescribing in the ambulatory setting. This strategy is particularly
appealing, as it requires minimal resources to implement and may
not only influence provider behavior but also stimulate a discussion
between provider and patient around the importance of judicious
antibiotic use. In addition, clear communication across clinic providers and staff to ensure this message is consistent and practices are
aligned is paramount.

Actions to Improve Antibiotic Prescribing

As with hospital-­
based stewardship programs, development and
implementation of local guidelines to inform antibiotic prescribing for
relevant conditions is a key strategy for ambulatory stewardship programs. Target conditions in this setting include acute respiratory tract
infections, such as pharyngitis, sinusitis, otitis media, and community-­
acquired pneumonia, given that these conditions account for the vast
majority of ambulatory antibiotic use and are associated with significant variation in antibiotic prescribing practices across clinics. A
number of strategies have been used to optimize adherence to such
guidelines, including audit with feedback at the practice or provider
level, clinician education, and computerized decision support. An
additional evidence-­based practice that may improve antibiotic use in
the outpatient setting for specific conditions is use of delayed prescriptions, namely, prescriptions provided to patients with mild infections
likely to improve without antibiotics at the time of the clinic visit, with
instructions to fill the prescription only if symptoms worsen or fail to
improve. Delayed prescribing is endorsed by the American Academy
of Pediatrics for acute otitis media and acute sinusitis. This type of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 227 u Staphylococcus
“contingency plan” may contribute to patient and parent acceptance of
an initial recommendation against antibiotics.

Education

Education is also a fundamental element of outpatient stewardship. In
contrast to education in the inpatient setting, which focuses on clinicians, education in the ambulatory setting additionally requires a focus
on the patient and family, as well as teaching providers to promote
optimal communication. For example, a commonly cited challenge to
judicious antibiotic prescribing in the pediatric outpatient setting is
a perception on the part of providers that antibiotic prescriptions are
strongly desired by parents, even in situations where bacterial infections are unlikely. However, several studies have refuted this notion
and instead suggest that communication of both “positive” treatment recommendations (e.g., specific measures to take to improve
symptoms) and “negative” treatment recommendations (e.g., recommendations against using antibiotics when they are not indicated, antibiotic adverse events) is a driver of parent satisfaction and
desired by parents.

TRACKING AND REPORTING ANTIMICROBIAL USE
MEASURES

Quantifying antimicrobial use and reporting it to key stakeholders,
including clinicians and hospital leadership, are key elements for both
inpatient and outpatient stewardship efforts.

Antimicrobial Use Measures

Most antimicrobial stewardship measures are process measures. The
preferred metric for inpatient antimicrobial use is antimicrobial
days of therapy (DOTs) per 1,000 patient days. Each antimicrobial
prescribed on each hospital day counts as one DOT, independent of the
number of doses the patient receives in the day. For example, if a patient
with an intraabdominal infection receives ceftriaxone and metronidazole on the same day, each drug contributes 1 DOT and the total DOT is
2. If instead, this patient received meropenem alone, just 1 DOT would
be recorded. DOT/1,000 patient days is a metric particularly useful to
track antimicrobial use over time or in response to a specific stewardship intervention and can be measured for an individual drug, a specific
unit, or throughout the hospital. Limitations of the measure are that it
does not measure the appropriateness of therapy or spectrum of activity,
and as demonstrated in the previous example, multidrug regimens will
contribute a greater number of DOTs even if the spectrum of the combination of drugs is narrower than the single drug. Finally, DOT/1,000
patient days does not account for differences in patient complexity, illness severity, or comorbid conditions, a limitation that should be considered when making comparisons across units or hospitals.
Antibiotic use measures in the outpatient setting can include individual-­or facility-­level tracking of antibiotic prescriptions in all visits,
or in visits with a certain diagnosis or collection of diagnoses. Metrics
could include the proportion of visits in which antibiotics were prescribed, the appropriateness of the antibiotic choice (e.g., broad-­versus
narrow-­spectrum, compliance with local guidelines), and/or the correct duration of antibiotics for a given condition. Individual-­level
measures are preferred, as they facilitate audit and feedback based on
individual performance, as well as peer comparisons, strategies that
have been used successfully to improve adherence to evidence-­based
guidelines for antibiotic use in the outpatient setting.

Outcome Measures

The impact of reductions in antimicrobial use through implementation of ASPs or specific interventions should ideally be linked to clinical outcomes. In practice, however, specific outcomes can be difficult to
identify, particularly in children where adverse outcomes attributable to
antibiotics are uncommon (e.g., C. difficile infection) or resource intensive to measure (e.g., drug adverse events, patient-­reported outcomes).
Improvement in antibiotic resistance rates over time is an appealing
hospital-­level measure, but improvement occurs slowly and is influenced by multiple factors other than inpatient antibiotic use, including
infection prevention and control practices and outpatient prescribing

1693

patterns. Other outcome measures that may be considered include
revisits, readmissions, or hospital length of stay, though few studies have
evaluated these outcomes, which may be confounded by multifactorial
influences. Importantly, because antibiotic exposure has been clearly
linked to development of antibiotic resistance, C. difficile infection, and
other adverse drug events, decreases in antibiotic use process measures
without a worsening of clinical outcomes are relevant and should be
considered sufficient for defining success, even if the reduction in antibiotic use does not result in improved clinical outcomes.

SUMMARY

Antimicrobial stewardship is an important element of patient safety and
quality that is the responsibility of all clinicians prescribing antimicrobials. Formal ASPs can guide these local efforts, and abundant evidence
demonstrates the positive impact of these programs on improving antibiotic use in both the inpatient and ambulatory settings. Key needs in
the field of pediatric antimicrobial stewardship include development
of risk-­adjusted antibiotic use measures for benchmarking across centers; development of measures to quantify antibiotic-­associated harm;
incorporating perspectives from nursing and patients/families; and
adapting stewardship strategies and organizational structures successful in acute care hospitals to other settings.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 4

Gram-Positive Bacterial
Infections
Chapter 227

Staphylococcus
Carol M. Kao, Patrick J. Reich, and
Stephanie A. Fritz
Staphylococci are hardy, aerobic, gram-­positive bacteria that grow in
pairs and clusters and are ubiquitous as normal flora of humans and
present on fomites and in dust. They are resistant to heat and drying and may be recovered from nonbiologic environments weeks to
months after contamination. Strains are classified as Staphylococcus
aureus if they are coagulase positive or as one of the many species of
coagulase-­negative staphylococci (e.g., S. epidermidis, S. lugdunensis,
S. saprophyticus, S. haemolyticus). S. aureus has many virulence factors that mediate various serious diseases, whereas coagulase-­negative
staphylococci tend to be less pathogenic unless an indwelling foreign
body (e.g., intravascular catheter) is present. S. aureus strains resistant
to β-­lactam antibiotics, typically referred to as methicillin-­resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), are a significant problem in both
community and hospital settings.

227.1 Staphylococcus aureus
Carol M. Kao, Patrick J. Reich, and Stephanie A. Fritz
S. aureus is the most common cause of skin and soft tissue infections
(SSTIs). Bacteremia (primary or secondary) is common and can be
associated with, or can result in, musculoskeletal infection (osteomyelitis, pyomyositis, septic arthritis), pneumonia, endocarditis, and
rarely meningitis. Toxin-­mediated diseases, including food poisoning,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1694 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
staphylococcal scarlet fever, scalded skin syndrome, and toxic shock
syndrome (TSS), are caused by certain S. aureus strains.

ETIOLOGY

S. aureus strains produce a wide spectrum of virulence factors. These
factors contribute to pathogenesis in human disease by protecting the
organism from host defenses, causing local tissue damage, and affecting noninfected sites through toxin elaboration.
Most strains of S. aureus possess factors that protect the organism from
host defenses. The microbial surface components recognizing adhesive
matrix molecules (MSCRAMMs) are a family of cell wall–anchored
proteins with a broad spectrum of virulence properties, including host
tissue and cell adhesion and invasion, biofilm formation, and evasion of
the host immune response. Many staphylococci produce a loose extracellular polysaccharide that promotes formation of biofilms, which may
interfere with opsonophagocytosis. Production of clumping factor and
coagulase differentiates S. aureus from coagulase-­
negative staphylococci. Clumping factor interacts with fibrinogen to create large clumps
of organisms, interfering with effective phagocytosis. Coagulase causes
plasma to clot by interacting with fibrinogen and may have an important role in abscess formation. Protein A is located on the outermost
coat of the cell wall and can absorb serum immunoglobulins, preventing
opsonization and thus inhibiting phagocytosis. The chemotaxis inhibiting protein of S. aureus (ChIPS) and extracellular adherence protein (Eap) interfere with the native host immune response by inhibiting
leukocyte chemotaxis. The staphylococcal enzyme catalase inactivates
hydrogen peroxide, promoting intracellular survival.
Many strains of S. aureus produce substances that cause local tissue
destruction. A number of immunologically distinct hemolysins that
act on cell membranes and cause tissue necrosis have been identified
(α-­toxin, β-­hemolysin, δ-­hemolysin). The leukocidins (LukAB, LukDE,
Panton-­Valentine leucocidin) are pore-­forming cytotoxins resulting in
increased cell membrane permeability and eventual cell death. Strains of
S. aureus that produce Panton-­Valentine leukocidin are associated with
more severe and invasive skin disease, necrotizing pneumonia, and osteomyelitis. Many strains of S. aureus release one or more exotoxins. Exfoliatins A and B are serologically distinct proteins that produce localized
(bullous impetigo) or generalized (scalded skin syndrome, staphylococcal
scarlet fever) dermatologic manifestations (see Chapter 706).
S. aureus can produce >20 distinct enterotoxins (types A-­V). Ingestion of preformed enterotoxin, particularly types A or B, can result in
food poisoning, resulting in vomiting and diarrhea and, in some cases,
profound hypotension.
Toxic shock syndrome toxin-­1 (TSST-­1) is associated with toxic
shock syndrome (TSS), related to menstruation and focal staphylococcal infection (see Chapter 227.2). TSST-­1 is a superantigen that
induces production of interleukin (IL)-­1 and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), resulting in hypotension, fever, and multisystem involvement.
Focal infections associated with enterotoxins A or B also may be associated with nonmenstrual TSS.
S. aureus also possesses intrinsic factors that can contribute to pathogenesis, including proteins that promote adhesion to fibrinogen, fibronectin, collagen, and other human proteins. Expression of proteins that
mediate antibiotic resistance is also of critical importance. Although
historically sensitive to penicillin, S. aureus isolates now almost universally produce penicillinase or β-­lactamase, which inactivates many
β-­lactams at the molecular level and represents the major resistance
mechanism against many penicillin and some cephalosporin antibiotics. Thus treatment of S. aureus with β-­lactam antibiotics requires
either a penicillinase-­resistant β-­lactam ring (e.g., antistaphylococcal
penicillins such as oxacillin or nafcillin) or combination with a β-­
lactamase inhibitor (e.g., ampicillin-­sulbactam). Production of altered
penicillin-­binding proteins (PBPs) in the bacterial cell wall mediates
resistance to penicillinase-­resistant antibiotics; an altered PBP-­2A,
encoded by the gene mecA, is responsible for the methicillin, cephalosporin, and carbapenem resistance of MRSA isolates.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

S. aureus is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality, particularly
in pediatric healthcare-­associated infections including infections of the

bloodstream, surgical sites, and respiratory tract. Genetically distinct
strains of MRSA are termed community-­associated MRSA (CA-­MRSA);
USA300 is the predominant pulsotype circulating in the United States.
These strains led to an epidemic of SSTIs, and occasionally necrotizing invasive infections, in healthy individuals without the traditional
healthcare-­associated risk factors for MRSA. Ambulatory visits for
purulent SSTIs rose from 5 million to 11 million annually between
2000 and 2013 but have since plateaued and even declined in some
populations. Additionally, the incidence of invasive nosocomial MRSA
infections (e.g., bacteremia) has also declined; however, the incidence
of SSTIs and bloodstream infections caused by MSSA has increased.
Approximately 20–40% of healthy individuals carry at least one
strain of S. aureus in the anterior nares at any given time, with intermittent carriage occurring in up to 70% of individuals. In children, the
oropharynx, umbilicus, inguinal folds, and rectum are also important
reservoirs of S. aureus carriage. Many neonates are colonized within
the first 2 months of life, usually by a maternal strain. The prevalence
of colonization with MRSA in the general pediatric population ranges
from 2% to 10%, with higher prevalence in some locales and in children
with significant healthcare exposure and chronic medical conditions.
S. aureus is acquired and transmitted through close person-­to-­
person contact and contact with contaminated objects or environmental surfaces. S. aureus colonization poses a risk for subsequent S. aureus
infection. In community settings, populations traditionally at high
risk for S. aureus infection have included athletes, military personnel,
young children, veterinarians, injection drug users, and inmates in
correctional facilities. However, given the high colonization prevalence
in the community, S. aureus infections commonly occur in individuals with no identifiable risk factors. In the outpatient setting, SSTI is
the most common entity caused by S. aureus, accounting for 8 million
annual ambulatory visits.
Households are an important reservoir for S. aureus transmission
because of close personal contact among colonized family members.
Increased disease frequency occurs among household contacts of S.
aureus–colonized or –infected individuals. Additionally, S. aureus can
persist on environmental surfaces over time. Contamination of environmental surfaces such as hand towels, television remote controls,
and bed linens can further perpetuate transmission among household
members and is a risk factor for recurrent infection. Thus preventive
strategies are aimed at decreasing the burden of S. aureus carriage in
affected individuals and household members, as well as targeted household environmental surfaces.

PATHOGENESIS

Except in the case of food poisoning resulting from ingestion of preformed enterotoxins, disease associated with S. aureus typically begins
with colonization. Subsequent disease manifestations in susceptible individuals results either directly from tissue invasion or from injury caused
by various toxins and enzymes produced by the organism (Fig. 227.1).
The most significant risk factor for the development of infection
is disruption of intact skin, including breaches from wounds, skin
diseases such as eczema, epidermolysis bullosa, insect bites, burns,
ventriculoperitoneal shunts, and central venous catheter placement.
Additional risk factors include immunodeficiency and malnutrition,
although infection can also occur in otherwise healthy children. Viral
infections of the respiratory tract, especially influenza virus infection,
may predispose to secondary bacterial infection with staphylococci.
Congenital defects in chemotaxis (hyper-­IgE syndromes, Chédiak-­
Higashi, and Wiskott-­Aldrich syndromes) and defective phagocytosis
and killing (neutropenia, chronic granulomatous disease) increase the
risk for staphylococcal infections. Patients with HIV infection have
neutrophils that are defective in their ability to kill S. aureus in vitro.
Young infants with invasive infection or individuals with recurrent
pyogenic infection should be evaluated for immune defects, especially
those involving neutrophil dysfunction. Poor mucus clearance in children with cystic fibrosis frequently leads to chronic pulmonary staphylococcal colonization and persistent inflammation in these patients.
Infants may acquire type-­specific humoral immunity to staphylococci transplacentally. Older children and adults develop antibodies to
staphylococci as a result of colonization or minor infections. Antibody

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 227 u Staphylococcus
1. Surface immune evasion
Antibody interference
Protein A (Spa)
Staphylokinase
Staphylococcal binder of Ig (Sbi)

Capsule
Cell wall

1695

3. Polysaccharide microcapsule
(not expressed by all clinical isolates)
4. Secreted toxins and virulence
factors

Biofilm adhesion
Poly-N-acetylglucosamine (PNAG)

Superantigens
Enterotoxins
Toxic shock syndrome toxin-1

Staphylococcus aureus

Exfoliative toxins
Exfoliative toxins A and B
Pore-forming toxins
Hemolysin A ( -toxin)
-Hemolysin
Leukocidin AB (LukAB)
Leukocidin ED (LukED)
Panton-Valentine leukocidin
Phenol-soluble modulins

2. Membrane bound proteins
MSCRAMMs
Clumping factor
Fibrinogen-binding protein
Fibronectin-binding proteins
Bone sialoprotein binding protein

Manipulation of host coagulation
Coagulase
von Willebrand factor-binding
protein (vWbp)

Nutrient acquisition proteins
Iron uptake via heme (Isd system)
Manganese transport (MntABC)

Fig. 227.1 Schematic of virulence factors and relevant surface adhesins of Staphylococcus aureus. YY, Immunoglobulin-­binding site; MSCRAMMs,

microbial surface components that recognize adhesive matrix molecules. (From Thomsen I, Creech CB. Staphylococcus aureus. In Long SS, Prober
CG, Fischer M, Kimberlin DW, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023, Fig. 115.1, p. 711.)

to the various S. aureus toxins appears to protect against those specific
toxin-­mediated diseases, but humoral immunity does not necessarily
protect against focal or disseminated S. aureus infection with the same
organisms.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

S. aureus has the potential to invade any tissue. Disease severity is influenced by local suppuration, systemic dissemination with metastatic
infection, or systemic effects of toxin production.

Newborn

S. aureus is an important cause of neonatal infections (see Chapter 148).

Skin

S. aureus is an important cause of pyogenic skin infections, including impetigo contagiosa, ecthyma, bullous impetigo, folliculitis, furuncles (boils), carbuncles (multiple coalesced boils), and paronychia.
Toxigenic infection with skin manifestations include staphylococcal
scalded skin syndrome and staphylococcal scarlet fever. S. aureus is
a frequent cause of superinfection of underlying dermatologic conditions, such as eczema, hidradenitis suppurativa, or insect bites. Skin
abscesses caused by CA-­MRSA commonly affect the lower extremities
and buttocks. Up to 70% of individuals with SSTI will experience a
recurrent infection. S. aureus is also an important cause of traumatic
and surgical wound infections and can cause deep soft tissue involvement, including cellulitis and, rarely, necrotizing fasciitis.

Respiratory Tract

Infections of the upper respiratory tract (otitis media, sinusitis) caused
by S. aureus are rare, in particular considering the frequency with
which the anterior nares are colonized. S. aureus sinusitis is relatively
common in children with cystic fibrosis or defects in leukocyte function and may be the only focus of infection in some children with TSS.
Suppurative parotitis is a rare infection, but S. aureus is a common
cause. A membranous tracheitis that complicates viral croup may
result from infection with S. aureus, although other organisms may
also be responsible.
Pneumonia caused by S. aureus is uncommon but can present with
rapidly progressive respiratory failure. Children may present with
recent flulike illness (see Chapter 449). Hematogenous pneumonia
may be secondary to septic emboli from right-­sided endocarditis or
septic thrombophlebitis, with or without intravascular devices. Inhalation pneumonia is caused by alteration of mucociliary clearance,
leukocyte dysfunction, or bacterial adherence initiated by a viral infection. Common symptoms and signs include high fever, abdominal

pain, tachypnea, dyspnea, and localized or diffuse bronchopneumonia
or lobar disease. In particular, USA300 strains of S. aureus often cause
a necrotizing pneumonitis that may be associated with early development of empyema, pneumatoceles, pyopneumothorax, and bronchopleural fistulas (Fig. 227.2). Chronic pulmonary infection with S.
aureus contributes to progressive pulmonary dysfunction in children
with cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454).

Bacteremia and Sepsis

S. aureus bacteremia and sepsis may be primary or secondary because
of a localized infection such as an infected central venous catheter or
thrombus, bone, or skin and soft tissue. Risk factors for S. aureus bacteremia include presence of a central venous catheter, immunodeficiency,
malnutrition, recent MRSA STTI, and recent surgery. The onset may
be acute and marked by nausea, vomiting, myalgia, fever, and chills.
Prolonged S. aureus bacteremia is associated with an increased
risk of developing complications such as septic emboli, thrombi, and
metastatic foci of infection. Methicillin resistance, musculoskeletal
infection, endovascular infection, and delayed intervention for source
control are risk factors for prolonged bacteremia. In general, removal
of an infected central venous catheter is recommended because of the
difficulty clearing S. aureus bacteremia in these patients.
A positive blood culture for MRSA or methicillin-­sensitive S. aureus
(MSSA) should always be considered pathogenic, and antistaphylococcus
treatment should be initiated with vancomycin or daptomycin with a β-­
lactam until antimicrobial susceptibility is available. In the absence of an
obvious source (isolated bacteremia), endocarditis must be considered.
MSSA bacteremia should be treated with a β-­lactam such as cefazolin or
oxacillin, given poorer outcomes in children treated with vancomycin.
Although vancomycin has been traditionally used as first-­line treatment
of MRSA bacteremia in children, daptomycin and ceftaroline, a β-­lactam
and fifth-­generation cephalosporin, can also be considered. The duration of antibiotic therapy depends on the age and presence of associated
infections. In general, 7-­14 days of intravenous therapy is appropriate
for uncomplicated bacteremia; however, additional studies are needed
to determine the optimal duration in children. Repeat blood cultures
should be obtained until negative for 2 days to document clearance of
bacteremia. Prolonged positive blood cultures while on therapy suggest
endocarditis, an infected thrombus, abscess formation, foreign body
(central lines, bone prosthesis, or internal fixation of fractures), or other
factors leading to poor source control. Whole body MRI or PET-­MRI
scanning may detect unrecognized metastatic foci. Infectious disease
consultation has been shown to improve cure rates and outcomes in
children with S. aureus bacteremia, including decreased mortality and
decreased recurrence of bacteremia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1696 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Muscle

Localized staphylococcal abscesses in muscle, sometimes without septicemia, have been called pyomyositis. This disorder is reported most
frequently from tropical areas and is termed tropical pyomyositis, but
also occurs in the United States in otherwise healthy children. Multiple abscesses occur in 30–40% of cases, most commonly affecting the
pelvic and lower extremity muscles. History may include prior trauma
at the site of the abscess. More commonly, pyomyositis results from
seeding secondary to bacteremia, often near the site of osteomyelitis.
Surgical drainage and appropriate antibiotic therapy are essential.

Bones and Joints

S. aureus is the most common cause of osteomyelitis and suppurative
arthritis in children, most commonly the result of hematogenous seeding and, less often, from a contiguous focus of infection or through inoculation from trauma or a surgical procedure (see Chapters 725 and 726).

Central Nervous System

Meningitis caused by S. aureus is uncommon; it is associated with penetrating cranial trauma and neurosurgical procedures (craniotomy,
cerebrospinal fluid [CSF] shunt placement) and, less frequently, with
endocarditis, parameningeal foci (epidural or brain abscess), prematurity, complicated sinusitis, diabetes mellitus, or malignancy. The CSF
profile of S. aureus meningitis is indistinguishable from that in other
forms of bacterial meningitis (see Chapter 643.1).

Heart

S. aureus is a common cause of acute endocarditis on native valves and
results in high rates of morbidity and mortality. Left-­sided endocarditis
is most common. The clinical presentation can be indolent with symptoms such as malaise, weight loss, or myalgias, and the typical signs of
endocarditis are often not present in children (see Chapter 486).

Kidney

S. aureus is a common cause of renal and perinephric abscess, usually
of hematogenous origin. Pyelonephritis and cystitis caused by S. aureus
are unusual (see Chapter 575).

Toxic Shock Syndrome

S. aureus, more commonly MSSA than MRSA, is the principal cause of
TSS, which should be suspected in anyone with fever, shock, and/or a
diffuse erythroderma (see Chapter 227.2).

Intestinal Tract

Staphylococcal enterocolitis may rarely follow overgrowth of normal
bowel flora by S. aureus, which can result from broad-­spectrum oral
antibiotic therapy. Diarrhea is associated with blood and mucus. Peritonitis associated with S. aureus in patients receiving long-­term ambulatory peritoneal dialysis usually involves the catheter tunnel.
Food poisoning may be caused by ingestion of preformed enterotoxins produced by staphylococci in contaminated foods (see Chapter
387). The source of contamination is often colonized or infected food
workers. Approximately 2-­7 hours after ingestion of the toxin, sudden, severe vomiting begins. Watery diarrhea may develop, but fever
is absent or low grade. Symptoms rarely persist >12-­24 hours. Rarely,
shock and death may occur.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of S. aureus infection depends on isolation of the organism in culture from the site of infection, such as cellulitis aspirates,
abscess cavities, blood, bone, or joint aspirates, or other sites of infection. In patients with musculoskeletal infection, ∼50% of children will
have blood cultures that yield S. aureus. Thus surgical debridement or
an aspirate or biopsy obtained by interventional radiology can maximize recovery of the organism, which is important for targeted antibiotic selection. Tissue samples or fluid aspirates in a syringe provide the
best culture material. Because of the high prevalence of MRSA and the
severity of S. aureus infections, it is important to obtain cultures before
starting antibiotic treatment. The organism can be grown readily in liquid and on solid media. After isolation, identification is made on the

basis of Gram stain and coagulase, clumping factor, and catalase activity. Molecular techniques and mass spectrometry are used to supplement traditional identification and antibiotic susceptibility methods.
These technologies may allow for rapid species identification from
positive blood cultures and simultaneously identify genetic patterns
associated with methicillin resistance, such as presence of the mecA
gene produced by MRSA. Diagnosis of S. aureus food poisoning is usually made on the basis of epidemiologic and clinical findings.

Differential Diagnosis

Many of the clinical entities caused by S. aureus can also be caused by
other bacterial pathogens, and consideration of the differential diagnosis is particularly important when making empirical antibiotic choices
before definitive identification of the offending pathogen. Skin lesions
caused by S. aureus may be indistinguishable from those caused by
group A streptococci, although S. aureus usually expands slowly and is
more likely to be suppurative, whereas group A streptococci are prone
to spread more rapidly and can be very aggressive. Fluctuant skin and
soft tissue lesions also can be caused by other organisms, including
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria, Nocardia, Bartonella
henselae (cat-­scratch disease), Francisella tularensis, and various fungi.
S. aureus pneumonia is often suspected in very ill-­appearing children
or after failure to improve with standard treatment that does not cover
Staphylococcus, or on the basis of chest radiographs that reveal pneumatoceles, pyopneumothorax, or lung abscess (see Fig. 227.2). Other etiologies of cavitary pneumonias include group A streptococci, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, and M. tuberculosis. In bone and joint infections, culture
is the only reliable way to differentiate S. aureus from other etiologies,
including group A streptococci and, in young children, Kingella kingae.

TREATMENT

Antibiotic therapy alone is rarely effective in individuals without source
control of the focus of infection. Loculated collections of purulent
material should be relieved by incision and drainage. Foreign bodies
(e.g., orthopedic instrumentation, ventricular shunts, central venous
catheters) should be removed, if possible. Therapy always should be
initiated with an antibiotic consistent with the local staphylococcal susceptibility patterns, severity, and anatomic site of infection. For most
patients with serious S. aureus infection, initial intravenous (IV) treatment is usually recommended, and transition to oral therapy can be
considered based on clinical response and source of infection.
Treatment of S. aureus osteomyelitis (Chapter 725), meningitis
(Chapter 643.1), and endocarditis (Chapter 486) is discussed in the
respective chapters on these diagnoses.
Initial treatment for serious infections thought to be caused by
methicillin-­susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) should include a semisynthetic penicillin (e.g., nafcillin, oxacillin) or a first-­generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefazolin). Penicillin and ampicillin are not appropriate,
because >90% of all staphylococci isolated, regardless of source, are
resistant to these agents. Addition of a β-­lactamase inhibitor (clavulanic
acid, sulbactam, tazobactam) to a penicillin-­based drug also confers
antistaphylococcal activity but has no effect on MRSA. The spectrum
of these β-­lactam/β-­lactamase inhibitor agents (which includes gram-­
negative bacteria and anaerobes) can be an advantage when broad
empirical coverage is needed, but narrower coverage should be selected
once S. aureus is identified. Antistaphylococcal penicillins and most
cephalosporins do not provide activity against MRSA.
Vancomycin is typically selected for initial treatment for penicillin-­
allergic individuals and those with suspected serious infections caused
by MRSA. Although serum level monitoring has traditionally been
used for patients receiving vancomycin, this method is no longer recommended for severe MRSA infections. Instead, calculating the ratio of
area under the curve (AUC) over 24 hours to the minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) as the primary predictor of vancomycin activity is
currently recommended. Monitoring for nephrotoxicity is also important while on vancomycin therapy. Vancomycin intermediate S. aureus
strains (VISAs), defined as having an MIC of vancomycin greater than
2 μg/mL, and, rarely, vancomycin-­resistant strains of S. aureus (VRSA,
MIC of vancomycin >16 μg/mL) have also been reported, mostly in
patients being treated with vancomycin. For critically ill patients with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 227 u Staphylococcus

1697

D

A

B

C

E

Fig. 227.2 Progressive methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) pneumonia with pneumatoceles in a previously healthy 9-­mo-­old male.

Chest radiographic findings spanning 4 days showed a perihilar right lower lobe infiltrate (A) progressing to a worsening infiltrate and large hydropneumothorax with mediastinal shift (B and C) despite appropriate therapy. Axial CT of the chest without contrast (lung windows) showed partial
loculation of hydropneumothorax, multilobar consolidation, pneumatoceles, and atelectasis (D and E). Video-­assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS)
was performed, and a chest tube was placed for 3 days. MRSA was isolated from pleural fluid. After 2 weeks of clindamycin therapy, the chest radiograph had only minor abnormalities. (Courtesy Dr. Sarah S. Long.)

suspected S. aureus infection, empirical therapy with both vancomycin and a β-­lactam (cefazolin or nafcillin) should be considered until
culture results are available. Initial treatment with IV clindamycin followed by a transition to oral clindamycin can be considered in bone,
joint, and soft tissue infection; however, not all strains of MSSA or
MRSA are susceptible to clindamycin. Inducible clindamycin resistance in isolates initially reported as susceptible must be ruled out
by D-­test or molecular methods. Clindamycin is bacteriostatic and
should not be used to treat endocarditis, persistent bacteremia, or CNS
infections caused by S. aureus. Given that the mechanism of action of
clindamycin involves inhibition or protein synthesis, many experts use
clindamycin as an adjunctive agent to treat S. aureus toxin–mediated
illnesses (e.g., TSS) to inhibit toxin production.
Although the broad-­spectrum carbapenems (meropenem, ertapenem,
and imipenem) have activity against MSSA, they have no activity against
MRSA. As a result, carbapenems are rarely used for empirical therapy of
possible staphylococcal infection and are too broad in most cases for use
in identified MSSA infections. Linezolid, daptomycin, and ceftaroline
are useful for serious S. aureus infections, providing excellent coverage
of MRSA and MSSA (Table 227.1). A number of novel antistaphylococcal antibiotics have emerged for use in resistant or refractory MSSA and
MRSA infection in adults that may be required for pediatric therapy in
select patients under the guidance of a pediatric infectious disease specialist. These include the lipoglycopeptides, including telavancin, oritavancin, and dalbavancin, which are structurally related to vancomycin
but have very long half-­lives and broad activity against gram-­positive
organisms. Rifampin or gentamicin in addition to a β-­lactam or vancomycin are recommended for prosthetic-­valve endocarditis, although
patients need to be monitored closely for adverse side effects; their use as
combined therapy for other infections is not recommended.
In many infections, after an initial period of parenteral therapy,
patients may be transitioned to oral antimicrobials to complete the
course of treatment after determination of antimicrobial susceptibilities. Oral antimicrobials can be used as initial treatment in less severe
infections (e.g., skin abscess). Cephalexin (25-­100 mg/kg/24 hr divided
3-­4 times daily PO) and cefadroxil (30 mg/kg/24 hr divided 2 times
daily PO for noninvasive infections, 50-­60 mg/kg/24 hr divided 2 times
daily PO for osteoarticular infections) are absorbed well orally (PO)
and are effective against MSSA. (Variable cefadroxil dosing regimens
have been described, ranging from 30-150 mg/kg/day divided 2-4 times
daily PO.) Amoxicillin-­clavulanate (40-­80 mg amoxicillin/kg/24 hr
divided 3 times daily PO) is also effective when a broader spectrum
of coverage is required. Clindamycin (30-­40 mg/kg/24 hr divided 3-­4
times daily PO) is highly absorbed from the intestinal tract and is frequently used for empirical coverage when both MRSA and MSSA are
possible and for susceptible MRSA infections or for MSSA in penicillin/
cephalosporin-­allergic patients. Compliance with oral clindamycin may
be limited in small children because of poor palatability of liquid formulations. Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) may be an
effective oral antibiotic for many strains of both MSSA and MRSA for

SSTI. Oral linezolid is an option for severe MRSA infections that have
improved but require ongoing therapy when more common options
are not tolerated or are ineffective because of resistance patterns. The
duration of linezolid therapy is typically limited to 2-­3 weeks given toxicities such as myelosuppression and peripheral and optic neuropathy
with prolonged courses. Despite in vitro susceptibility of S. aureus to
ciprofloxacin and other quinolone antibiotics, these agents should not
routinely be used in serious staphylococcal infections, because their use
is associated with rapid development of resistance.
The duration of antibiotic therapy depends on the anatomic site
and severity of infection and response, as determined by the clinical
response and, in some cases, radiologic and laboratory findings.

PROGNOSIS

Untreated S. aureus septicemia is associated with a high fatality rate,
which has been reduced significantly by appropriate antibiotic treatment. S. aureus pneumonia can be fatal at any age but is more likely to
be associated with high morbidity and mortality in young infants or in
patients whose therapy has been delayed. Prognosis also may be influenced by numerous host factors, including nutrition, immunologic
competence, and the presence or absence of other debilitating diseases.

PREVENTION

S. aureus is transmitted primarily by direct contact. Strict attention to
hand hygiene is the most effective measure for preventing the spread of
staphylococci between individuals (see Chapter 216). Hospital surveillance programs to identify nosocomial acquisition of S. aureus colonization and/or infection are common, particularly in neonatal intensive
care units. Clusters of nosocomial cases may be defined by molecular
typing, and if associated with a singular molecular strain, investigation to identify any potential point sources (e.g., a colonized healthcare
worker or contaminated environmental reservoir) should occur.
As S. aureus colonization often predisposes to infection, a number
of protocols are aimed at decolonization, which is the application of
topical antimicrobials to the skin and/or nares to eradicate S. aureus
colonization. In healthcare settings, decolonization is often performed
among vulnerable populations to prevent nosocomial infections. In
community settings, decolonization is often recommended for patients
with recurrent S. aureus skin infections. Decolonization regimens
often involve combinations of decontaminating baths (hypochlorite, 1
tsp common bleach solution per gallon of water, or chlorhexidine 4%
soap), nasal mupirocin twice daily for at least 5 days, and enhanced
hygiene measures, including frequent laundering of household linens
and targeted decontamination of frequently touched household surfaces. Although success is not universal, recurrent infections may be
reduced, particularly when eradication is done in both the patient and
household contacts, especially those with history of SSTI. Most cases
of mild, recurrent disease will resolve in time without these measures.
Because of the potential severity of infections with S. aureus and
concerns about emerging resistance, much work has focused on

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1698 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 227.1  Parenteral Antimicrobial Agent(s) for Treatment of Serious Staphylococcus aureus Infections
SUSCEPTIBILITY

ANTIMICROBIALS

COMMENTS

I. INITIAL EMPIRICAL THERAPY (ORGANISM OF UNKNOWN SUSCEPTIBILITY)
Drugs of choice
Vancomycin + nafcillin/oxacillin or
cefazolin

Vancomycin

For non–life-­threatening infection without signs of severe
sepsis (e.g., skin infection, cellulitis, osteomyelitis,
pyarthrosis) when prevalence of MRSA infection in the
community is >20% of all S. aureus infections

Cefazolin or nafcillin/oxacillin

For non–life-­threatening infection when low likelihood of
MRSA is suspected

Clindamycin

For non–life-­threatening infection without signs of severe
sepsis when rates of MRSA infection in the community
is substantial (>20% of all S. aureus infections) and
prevalence of clindamycin resistance is low

II. METHICILLIN-­SUSCEPTIBLE, PENICILLIN-­RESISTANT S. AUREUS
Drugs of choice
Cefazolin or oxacillin/nafcillin
Alternatives (depending on
susceptibility results)

May change to oral therapy after infection is controlled in
low-­risk situations

Clindamycin

Only for patients with a serious penicillin allergy and
clindamycin-­susceptible strain

Vancomycin

Only for penicillin-­and cephalosporin-­allergic patients

Ampicillin + sulbactam

When broader coverage, including gram-­negative
organisms and/or anaerobes is required

III. METHICILLIN-­RESISTANT S. AUREUS (MRSA)
Drugs of choice
Vancomycin
(some combine with a β-­lactam)
(some may begin with ceftaroline)
Alternatives: susceptibility testing results
available before alternative drugs are
used

For life-­threatening infections (e.g., septicemia,
endocarditis, CNS infection); linezolid, daptomycin,
or ceftaroline could be substituted depending on the
clinical scenario and site of infection

Linezolid, daptomycin, or ceftaroline* could be
substituted or added depending on the clinical
scenario, site of infection, or persistent bacteremia

Clindamycin (if susceptible)
Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole
Doxycycline

*Linezolid, daptomycin, and ceftaroline are agents with activity and efficacy against multidrug-­resistant, gram-­positive organisms, including S. aureus. Because experience with these
agents in children is limited, consultation with an infectious diseases specialist should be considered before use. Daptomycin is ineffective for treatment of pneumonia, as it is inactivated by pulmonary surfactant.

developing a staphylococcal vaccine for use in high-­risk patients, but
to date, clinical trials have been disappointing. Because S. aureus is frequently a co-­infection in severe influenza infections, an indirect preventive impact against staphylococcal pneumonia and tracheitis may
be achieved through annual influenza vaccination.
To prevent S. aureus food poisoning, cooked foods should be eaten
immediately or refrigerated within 2 hours of preparation to prevent
multiplication of S. aureus that may have contaminated the food (see
Chapter 387). Treatment is supportive.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

227.2 Toxic Shock Syndrome
Carol M. Kao, Patrick J. Reich, and Stephanie A. Fritz
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS) is an acute and potentially severe illness characterized by fever, hypotension, diffuse erythroderma with
subsequent desquamation on the hands and feet, and multisystem
involvement.

ETIOLOGY

TSS is caused by TSST-­1–producing and some enterotoxin-­producing
strains of S. aureus, which may colonize the skin or mucous membranes or cause focal sites of staphylococcal infection.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

TSS continues to occur in the United States in men, women, and children, with the highest rates in menstruating women 15-­25 years of age.

Nonmenstrual TSS is associated with S. aureus–infected nasal packing and wounds, sinusitis, tracheitis, pneumonia, empyema, abscesses,
burns, osteomyelitis, and primary bacteremia. The majority of strains of
S. aureus associated with TSS are methicillin susceptible. Most strains
of USA300, the predominant clone of community-­associated MRSA in
the United States, do not possess the genes expressing the most common TSS superantigens; however, MRSA-­associated TSS can occur.

PATHOGENESIS

The primary toxin associated with TSS is TSST-­1, although a significant
proportion of nonmenstrual TSS is caused by one or more staphylococcal enterotoxins. These toxins act as superantigens, which trigger cytokine release, causing massive loss of fluid from the intravascular space
and end-­organ cellular injury. Epidemiologic and in vitro studies suggest
that these toxins are selectively produced in a clinical environment consisting of a neutral pH, a high Pco2, and an aerobic Po2, which are the
conditions found in abscesses and the vagina with tampon use during
menstruation. The risk factors for symptomatic disease include a nonimmune host who is colonized with a toxin-­producing organism that is
exposed to focal growth conditions (menstruation plus tampon use or
abscess) that in turn induce toxin production. Some hosts may have a
varied cytokine response to TSST-­1 exposure, helping to explain a spectrum of severity of TSS that may include staphylococcal scarlet fever. The
overall mortality rate of treated patients is 3–5% when treated early.
Approximately 90% of adults have antibody to TSST-­1 without a
history of clinical TSS, suggesting that most individuals are colonized
at some point with a toxin-­producing organism at a site (e.g., anterior nares) where low-­grade or inactive toxin exposure results in an
immune response without disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 227 u Staphylococcus
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The diagnosis of TSS is based on clinical manifestations (Table 227.2).
Milder cases and those with incomplete clinical characteristics may
be common, particularly if the nidus of infection is addressed quickly
(e.g., removal of a tampon or nasal packing). The onset of classic TSS
is abrupt, with high fever, vomiting, and diarrhea, and is accompanied
by sore throat, headache, and myalgias. A diffuse erythematous rash
(sunburn-­like or scarlatiniform) appears within 24 hours and may be
associated with hyperemia of pharyngeal, conjunctival, and vaginal
mucous membranes. A strawberry tongue is common. Symptoms may
include alterations in the level of consciousness, oliguria, and hypotension, which in severe cases may progress to shock and disseminated
intravascular coagulation. Complications, including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), myocardial dysfunction, and renal
failure, are commensurate with the degree of shock. Recovery occurs
within 7-­10 days and is associated with desquamation, particularly of
the palms and soles; hair and nail loss have also been observed after
1-­2 months. Immunity to the toxins is slow to develop, so recurrences
can occur, especially if there is inadequate antibiotic treatment and/
or recurrent tampon use. Many cases of apparent scarlet fever without
shock may be caused by TSST-­1–producing S. aureus strains.

DIAGNOSIS

There is no specific laboratory test, and diagnosis depends on meeting
certain clinical and laboratory criteria in the absence of an alternative
diagnosis (see Fig. 227.2). Appropriate tests reveal involvement of multiple
organ systems, including the hepatic, renal, muscular, gastrointestinal,
Table 227.2  Toxic Shock Syndrome (Other Than
Streptococcal) (TSS) 2011 Case Definition
CLINICAL CRITERIA
1.	Fever: temperature ≥102.0°F (≥38.9°C)
2.	Rash: diffuse macular erythroderma
3.	Desquamation: 1-2 weeks after onset of rash
4.	Hypotension: systolic blood pressure ≤90 mm Hg for adults or less
than fifth percentile by age for children age less than 16 years
5.	Multisystem involvement (three or more of the following organ
systems):
• Gastrointestinal: vomiting or diarrhea at onset of illness
• Muscular: severe myalgia or creatine phosphokinase level at
least twice the upper limit of normal
• Mucous membrane: vaginal, oropharyngeal, or conjunctival
hyperemia
• Renal: blood urea nitrogen or creatinine at least twice the
upper limit of normal for laboratory or urinary sediment with
pyuria (≥5 leukocytes per high-power field) in the absence of
urinary tract infection
• Hepatic: total bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase enzyme, or
aspartate aminotransferase enzyme levels at least twice the
upper limit of normal for laboratory
• Hematologic: platelets less than 100,000/mm3
• Central nervous system: disorientation or alterations in
consciousness without focal neurologic signs when fever and
hypotension are absent
LABORATORY CRITERIA FOR DIAGNOSIS
Negative results on the following tests, if obtained:
• Blood or cerebrospinal fluid cultures (blood culture may be
positive for Staphylococcus aureus)
• Negative serologies for Rocky Mountain spotted fever,
leptospirosis, or measles
CASE CLASSIFICATION
Probable
A case that meets the laboratory criteria and in which four of the five
clinical criteria described above are present
Confirmed
A case that meets the laboratory criteria and in which all five
of the clinical criteria described above are present, including
desquamation, unless the patient dies before desquamation occurs
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: https://ndc.services.cdc.gov/c
ase-definitions/toxic-shock-syndrome-2011/

1699

cardiopulmonary, and central nervous systems. Bacterial cultures of the
associated focus (vagina, abscess) before administration of antibiotics usually yield S. aureus, although this is not a required element of the definition.

Differential Diagnosis

Group A streptococci can cause a similar TSS-­like illness, termed
streptococcal TSS (see Chapter 229), which is often associated with
severe streptococcal sepsis or a focal streptococcal infection such as
cellulitis, necrotizing fasciitis, or pneumonia.
Kawasaki disease closely resembles TSS clinically but is usually not
as severe or rapidly progressive. Both conditions are associated with
fever unresponsive to antibiotics, hyperemia of mucous membranes,
and an erythematous rash with subsequent desquamation. However,
many of the clinical features of TSS are rare in Kawasaki disease, including diffuse myalgia, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, azotemia,
hypotension, ARDS, and shock (see Chapter 208). Kawasaki disease
typically occurs in children <5 years old. Measles, scarlet fever, Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, leptospirosis, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and
bacterial sepsis must also be considered in the differential diagnosis.

TREATMENT

Identification and drainage/removal of any focal source of infection
(e.g., abscess, tampon, nasal packing), when present, is essential. Recommended antibiotic therapy for TSS should include the combination of a β-­lactamase–resistant antistaphylococcal antibiotic (nafcillin,
oxacillin, or cefazolin) plus clindamycin to reduce toxin production.
Although TSS is most often caused by MSSA, clinicians should consider use of vancomycin in addition to the β-­lactam in areas where
MRSA rates are very high, when hospital-­acquired MRSA is suspected,
and when the clinical picture overlaps with staphylococcal sepsis.
TSS often requires intensive supportive care, including aggressive
fluid replacement to prevent or treat hypotension, renal failure, and
cardiovascular collapse. Inotropic agents may be needed to treat shock;
intravenous immunoglobulin may be helpful in severe cases.

PREVENTION

The risk for acquiring menstrual TSS is low (1-­2 cases/100,000 menstruating women). Changing tampons at least every 8 hours is recommended. If a fever, rash, or dizziness develops during menstruation,
any tampon should be removed immediately and medical attention
sought. Avoidance of tampon use with subsequent menstrual cycles
may also reduce the risk for recurrent menstrual TSS.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

227.3 Coagulase-­Negative Staphylococci
Carol M. Kao, Patrick J. Reich, and Stephanie A. Fritz
At present, there are approximately 50 identified species of coagulase-­
negative staphylococci (CoNS) affecting or colonizing humans.
Staphylococcus epidermidis and, less often, Staphylococcus hominis, S.
haemolyticus, and others are widely distributed on the skin and are significant causes of nosocomial infection, particularly in the bloodstream
of neonatal and immunocompromised hosts, in surgical patients, and in
those with indwelling catheters and other medical devices. Staphylococcus saprophyticus is a common cause of urinary tract infection (UTI).
Staphylococcus lugdunensis and Staphylococcus schleiferi can cause severe
infection similar to S. aureus and have been increasingly recognized as
important pathogens since improved species identification with matrix-­
assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight (MALDI-­TOF) mass
spectrometry in clinical microbiology laboratories.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

In the United States, CoNS may be the most common cause of hospital-­
acquired infection, particularly in neonatal intensive care units
(NICUs). In many instances, growth of CoNS from clinical specimens
represents contamination from skin rather than a cause of true disease,
posing significant challenges for clinicians and infection prevention
specialists. CoNS are normal inhabitants of the human skin, throat,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1700 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
mouth, vagina, and urethra. S. epidermidis is the most common and
persistent species, representing 65–90% of staphylococci present on the
skin and mucous membranes. Colonization, sometimes with strains
acquired during hospitalization, precedes infection. Alternatively,
direct inoculation during surgery may initiate infection of CSF shunts,
prosthetic valves, or indwelling vascular lines.

PATHOGENESIS

CoNS produce an exopolysaccharide protective biofilm, particularly
on indwelling medical devices, that surrounds the organism and may
enhance adhesion to foreign surfaces, resist phagocytosis, and impair
penetration of antibiotics. However, the low virulence of CoNS usually requires the presence of another factor for development of clinical
disease. Of these, the most significant is the presence of an indwelling
catheter or other medical device, including central venous catheters
(CVCs), hemodialysis shunts and grafts, CSF shunts (meningitis), peritoneal dialysis catheters (peritonitis), pacemaker wires and electrodes
(local infection), prosthetic cardiac valves (endocarditis), and prosthetic joints (septic arthritis). Other risk factors for the development of
infection include immature or compromised immunity and significant
exposure to antibiotics.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Bacteremia

CoNS, specifically S. epidermidis, are the most common cause of
nosocomial bacteremia, usually in association with central vascular
catheters. In neonates, CoNS bacteremia, with or without a CVC, can
manifest as localized disease in the CNS, lungs, skin, heart, bones, and
joints, or even as sepsis or necrotizing enterocolitis. Persistent positive blood cultures despite adequate antimicrobial therapy is common,
particularly when catheters are not removed. In older children with
intact immune systems, CoNS bacteremia is indolent and is not usually
associated with overwhelming septic shock.

Endocarditis

Infection of native heart valves or the right atrial wall may occur secondary to an infected thrombosis at the end of a central line. S. epidermidis and other CoNS may rarely produce native valve subacute
endocarditis in previously healthy hosts without a CVC. CoNS is a
common cause of prosthetic valve endocarditis, presumably a result of
inoculation at surgery. Infection of the valve sewing ring, with abscess
formation and dissection, produces valve dysfunction or obstruction,
dehiscence, or arrhythmias (see Chapter 486). S. lugdunensis has been
increasingly associated with severe endocardial infection in adults but
remains an uncommon cause in children.

Central Venous Catheter Infection

DIAGNOSIS

Because S. epidermidis is a common skin inhabitant and may contaminate poorly collected blood cultures, differentiating bacteremia from contamination is often difficult. True bacteremia should be suspected if blood
cultures grow rapidly (within 15 hours of incubation in a continuously
monitored blood culture system), more than one blood culture is positive with the same CoNS strain, cultures from both the blood and another
sterile site are positive, and clinical and laboratory signs and symptoms
compatible with CoNS sepsis are present and subsequently resolve with
appropriate therapy. Growth of CoNS from a blood culture in a neonate
or patient with an intravascular catheter should be considered evidence of
true bacteremia until careful review of the foregoing criteria and evaluation of the patient. Before initiating presumptive antimicrobial therapy in
such patients, it is always prudent to draw two separate blood cultures to
facilitate subsequent interpretation if CoNS is grown. Molecular and mass
spectrometry assays similar to those used for identification of S. aureus
allow for rapid identification of CoNS in positive blood cultures.

TREATMENT

Because most CoNS strains are resistant to methicillin (with the exception of S. lugdunensis and S. saprophyticus, which are generally methicillin susceptible), vancomycin is the initial drug of choice. Resistance to
vancomycin has rarely been reported with S. haemolyticus. For patients
with indwelling medical devices, the addition of rifampin to vancomycin may increase antimicrobial efficacy because of good penetration of
this antibiotic into biofilms. Other antibiotics with good in vitro activity
against CoNS may be considered in certain circumstances. These include
linezolid, ceftaroline, and daptomycin. Removal of an infected catheter
is ideal. However, this is not always possible because of the therapeutic
requirements of the underlying disease (e.g., nutrition for short bowel
syndrome, chemotherapy for malignancy). A trial of IV vancomycin
(potentially with the addition of rifampin) with the retained catheter
can be attempted to preserve the use of the central line, as long as systemic manifestations of infection are not severe. Antibiotic therapy given
through an infected CVC and the use of antibiotic locks in conjunction
with systemic therapy may increase the likelihood of curing CoNS line
sepsis without line removal. Prosthetic heart valves and CSF shunts usually need to be removed to adequately treat the infection.
Peritonitis caused by S. epidermidis in patients on continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis is an infection that may be treated with IV or
intraperitoneal antibiotics without removing the dialysis catheter. If
the organism is resistant to methicillin, vancomycin adjusted for renal
function is appropriate therapy. Unlike most CoNS, S. saprophyticus is
usually methicillin susceptible, and UTIs can typically be treated with
a first-­generation cephalosporin (cephalexin), amoxicillin–clavulanic
acid, or TMP-­SMX.

CVCs become infected through the exit site and subcutaneous tunnel,
which provide a direct path to the bloodstream. S. epidermidis is the most
frequent pathogen, in part because of its high rate of cutaneous colonization. Line sepsis is usually manifested as fever and leukocytosis; tenderness
and erythema may be present at the exit site or along the subcutaneous
tunnel. Catheter thrombosis may complicate line sepsis. Disease severity
with CoNS is often less severe than other etiologies of line infection.

PROGNOSIS

Cerebrospinal Fluid Shunts

PREVENTION

CoNS, introduced at surgery, is the most common pathogen associated
with CSF shunt meningitis. Most infections (70–80%) occur within 2
months of the operation and manifest as signs of meningeal irritation,
fever, increased intracranial pressure (headache, vomiting), or peritonitis
from the intraabdominal position of the distal end of the shunt tubing.

Urinary Tract Infection

S. saprophyticus is a common cause of primary UTIs in sexually active
females. Manifestations are similar to those characteristics of UTI
caused by Escherichia coli (see Chapter 575). CoNS also cause asymptomatic UTI in hospitalized patients with urinary catheters and after
urinary tract surgery or transplantation.

Most episodes of CoNS bacteremia respond successfully to antibiotics and removal of any foreign material that is present. Poor prognosis
is associated with malignancy, neutropenia, and infected prosthetic or
native heart valves. CoNS infections increase the morbidity, duration
of hospitalization, and mortality among patients with underlying complicated illnesses.
Iatrogenic morbidity and resource use caused by contaminated blood
cultures can be reduced by following recommended strategies to prevent CVC-­associated bloodstream infections during catheter insertion and maintenance. These strategies include basic techniques such
as central line care “bundles,” which incorporate good hand hygiene,
decontamination of hubs and ports before access, minimizing frequency of access, and frequent replacement of external connections
and infusion materials. Antibiotic-­impregnated catheters can be considered when other preventive measures have failed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 228 u Streptococcus pneumoniae (Pneumococcus)

Chapter 228

Streptococcus
pneumoniae
(Pneumococcus)
Kacy A. Ramirez and Timothy R. Peters
Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) is an important pathogen
that results in more than 1 million children deaths each year. Childhood invasive pneumococcal disease is prevalent and typically severe,
causes numerous clinical syndromes, and is a major cause of life-­
threatening pneumonia, bacteremia, endocarditis, and meningitis; it
may also cause sinusitis, otitis media, and bone and joint infections.
Antimicrobial resistance in pneumococcus is a major public health
problem, with 15–30% of isolates worldwide classified as multidrug
resistant (MDR; resistant to at least three classes of antibiotics). Pneumococcal polysaccharide-­protein conjugate vaccines (PCVs) developed for infants have been highly successful in the control of disease
caused by virulent vaccine-­specific serotypes. Epidemiologic surveillance reveals a dynamic pneumococcal ecology with emergence of
highly virulent MDR serotypes. Ongoing vaccine development and
distribution efforts remain the best approach to control this threat to
childhood health.

ETIOLOGY

S. pneumoniae is a gram-­
positive, lancet-­
shaped, polysaccharide
encapsulated diplococcus, occurring occasionally as individual cocci
or in chains; >90 serotypes have been identified by type-­specific capsular polysaccharides. Antisera to some pneumococcal polysaccharides cross-­react with other pneumococcal types, defining serogroups
(e.g., 6A and 6B). Encapsulated strains cause most serious disease in
humans. Capsular polysaccharides impede phagocytosis. Virulence is
related in part to capsule size, but pneumococcal types with capsules of
the same size can vary widely in virulence.
On solid media, S. pneumoniae forms unpigmented, umbilicated
colonies surrounded by a zone of incomplete (α) hemolysis. S. pneumoniae is bile soluble (i.e., 10% deoxycholate) and optochin sensitive.
S. pneumoniae is closely related to the viridans groups of Streptococcus mitis, which typically overlap phenotypically with pneumococci.
The conventional laboratory definition of pneumococci continues to
rely on bile and optochin sensitivity, although considerable confusion occurs in distinguishing pneumococci and other α-­hemolytic
streptococci. Pneumococcal capsules can be microscopically visualized and typed by exposing organisms to type-­specific antisera that
combine with their unique capsular polysaccharide, rendering the
capsule refractile (Quellung reaction). Specific antibodies to capsular
polysaccharides confer protection on the host, promoting opsonization and phagocytosis. Additionally, CD4+ T cells have a direct role
in antibody-­independent immunity to pneumococcal nasopharyngeal
colonization. Conjugated PCVs promote T-­cell immunity and protect
against pneumococcal colonization, in contrast to the pneumococcal
polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) that is used in adults and certain
high-­risk pediatric populations and that does not affect nasopharyngeal colonization.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Most healthy individuals carry (colonized) various S. pneumoniae
serotypes in their upper respiratory tract; >90% of children between 6
months and 5 years of age harbor S. pneumoniae in the nasopharynx
at some time. A single serotype usually is carried by a given individual for an extended period (45 days to 6 months). Carriage does not
consistently induce local or systemic immunity sufficient to prevent

1701

later reacquisition of the same serotype. Rates of pneumococcal carriage peak during the first and second year of life and decline gradually thereafter. Carriage rates are highest in institutional settings and
during the winter and are lowest in summer. Nasopharyngeal carriage
of pneumococci is common among young children attending out-­of-­
home care, with rates of 21–59% in point prevalence studies.
Before the introduction of heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7) in 2000, serotypes 4, 6B, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F, and 23F caused
most invasive childhood pneumococcal infections in the United States.
The introduction of PCVs resulted in a marked decrease in invasive
pneumococcal infections (IPIs) in children. By 2005, however, IPIs
began to increase slightly because of an increase in non-­PCV7 serotypes, particularly serotype 19A. Serotype replacement can result
from expansion of existing nonvaccine serotypes and from vaccine-­
type pneumococci acquiring the polysaccharide capsule of a nonvaccine serotype (serotype switching). Since the introduction of PCV13
in 2010 in the United States, there has been a decline in IPIs caused
by new vaccine serotypes, including 19A. Nonetheless, 19A remains
an important cause of meningitis. Indirect protection of unvaccinated
persons has occurred since PCV introduction, and this herd protection is likely a result of decreases in nasopharyngeal carriage of virulent
pneumococcal vaccine serotypes.
S. pneumoniae is the most frequent cause of bacteremia, bacterial
pneumonia, and bacterial meningitis and among the most common
causes of otitis media and sinusitis in children. The decreased ability
in children <2 years old to produce antibody against the T-­cell–independent polysaccharide antigens and the high prevalence of colonization may explain an increased susceptibility to pneumococcal infection
and the decreased effectiveness of polysaccharide vaccines. Children at
increased risk of pneumococcal infections include those with sickle cell
disease, asplenia, deficiencies in humoral (B-­cell) immunity, deficiencies in complement-­mediated immunity, toll like receptor deficiencies, HIV infection, certain malignancies (e.g., leukemia, lymphoma),
chronic heart, lung, or renal disease (particularly nephrotic syndrome),
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak, and cochlear implants. Table 228.1 lists
other high-­risk groups. Some American Indian, Alaska Native, and
African American children may also be at increased risk. Children <5
years old in out-­of-­home daycare are at increased risk (approximately
twofold higher) of experiencing IPIs than other children. Males are
more frequently affected than females. Because immunocompetent
vaccinated children have had fewer episodes of IPI, the proportion of
infected children with immunologic risk factors has increased (estimated at 20%).
Pneumococcal disease usually occurs sporadically but can be spread
from person to person by respiratory droplet transmission. S. pneumoniae is an important cause of secondary bacterial pneumonia in
patients with influenza. During influenza epidemics and pandemics,
most deaths result from bacterial pneumonia, and pneumococcus is
the predominant bacterial pathogen isolated in this setting. Pneumococcal co-­pathogenicity may be important in disease caused by other
respiratory viruses as well.

PATHOGENESIS

Invasion of the host is affected by a number of factors. Nonspecific
defense mechanisms, including the presence of other bacteria in the
nasopharynx, may limit multiplication of pneumococci. Aspiration of
secretions containing pneumococci is hindered by the epiglottic reflex
and by respiratory epithelial cell cilia, which move infected mucus
toward the pharynx. Similarly, normal ciliary flow of fluid from the
middle ear through the eustachian tube and sinuses to the nasopharynx usually prevents infection with nasopharyngeal flora, including
pneumococci. Interference with these normal clearance mechanisms
by allergy, viral infection, or irritants (e.g., smoke) may allow colonization and subsequent infection with these organisms in otherwise normally sterile sites.
Virulent pneumococci are intrinsically resistant to phagocytosis by
alveolar macrophages. Pneumococcal disease frequently is facilitated
by viral respiratory tract infection, which may produce mucosal injury,
diminish epithelial cell ciliary activity, and depress the function of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1702 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 228.1  Children at Increased Risk of Invasive
Pneumococcal Infection
RISK GROUP

CONDITION

Immunocompetent children

Chronic heart disease*
Chronic lung disease†
Chronic kidney disease (excluding
dialysis and nephrotic syndrome)
Chronic liver disease
Diabetes mellitus
Cerebrospinal fluid leaks
Cochlear implant

Children with
immunocompromising
conditions

HIV infection
Maintenance dialysis or nephrotic
syndrome
Congenital or acquired asplenia or
splenic dysfunction
Congenital or acquired
immunodeficiencies
Sickle cell disease and other
hemoglobinopathies
Congenital immunodeficiency‡
Diseases and conditions treated
with immunosuppressive drugs
or radiation therapy, including
malignant neoplasm, leukemia,
lymphoma, and Hodgkin disease,
or solid organ transplantation

*Particularly cyanotic congenital heart disease and cardiac failure.
†Including moderate persistent or severe persistent asthma.
‡Includes humoral or T lymphocyte deficiency; complement deficiencies, particularly
C1, C2, C3 and C4 deficiency; and phagocytic disorders (excluding chronic
granulomatous disease).
Adapted from Kobayashi M, Farrar JI, Gierke R, et al. Use of 15-­valent pneumococcal
conjugate vaccine among U.S. children: updated recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices -­-­United States, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep. 2022;71(4):1174-­1181; and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ACIP
updates: Recommendations for use of 20-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in
children—United States, 2023. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023;72(39):1072.

alveolar macrophages and neutrophils. Phagocytosis may be impeded
by respiratory secretions and alveolar exudate. In the lungs and other
tissues, the spread of infection is facilitated by the antiphagocytic properties of the pneumococcal capsule. Surface fluids of the respiratory
tract contain only small amounts of immunoglobulin G (IgG) and are
deficient in complement. During inflammation, there is limited influx
of IgG, complement, and neutrophils. Phagocytosis of bacteria by
neutrophils may occur, but normal human serum may not opsonize
pneumococci and facilitate phagocytosis by alveolar macrophages. In
tissues, pneumococci multiply and spread through the lymphatics or
bloodstream or, less often, by direct extension from a local site of infection (e.g., sinuses). In bacteremia the severity of disease is related to the
number of organisms in the bloodstream and to the integrity of specific
host defenses. A poor prognosis correlates with very large numbers of
pneumococci and high concentrations of capsular polysaccharide in
the blood and CSF.
Invasive pneumococcal disease is 30-­to 100-­fold more prevalent in
children with sickle cell disease and other hemoglobinopathies and in
children with congenital or surgical asplenia than in the general population. This risk is greatest in infants <2 years old, the age when antibody production to most serotypes is poor. The increased frequency of
pneumococcal disease in asplenic persons is related to both deficient
opsonization of pneumococci and absence of clearance by the spleen
of circulating bacteria. Children with sickle cell disease also have deficits in the antibody-­independent properdin (alternative) pathway of
complement activation in addition to functional asplenia. Both complement pathways contribute to antibody-­independent and antibody-­
dependent opsonophagocytosis of pneumococci. With advancing age
(e.g., >5 years), children with sickle cell disease produce anticapsular

A

B

Fig. 228.1 Bacterial “round” pneumonia caused by Streptococcus
pneumoniae in 2-­yr-­old child with a 2-­day history of cough, high fever,
leukocytosis, and back pain.
antibody, augmenting antibody-­dependent opsonophagocytosis and
greatly reducing, but not eliminating, the risk of severe pneumococcal
disease. Deficiency of many of the complement components (e.g., C2
and C3) is associated with recurrent pyogenic infection, including S.
pneumoniae infection. The efficacy of phagocytosis also is diminished
in patients with B-­and T-­cell immunodeficiency syndromes (e.g.,
agammaglobulinemia, severe combined immunodeficiency) or loss
of immunoglobulin (e.g., nephrotic syndrome) and is largely caused
by a deficiency of opsonic anticapsular antibody. These observations
suggest that opsonization of pneumococci depends on the alternative
complement pathway in antibody-­deficient persons and that recovery
from pneumococcal disease depends on the development of anticapsular antibodies that act as opsonins, enhancing phagocytosis and killing
of pneumococci. Children with HIV infection also have high rates of
IPI similar to or greater than rates in children with sickle cell disease,
although rates of invasive pneumococcal disease decreased after the
introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The signs and symptoms of pneumococcal infection are related to the
anatomic site of disease. Common clinical syndromes include otitis media (see Chapter 680), sinusitis (see Chapter 429), pneumonia
(Fig. 228.1) (see Chapter 449), and sepsis (see Chapter 85). Before routine use of PCVs, pneumococci caused >80% of bacteremia episodes
in infants 3-­36 months old with fever without an identifiable source
(i.e., occult bacteremia). Bacteremia may be followed by meningitis
(see Chapter 643), osteomyelitis (see Chapter 725), suppurative (septic) arthritis (see Chapter 726), endocarditis (see Chapter 486), and,
rarely, brain abscess (see Chapter 644). Primary peritonitis (see Chapter 419.1) may occur in children with peritoneal effusions caused by
nephrotic syndrome and other ascites-­producing conditions. Local
complications of infection may occur, causing empyema, pericarditis, mastoiditis, epidural abscess, periorbital cellulitis, or meningitis.
Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome (see Chapter 533.4) and disseminated
intravascular coagulation also occur as rare complications of pneumococcal infections. Epidemic conjunctivitis caused by nonencapsulated
or encapsulated pneumococci occurs as well.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of pneumococcal infection is established by recovery of
S. pneumoniae from the site of infection or the blood/sterile body fluid.
Although pneumococci may be found in the nose or throat of patients
with otitis media, pneumonia, septicemia, or meningitis, cultures of
these locations are generally not helpful for diagnosis, because they are
not indicative of causation. Blood cultures should be obtained in children with pneumonia, meningitis, endocarditis, arthritis, osteomyelitis, peritonitis, pericarditis, or gangrenous skin lesions. Because of the
implementation of universal vaccination with PCVs, there has been a
substantial decrease in the incidence of occult bacteremia, but blood

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 228 u Streptococcus pneumoniae (Pneumococcus)
cultures should still be considered in febrile patients with clinical toxicity or significant leukocytosis. Leukocytosis often is pronounced, with
total white blood cell (WBC) counts frequently >15,000/μL. In severe
cases of pneumococcal disease, WBC count may be low.
Pneumococci can be identified in body fluids as gram-­positive,
lancet-­shaped diplococci. Early in the course of pneumococcal meningitis, many bacteria may be seen in relatively acellular CSF. With
methods of continuously monitored blood culture systems, the average
time to isolation of pneumococcal organisms is 14-­15 hours. Multiplex real-­time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays are specific and
more sensitive than culture of CSF and blood, particularly in patients
who have recently received antimicrobial therapy. Antigen detection of
C-­polysaccharide in urine may be useful in adults with pneumococcal pneumonia but lacks specificity in children who may have positive
results with asymptomatic colonization. Antigen immunochromatographic or PCR assays on pleural fluid are not routinely used but could
be considered.

TREATMENT

Antimicrobial resistance among S. pneumoniae continues to be a
serious healthcare concern, especially for the widely used β-­lactams,
macrolides, and fluoroquinolones. Serotypes 6A, 6B, 9V, 14, 19A, 19F,
and 23F are the most common serotypes associated with resistance
to penicillin. Consequently, the introduction of the 7-­and 13-­valent
pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (PCV7 and PCV13) has altered
antimicrobial resistance patterns. By 2014, only ∼5% of pneumococcal strains were penicillin nonsusceptible. However, pneumococcal
serotypes 11A, 35F, and 35B have contributed to steady erosion of
pneumococcal antibiotic susceptibility to penicillin, third-­generation
cephalosporins, fluoroquinolones, and carbapenems.
Resistance in pneumococci to penicillin and cephalosporins is defined
by the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and clinical syndrome. Pneumococci are considered susceptible, intermediate, or resistant to various antibacterial agents based on specific MIC breakpoints.
For patients with pneumococcal meningitis, penicillin-­
susceptible
strains have MICs ≤0.06 μg/mL, and penicillin-­resistant strains have
MICs ≥0.12 μg/mL. For patients with nonmeningeal pneumococcal
infections, breakpoints are higher; in particular, penicillin-­susceptible
strains have MICs ≤2 μg/mL, and penicillin-­resistant strains have MICs
≥8 μg/mL. For patients with meningitis, ceftriaxone-­susceptible strains
have MICs ≤0.5 μg/mL, and resistant strains have MICs ≥2.0 μg/mL.
For patients with nonmeningeal pneumococcal disease, breakpoints
are higher, and ceftriaxone-­susceptible strains have MICs ≤1 μg/mL,
and resistant strains have MICs ≥4 μg/mL. In cases when pneumococcus is resistant to erythromycin but sensitive to clindamycin, a D-­test
should be performed to determine whether clindamycin resistance can
be induced; if the D-­test is positive, clindamycin should not be used to
complete treatment of the patient. More than 30% of pneumococcal
isolates are resistant to trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX);
levofloxacin resistance is low but has also been reported. All isolates
from children with severe infections should be tested for antibiotic susceptibility, given widespread pneumococcal MDR strains. Resistance
to vancomycin has not been seen at this time, but vancomycin-­tolerant
pneumococci that are killed at a slower rate have been reported, and
these tolerant pneumococci may be associated with a worse clinical outcome. Linezolid is an oxazolidinone antibacterial with activity
against MDR gram-­positive organisms, including pneumococcus, and
has been used in the treatment of MDR pneumococcal pneumonia,
meningitis, and severe otitis media. Despite early favorable studies, use
of this drug is limited by myelosuppression and high cost, and linezolid
resistance in pneumococcus is reported.
Children ≥1 month old with suspected pneumococcal meningitis
should be treated with combination therapy using vancomycin (60
mg/kg/24 hr divided every 6-8 hr IV) and high-­dose ceftriaxone (100
mg/kg/24 hr divided every 12 hr IV). Proven pneumococcal meningitis
can be treated with penicillin alone or ceftriaxone alone if the isolate is
penicillin susceptible. If the organism is nonsusceptible (i.e., intermediate or full resistance) to penicillin but susceptible to ceftriaxone, pneumococcal meningitis can be treated with ceftriaxone alone. However, if

1703

the organism is nonsusceptible to penicillin and to ceftriaxone, pneumococcal meningitis should be treated with combination vancomycin
plus ceftriaxone, not with vancomycin alone, and consideration should
be given to the addition of rifampin. Some experts recommend use
of corticosteroids in pneumococcal meningitis early in the course of
disease, but data demonstrating clear benefit in children are lacking.
The 2011 Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines recommend amoxicillin as first-­
line therapy for previously healthy,
appropriately immunized infants and preschool children with mild
to moderate, uncomplicated community-­acquired pneumonia. Ampicillin or penicillin G may be administered to the fully immunized
infant or school-­age child admitted to a hospital with uncomplicated
community-­acquired pneumonia when local epidemiologic data document lack of substantial high-­level penicillin resistance for invasive
S. pneumoniae. Empirical therapy with parenteral ceftriaxone should
be prescribed for hospitalized infants and children who are not fully
immunized, in regions where local epidemiology of invasive pneumococcal strains documents widespread penicillin resistance, or for
infants and children with life-­threatening infection, including those
with empyema. Non–β-­lactam agents, such as vancomycin, have not
been shown to be more effective than ceftriaxone in the treatment of
pneumococcal pneumonia, given the degree of drug resistance currently seen in the United States.
Higher doses of amoxicillin (80-­
90 mg/kg/24 hr) have been
successful in the treatment of otitis media caused by relatively
penicillin-­resistant pneumococcal strains. If the patient has failed
initial antibiotic therapy, alternative agents should be active against
penicillin-­
nonsusceptible pneumococcus as well as β-­lactamase–
producing Haemophilus influenzae and Moraxella catarrhalis. These
include high-­dose oral amoxicillin-­clavulanate (in the 14:1 formulation to reduce the risk of diarrhea), oral cefdinir, cefpodoxime, or
cefuroxime or a 3-­day course of daily intramuscular (IM) ceftriaxone
if patients fail oral therapy. Empirical treatment of pneumococcal
disease should be based on knowledge of susceptibility patterns in
specific communities.
For individuals with a non–type I allergic reaction to penicillin, cephalosporins (standard dosing) can be used. For type I allergic reactions (immediate, anaphylactic) to β-­lactam antibiotics,
clindamycin and levofloxacin are preferred alternatives depending
on the site of infection (e.g., clindamycin may be effective for pneumococcal infections other than meningitis). TMP-­SMX may also
be considered for susceptible strains but should be avoided in the
absence of susceptibility results. Erythromycin and related macrolides (e.g., azithromycin, clarithromycin) should be avoided given
high rates of resistance.

PROGNOSIS

Prognosis depends on the integrity of host defenses, virulence and
numbers of the infecting organism, age of the host, site and extent of
the infection, and adequacy of treatment. The mortality rate for pneumococcal meningitis is approximately 10% in most studies. Pneumococcal meningitis results in sensorineural hearing loss in 20–30% of
patients and can cause other serious neurologic sequelae, including
paralysis, epilepsy, blindness, and intellectual deficits.
Invasive pneumococcal disease is associated with various primary
immunodeficiency states, leading some to suggest screening for
immune defects in all or some patients with invasive diseases. In the
absence of other risk factors (see Table 228.1), screening for immune
defects (complement, B-­cell, toll-­like receptor, asplenia) may be indicated for patients with recurrent invasive disease, infection by a serotype covered by vaccination in a fully vaccinated child, children ≥2
years of age, or in some centers all patients with invasive disease.

PREVENTION

The highly successful PCVs have resulted in a marked decrease in IPIs
in children. PCVs provoke protective antibody responses in 90% of
infants given these vaccines at 2, 4, and 6 months of age, and greatly
enhanced responses (e.g., immunologic memory) are apparent after
vaccine doses given at 12-­15 months of age (Table 228.2). In a large

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1704 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 228.2  Comparison of Pneumococcal Vaccines Licensed in United States*
CARRIER PROTEIN

PNEUMOCOCCAL CAPSULAR
POLYSACCHARIDES

MANUFACTURER

Diphtheria CRM197 protein

4, 6B, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F, 23F

Wyeth Lederle (PCV7, Prevnar)

Diphtheria CRM197 protein

1, 3, 4, 5, 6A, 6B, 7F, 9V, 14, 18C, 19A, 19F, 23F

Wyeth Lederle (PCV13, Prevnar 13)

Diphtheria CRM197 protein

1, 3, 4, 5, 6A, 6B, 7F, 9V, 14, 18C, 19A, 19F, 22F,
23F, 32F

Merck Sharp and Dohme (PCV15, Prevnar 15)

Diphtheria CRM197 protein

1, 3, 4, 5, 6A, 6B, 7F, 8, 9V, 10A, 11A, 12F, 14,
15B, 18C, 19A, 19F, 22F, 23F, 32F

Merck Sharp and Dohme (PCV20, Prevnar 20)

None

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6B, 7F, 8, 9N, 9V, 10A, 11A, 12F, 14,
15B, 17F, 18C, 19A, 19F, 20, 22F, 23F, 33F

Sanofi Pasteur MSD (PPSV23, Pneumovax II)

*PCV7 serotypes in bold.

Table 228.3  Recommended Routine Vaccination Schedule for 15-­or 20-­Valent Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine (PCV15 or
20) Among Infants and Children Who Have Not Received Previous Doses of Conjugate Vaccines, by Age at First
Dose—United States, 2010
AGE AT FIRST DOSE (MO)

PRIMARY PCV15 OR PCV20 SERIES*

PCV15 OR PCV20 BOOSTER DOSE†

2-­6

3 doses

1 dose at age 12-­15 mo

7-­11

2 doses

1 dose at age 12-­15 mo

12-­23

2 doses

—

24-­59 (healthy children)

1 dose

—

24-­71 (children with certain chronic diseases or
immunocompromising conditions‡)

2 doses

—

*The minimum interval between doses is 8 wk except for children vaccinated at age <12 mo, for whom the minimum interval between doses is 4 wk. The minimum age for
administration of the first dose is 6 wk.
†Given at least 8 wk after the previous dose.
‡See Table 228.1. If two doses of PCV15 are used, then 1 dose of PPSV23 vaccine is given ≥8 weeks later.
Adapted from Kobayashi M, Farrar JI, Gierke R, et al. Use of 15-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine among U.S. children: updated recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices -­-­United States, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2022;71(4):1174-­1181; and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ACIP updates:
Recommendations for use of 20-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in children—United States, 2023. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023;72(39):1072.

clinical trial, PCV7 was shown to reduce invasive disease caused by
vaccine serotypes by up to 97% and to reduce invasive disease caused
by all serotypes, including serotypes not in the vaccine, by 89%.
Children who received PCV7 had 7% fewer episodes of acute otitis
media and underwent 20% fewer tympanostomy tube placements
than unvaccinated children. After PCV13, a 98% reduction in IPIs
caused by vaccine serotypes has been seen, particularly in children
<5 years old. The number of pneumococcal isolates and percentage
of isolates with high-­level penicillin resistance from cultures taken
from children with otitis media or mastoiditis for clinical indications decreased, largely related to decreases in serotype 19A. Rates
of hospitalization for pneumococcal pneumonia among U.S. children
decreased after PCV13 introduction. The number of cases of pneumococcal meningitis in children remain unchanged, but the proportion of PCV13 serotypes has decreased significantly. In addition,
pneumococcal conjugate vaccines significantly reduce nasopharyngeal carriage of vaccine serotypes. PCVs have significantly decreased
rates of invasive pneumococcal disease in children with sickle cell
disease, and studies suggest substantial protection for HIV-­infected
children and splenectomized adults. Adverse events after the administration of PCV have included local swelling and redness and slightly
increased rates of fever when used in conjunction with other childhood vaccines.
Currently, the predominant non-­PCV13 serotypes are 22F, 12F, 33F,
24F, 15C, 15B, 23B, 10A, 11A, 35B, 35F, and 38. Serotypes 12F and 24F
have high invasive disease potential, with the latter responsible for a
rebound in incidence of pneumococcal meningitis since 2015. Serotypes 11A, 35F, and 35B in nasopharyngeal and middle ear samples

are increasingly resistant to antibiotics. PCV15 or PCV20, which
have replaced PCV13, do not contain serotypes 24 or 35, but PCV20
includes 11A and 12F.
Immunologic responsiveness and efficacy after administration of
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccines (PPSV23) is unpredictable in
children <2 years old. PPSV23 contains purified polysaccharide of 23
pneumococcal serotypes responsible for >95% of invasive disease. The
clinical efficacy of PPSV23 is controversial, and studies have yielded
conflicting results.
Immunization with PCV15 or PCV20 is recommended for all
infants on a schedule for primary immunization, in previously unvaccinated infants, and for transition for those partially vaccinated (Table
228.3). High-­risk children ≥2 years old, such as those with asplenia,
sickle cell disease, some types of immune deficiency (e.g., antibody
deficiencies), HIV infection, cochlear implant, CSF leak, diabetes
mellitus, and chronic lung (including moderate persistent or severe
persistent asthma), heart, liver, or kidney disease (including nephrotic
syndrome) or immunocompromising conditions, such as asplenia,
sickle cell disease, some types of immune deficiency (e.g., antibody
deficiencies), HIV infection, etc., may also benefit from PPSV23
administered after 2 years of age after priming with the scheduled
doses of PCV15 or 20. Thus it is recommended that children 2 years
of age and older with these conditions receive supplemental vaccination with PPSV23. A second dose of PPSV23 is recommended 5
years after the first dose of PPSV23 for persons ≥2 years old who have
immunocompromising conditions including sickle cell disease and
functional or anatomic asplenia. Additional doses of PPSV23 are not
required, however, if the patient has ever received PCV20. Additional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 228 u Streptococcus pneumoniae (Pneumococcus)

1705

TABLE 228.4  CDC Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommendations for Use of PCV in Children, June 2023
AGE AND RISK GROUP

RECOMMENDATIONS

Children age <24 mo

• Use of either PCV15 or PCV20 is recommended for all children age 2–23 mo according to previously
recommended PCV dosing and schedules.
• If only PCV13 is available when the child is scheduled to receive a PCV, PCV13 may be given as
previously recommended.
• If a child started the PCV series with PCV13, the child may complete the series with PCV15 or PCV20
without giving additional doses; the PCV series does not need to be restarted.
• For children who have received all recommended dosing and schedules with PCV13 or PCV15, a
supplemental dose of PCV20 is not indicated.

Healthy children age 24–59 mo with an
incomplete PCV vaccination status*

• A single dose of either PCV15 or PCV20 is recommended.
• A supplemental dose of PCV15 or PCV20 is not indicated for healthy children who have received 4
doses of PCV13 or who completed another age-­appropriate PCV13 schedule.

Children age 24–71 mo with any risk
condition†

• Use either PCV15 or PCV20 according to previously recommended PCV dosing and schedules.
• If only PCV13 is available when the child is scheduled to receive a PCV, PCV13 may be given as
previously recommended.

Children age 2–18 yr with any
risk condition who completed a
recommended PCV series before age
6 yr

• Completed series includes ≥1 dose of PCV20:
○	
No additional doses of any pneumococcal vaccine are indicated.
○	
This recommendation may be updated as additional data become available.
• Completed series using PCV13 or PCV15 (no PCV20):
○	
Either a single dose of PCV20 or PPSV23 using previously recommended dosing and schedules is
recommended to complete the recommended vaccine series.

Children age 6–18 yr with any risk
condition with no previous PCV13,
PCV15, or PCV20 vaccination

• For children age 6–18 yr with any risk condition who have not received any dose of PCV (PCV13,
PCV15, or PCV20) a single dose of either PCV15 or PCV20 is recommended.
• If the child has previously received PCV7 and/or PPSV23, a single dose of either PCV15 or PCV20 is
recommended ≥8 wk after the most recent dose of pneumococcal vaccination.
○	
PCV15 should be followed by a dose of PPSV23 if not previously given.
○	
PCV20 does not need to be followed by a dose of PPSV23.

Children who have received HSCT

• Children who received HSCT are recommended to receive three doses of PCV20, 4 wk apart starting
3–6 mo after HSCT.
• A fourth PCV20 dose is recommended ≥6 mo after the third PCV20 dose, or ≥12 mo after HSCT,
whichever is later.
• HSCT recipients who have started their pneumococcal vaccine series with PCV13 or PCV15 may
complete their 4-­dose pneumococcal vaccine series with PCV20 without giving extra doses.
• If PCV20 is not available, three doses of PCV15, 4 wk apart starting 3–6 mo after HSCT, followed by a
dose of PPSV23 ≥12 mo after HSCT may be given.
• For patients with chronic graft-­versus-­host disease who are receiving PCV15, a fourth dose of PCV15
can be given in place of PPSV23 since these children are less likely to respond to PPSV23. A patient’s
clinical team is best positioned to determine the appropriate timing of vaccination.

*Routine use of PCV is not recommended for healthy children age ≥5 yr.

†Risk conditions include: cerebrospinal fluid leak; chronic heart disease; chronic kidney disease (excluding maintenance dialysis and nephrotic syndrome, which are included

in immunocompromising conditions); chronic liver disease; chronic lung disease (including moderate persistent or severe persistent asthma); cochlear implant; diabetes
mellitus; immunocompromising conditions (on maintenance dialysis or with nephrotic syndrome; congenital or acquired asplenia or splenic dysfunction; congenital or acquired
immunodeficiencies; diseases and conditions treated with immunosuppressive drugs or radiation therapy, including malignant neoplasms, leukemias, lymphomas, Hodgkin
disease, and solid organ transplant; HIV infection; and sickle cell disease or other with these conditions who received PCV13 or PCV15 are also recommended to receive 23-­valent
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine.
PCV, pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PCV13, 13-­valent PCV; PCV15, 15-­valent PCV; PCV20, 20-­valent PCV; PPSV23, 23-­valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine; HSCT,
hematopoietic stem cell transplant.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ACIP updates: Recommendations for use of 20-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in children―United States, 2023. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023;72(39):1072. (Table 1).

recommendations have been made for at-­risk children 6-­18 years old
(Table 228.4).
Immunization with pneumococcal vaccines also may prevent pneumococcal disease caused by nonvaccine serotypes that are serotypically related to a vaccine strain. However, because current vaccines
do not eliminate all pneumococcal invasive infections, penicillin
prophylaxis is recommended for children at high risk of invasive
pneumococcal disease, including children with asplenia or sickle cell
disease. Oral penicillin V potassium (125 mg twice daily for children
<3 years old; 250 mg twice daily for children ≥3 years old) decreases
the incidence of pneumococcal sepsis in children with sickle cell disease. Once-­monthly IM benzathine penicillin G (600,000 units every
3-­4 weeks for children weighing <60 lb; 1,200,000 units every 3-­4
weeks for children weighing ≥60 lb) may also provide prophylaxis.
Erythromycin may be used in children with penicillin allergy, but

its efficacy is unproven. Prophylaxis in sickle cell disease has been
safely discontinued after the fifth birthday in children who have
received all recommended pneumococcal vaccine doses and who
had not experienced invasive pneumococcal disease. Prophylaxis is
often administered for at least 2 years after splenectomy or up to
5 years of age. Efficacy in children >5 years old and adolescents is
unproven. If oral antibiotic prophylaxis is used, strict compliance
must be encouraged.
Given the rapid emergence of penicillin-­
resistant pneumococci,
especially in children receiving long-­term, low-­dose therapy, prophylaxis cannot be relied on to prevent disease. High-­risk children with
fever should be promptly evaluated and treated regardless of vaccination or penicillin prophylaxis history.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1706 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 229

Group A Streptococcus
Stanford T. Shulman and Ami B. Patel
Group A Streptococcus (GAS), also known as Streptococcus pyogenes, is
a common cause of infections of the upper respiratory tract (pharyngitis) and the skin (impetigo, pyoderma) in children. Less frequently,
GAS causes perianal cellulitis, vaginitis, septicemia, pneumonia, empyema, endocarditis, pericarditis, osteomyelitis, suppurative arthritis,
myositis, cellulitis, omphalitis, and other infections. This organism also
causes distinct clinical entities (scarlet fever and erysipelas), as well as
streptococcal toxic shock syndrome and monomicrobial necrotizing
fasciitis. GAS is also the cause of at least two potentially serious nonsuppurative complications: rheumatic fever (see Chapters 229.1 and
487) and acute glomerulonephritis (see Chapter 559.4).

ETIOLOGY

Group A streptococci are gram-­
positive, coccoid-­
shaped bacteria
that tend to grow in chains. Streptococci are broadly classified by
their hemolytic activity on mammalian (typically sheep) red blood
cells. The zone of complete hemolysis that surrounds colonies grown
on blood agar distinguishes β-­hemolytic (complete hemolysis) from
α-­hemolytic (green or partial hemolysis) and γ (nonhemolytic) species. The β-­hemolytic streptococci can be divided into groups by a
group-­specific polysaccharide (Lancefield C carbohydrate) located in
the bacterial cell wall. More than 20 serologic groups are identified,
designated by the letters A through V, although only A through D are
medically important. Serologic grouping by the Lancefield method is
precise, but group A organisms can be identified more readily by any
of a number of latex agglutination, coagglutination, molecular assays
or enzyme immunoassays. Group A strains can also be distinguished
from other groups by differences in sensitivity to bacitracin, as other
groups are generally resistant to this antibiotic.
GAS can be subdivided into at least 220 serotypes on the basis of the
M protein antigen, which is located on the cell surface and in fimbriae
that project from the outer surface of the cell. Currently, a molecular
approach to M-­typing GAS isolates using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is based on sequencing the terminal portion of the emm
gene of GAS that encodes the M protein. This emm typing system correlates with known serotypes and emm types. The emm types can be
grouped into emm clusters that share structural and binding properties. It is important to note that immunity is largely based on type-­
specific opsonic anti-­M antibody.
M/emm typing is valuable for epidemiologic studies; specific GAS
diseases tend to be associated with certain M types. Types 1, 12, 28, 4,
3, and 2 (in that order) are the most common causes of uncomplicated
streptococcal pharyngitis in the United States. M types usually associated with pharyngitis rarely cause skin infections, and the M types
associated with skin infections rarely cause pharyngitis. A few pharyngeal GAS strains (e.g., M type 12) are associated with glomerulonephritis, but many more skin GAS strains (e.g., M types 49, 55, 57, and
60) are considered nephritogenic. Several pharyngeal serotypes (e.g.,
M types 1, 3, 5, 6, 18, and 29), but no proven skin strains, are associated
with acute rheumatic fever in North America.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Humans are the natural reservoir for GAS. These bacteria are highly
communicable and can cause disease in normal individuals of all
ages who do not have type-­specific immunity against the particular
serotype involved. Disease in neonates is uncommon in developed
countries, probably because of maternally acquired antibody. The
incidence of pharyngitis is highest in children 5-­15 years of age,
especially in young school-­age children. Acute streptococcal pharyngitis is uncommon in children younger than 3 years, and testing

is generally not recommended. These infections are most common
in the northern regions of the United States, especially during winter and early spring. Children with untreated acute pharyngitis
spread GAS by salivary droplets and nasal discharge. Transmission is
favored by close proximity; therefore schools, military barracks, and
homes are important environments for spread. GAS has the potential
to be an important upper respiratory tract pathogen and to produce
outbreaks of disease in the daycare setting. Foods contaminated by
GAS occasionally cause explosive outbreaks of pharyngotonsillitis.
The incubation period for pharyngitis is usually 2-­5 days. Children
are usually no longer infectious within 24 hours of starting appropriate antibiotic therapy. Chronic pharyngeal carriers of GAS rarely
transmit this organism to others.
Streptococcal pyoderma (impetigo, pyoderma) occurs most frequently during the summer in temperate climates, or year-­round in
warmer climates, when the skin is exposed and abrasions and insect
bites are more likely to occur (see Chapter 727). Colonization of
healthy skin by GAS usually precedes the development of impetigo.
Because GAS cannot penetrate intact skin, impetigo and other skin
infections usually occur at the site of open lesions (insect bites, traumatic wounds, burns). Although impetigo serotypes may colonize
the throat, spread is usually from skin to skin, not via the respiratory
tract. Fingernails and the perianal region can harbor GAS and play
a role in disseminating impetigo. Multiple cases of impetigo in the
same family are common. Both impetigo and pharyngitis are more
likely to occur among children living in crowded homes and in poor
hygienic circumstances.
The incidence of severe invasive GAS infections, including bacteremia, pneumonia and empyema, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis,
retropharyngeal abscess, lymphadenitis, streptococcal toxic shock
syndrome, scarlet fever, and necrotizing fasciitis, has increased in
recent decades. The incidence appears to be highest in very young
and elderly persons. Before the routine use of varicella vaccine,
varicella was the most commonly identified risk factor for invasive
GAS infection in children. Other risk factors include diabetes mellitus, HIV infection, intravenous drug use, and chronic pulmonary
or chronic cardiac disease. The portal of entry is unknown in almost
50% of cases of severe invasive GAS infection; in most cases, it is
believed to be skin or, less often, mucous membranes. Severe invasive
disease rarely follows clinically apparent GAS pharyngitis. Invasive
GAS disease was reported in many children’s hospitals in multiple
countries during the COVID-­19 pandemic. It is unclear why this has
happened, but masking, social distancing, and school closures may
have reduced exposure to common viral pathogens or colonization
with GAS, resulting in more severe infection when mask and social
distancing have stopped and schools have reopened. Co-­infection
with respiratory viruses (respiratory syncytial virus [RSV], other)
may predispose to more severe infection.

PATHOGENESIS

The virulence of GAS depends primarily on the M protein, and strains
rich in M protein resist phagocytosis in fresh human blood, whereas
M-­negative strains do not. M protein stimulates the production of protective opsonophagocytic antibodies that are type specific, protecting
against infection with a homologous M type but much less so against
other M types. Therefore multiple GAS infections attributable to various M types are common during childhood and adolescence. By adult
life, individuals are probably immune to many of the common M types
in the environment.
GAS produces a large variety of extracellular enzymes and toxins,
including erythrogenic toxins, known as streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxins. Streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxins A, C, and SSA, alone or in
combination, are responsible for the rash of scarlet fever and are elaborated by streptococci that contain a particular bacteriophage. These
exotoxins stimulate the formation of specific antitoxin antibodies that
provide immunity against the scarlatiniform rash but not against other
streptococcal infections. Pathogenic variants in genes that are promoters of several virulence genes, including pyrogenic exotoxins, as well
as several newly discovered exotoxins, appear to be involved in the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 229 u Group A Streptococcus
pathogenesis of invasive GAS disease, including streptococcal toxic
shock syndrome.
The importance of other streptococcal toxins and enzymes in human
disease is not yet established. Many of these extracellular substances
are antigenic and stimulate antibody production after an infection.
However, these antibodies do not confer immunity. The measurement
of select toxins and antibodies is useful for establishing evidence of a
recent streptococcal infection to aid in the diagnosis of postinfectious
illnesses. Tests for antibodies against streptolysin O (anti–streptolysin
O) and DNase B (anti–DNase B) are the most frequently used antibody
determinations.

1707

B

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The most common infections caused by GAS involve the respiratory
tract and the skin and soft tissues.

Respiratory Tract Infections

GAS is an important cause of acute pharyngitis (see Chapter 430) and
pneumonia, often with empyema (see Chapter 449).

Scarlet Fever

Scarlet fever is GAS pharyngitis associated with a characteristic rash,
which is caused by an infection with pyrogenic exotoxin (erythrogenic
toxin)–producing GAS in individuals who do not have antitoxin antibodies. It is now encountered less often and is less virulent than in the
past, but the incidence is cyclic, depending on the prevalence of toxin-­
producing strains and the immune status of the population. The modes
of transmission, age distribution, and other epidemiologic features are
otherwise similar to those for GAS pharyngitis.
The scarlet fever rash appears within 24-­48 hours after the onset
of symptoms, although it may appear with the first signs of illness
(Fig. 229.1A). It often begins around the neck and spreads over the
trunk and extremities. The rash is a diffuse, finely papular, erythematous eruption producing bright-­red discoloration of the skin, which
blanches on pressure. It is often accentuated in the creases of the
elbows, axillae, and groin (Pastia lines). The skin has a goose-­pimple
appearance and feels rough. The cheeks are often erythematous with
perioral pallor. After 3-­4 days, the rash begins to fade and is followed by desquamation, initially on the face, progressing caudally,
and often resembling a mild sunburn. Occasionally, sheetlike desquamation may occur around the free margins of the fingernails,
the palms, and the soles. Examination of the pharynx of a patient
with scarlet fever reveals essentially the same findings as with GAS
pharyngitis. In addition, the tongue is usually coated and the papillae are swollen (see Fig. 229.1B). After desquamation, the reddened
papillae are prominent, giving the tongue a strawberry appearance
(see Fig. 229.1C).
Typical scarlet fever is not difficult to diagnose; the milder form with
equivocal pharyngeal findings can be confused with viral exanthems,
Kawasaki disease, and drug eruptions. Staphylococcal infections are
occasionally associated with a scarlatiniform rash. A history of recent
exposure to a GAS infection is helpful. Identification of GAS in the
pharynx confirms the diagnosis.

Impetigo

Impetigo (or pyoderma) has traditionally been classified into two
clinical forms: bullous and nonbullous (see Chapter 706.1). Nonbullous impetigo is the more common form and is a superficial infection
of the skin that appears first as a discrete papulovesicular lesion surrounded by a localized area of redness. The vesicles rapidly become
purulent and covered with a thick, confluent, amber-­colored crust that
gives the appearance of having been stuck onto the skin. The lesions
may occur anywhere but are most common on the face and extremities. If untreated, nonbullous impetigo is a mild but chronic illness,
often spreading to other parts of the body, but occasionally self-­limited.
Regional lymphadenitis is common. Nonbullous impetigo is generally not accompanied by fever or other systemic signs or symptoms.
Impetiginized excoriations around the nares are seen with active GAS

A

C

Fig. 229.1 Scarlet fever. A, Punctate, erythematous rash (second

day). B, White strawberry tongue (first day). C, Red strawberry tongue
(third day). (Courtesy Dr. Franklin H. Top, Professor and Head of the
Department of Hygiene and Preventive Medicine, State University of
Iowa, College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA; and Parke, Davis & Company’s
Therapeutic Notes. From Gershon AA, Hotez PJ, Katz SL. Krugman’s
Infectious Diseases of Children, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004,
Plate 53.)

infections of the nasopharynx, particularly in young children. However, impetigo is rarely associated with overt streptococcal infection of
the upper respiratory tract.
Bullous impetigo is less common and occurs most often in neonates and young infants. It is characterized by flaccid, transparent bullae usually <3 cm in diameter on previously untraumatized
skin. The usual distribution involves the face, buttocks, trunk, and
perineum.
Although Staphylococcus aureus has traditionally been accepted as
the sole pathogen responsible for bullous impetigo, there has been
confusion about the organisms responsible for nonbullous impetigo.
In most episodes of nonbullous impetigo, either GAS or S. aureus (or
both) is isolated. Earlier investigations suggested that GAS was the
causative agent in most cases of nonbullous impetigo and that S. aureus
was only a secondary invader. However, S. aureus has emerged as the
causative agent in most cases of nonbullous impetigo. Culture of the
lesions is the only way to distinguish nonbullous impetigo caused by S.
aureus from that caused by GAS.

Erysipelas

Erysipelas is a relatively rare acute GAS infection involving the
deeper layers of the skin and the underlying connective tissue. The
skin in the affected area is edematous, highly erythematous, and very
tender. The erythema associated with erysipelas is very bright, which
differentiates it from the dusky appearance of necrotizing fasciitis.
Superficial blebs may be present. The most characteristic finding is
a sharply defined, slightly elevated border. At times, reddish streaks
of lymphangitis project out from the margins of the lesion. The onset
is abrupt, and signs and symptoms of a systemic infection, such as
high fever and sepsis, are often present. Cultures obtained by needle
aspirate of the advancing margin of the inflamed area often reveal the
causative agent.

Perianal Dermatitis

Perianal dermatitis, also called perianal cellulitis or perianal streptococcal disease, is a distinct clinical entity characterized by well-­
demarcated, perianal erythema associated with anal pruritus, painful
defecation, and occasionally blood-­streaked stools. Most children are
2-­7 years old (range: 18 days-­12 years). Physical examination reveals
flat, pink to beefy-­red perianal erythema with sharp margins extending

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1708 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
as far as 2 cm from the anus. Erythema may involve the vulva and
vagina. Lesions may be very tender and, particularly when chronic,
may fissure and bleed. Systemic symptoms and fever are unusual. Culture or a rapid streptococcal test of a perianal swab will yield GAS or
detect antigen.

Vaginitis

GAS is a common cause of vaginitis in prepubertal girls (see Chapter
586). Patients usually have a serous discharge with marked erythema
and irritation of the vulvar area, accompanied by discomfort in walking and in urination.

Severe Invasive Disease

Invasive GAS infection is defined by isolation of GAS from a normally
sterile body site and includes three overlapping clinical syndromes.
GAS toxic shock syndrome (TSS) is differentiated from other types
of invasive GAS infections by the presence of shock and multiorgan
system dysfunction early in the course of the infection (Table 229.1).
The second syndrome is GAS necrotizing fasciitis, characterized by
extensive local necrosis of subcutaneous soft tissues and skin. The third
syndrome is the group of focal and systemic infections that do not
meet the criteria for TSS or necrotizing fasciitis and includes bacteremia with sepsis with no identified focus, meningitis, pneumonia
and empyema, peritonitis, puerperal sepsis, osteomyelitis, suppurative
arthritis, myositis, and surgical wound and other infections. GAS TSS,
necrotizing fasciitis, and focal and systemic infections can be present
in any combination.
The pathogenic mechanisms responsible for severe, invasive GAS
infections, including streptococcal TSS and necrotizing fasciitis, have
yet to be defined completely, but an association with streptococcal
pyrogenic exotoxins is strongly suspected. At least two of the three
original streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxins (A and C) and potentially
other as yet unidentified toxins produced by GAS act as superantigens,
which stimulate intense activation and proliferation of T lymphocytes
and macrophages, resulting in the production of large quantities of
proinflammatory cytokines. These cytokines are capable of inducing
shock and tissue injury and appear to mediate many of the clinical
manifestations of severe, invasive GAS infections.

DIAGNOSIS OF GAS PHARYNGITIS

When deciding whether to perform a diagnostic test on a patient
presenting with acute pharyngitis, the clinical and epidemiologic
findings should be considered. A history of close contact with a well-­
documented case of GAS pharyngitis is helpful, as is an awareness of
a high prevalence of GAS infections in the community. The signs and
symptoms of streptococcal and nonstreptococcal pharyngitis overlap too broadly to allow the requisite diagnostic precision on clinical
grounds alone. The clinical diagnosis of GAS pharyngitis cannot be
made with reasonable accuracy even by the most experienced physicians, and laboratory confirmation is required, except for patients with

Table 229.1  Definition of Streptococcal Toxic Shock
Syndrome
CLINICAL CRITERIA
Hypotension plus two or more of the following:
Renal impairment
Coagulopathy
Hepatic involvement
Adult respiratory distress syndrome
Generalized erythematous macular rash
Soft tissue necrosis
DEFINITE CASE
Clinical criteria plus group A Streptococcus from a normally sterile
site
PROBABLE CASE
Clinical criteria plus group A Streptococcus from a nonsterile site

overt viral signs and symptoms (e.g., rhinorrhea, cough, mouth ulcers,
hoarseness), who generally do not need a GAS diagnostic test performed, as GAS is highly unlikely.
Culture of a throat swab on a sheep blood agar plate is effective for
documenting the presence of GAS and for confirming the clinical diagnosis of acute GAS pharyngitis. When performed correctly, a single
throat swab has a sensitivity of 90–95% for detecting the presence of
GAS in the pharynx.
The significant disadvantage of culturing a throat swab on a blood
agar plate is the delay (overnight or longer) in obtaining the culture
result. Streptococcal rapid antigen detection tests are available for the
identification of GAS directly from throat swabs. Their advantage over
culture is the speed in providing results, often <10-­15 minutes. Rapid
identification and treatment of patients with streptococcal pharyngitis
can reduce the risk for spread of GAS, allowing the patient to return
to school or work sooner, and can reduce the acute morbidity of this
illness.
Almost all currently available rapid antigen detection tests have
excellent specificity of >95% compared with blood agar plate cultures.
False-­positive test results are quite unusual, and therefore therapeutic
decisions can be made with confidence on the basis of a positive test
result. Unfortunately, the sensitivity of most of these tests is 70–90%
when compared with blood agar plate culture. Therefore a negative
rapid test does not completely exclude the presence of GAS, and a
confirmatory throat culture should be performed in children and
adolescents, but not necessarily in adults, who are at exceptionally
low risk for developing acute rheumatic fever. Definitive studies are
not available to determine whether some rapid antigen detection tests
are significantly more sensitive than others or whether any of these
tests is sensitive enough to be used routinely in children and adolescents without throat culture confirmation of negative test results.
Some experts believe that physicians who use a rapid antigen detection test without culture backup should compare the results with that
specific test to those of throat cultures to confirm adequate sensitivity
in their practice.
In point-­of-­care settings and laboratories testing for GAS pharyngitis, culture methods are being replaced by rapid antigen and
molecular assays. These molecular assays include PCR methods and
nucleic acid amplification tests using isothermal loop amplification.
Some of these methods have been reported to have a sensitivity of up
to 100% and specificity of >96% compared to culture or PCR. This
very high sensitivity may lead to higher numbers of positive results,
which in turn may contribute to identification of more patients with
asymptomatic GAS colonization and unnecessary antibiotic therapy.
Therefore it is important that the appropriate clinical context to perform these highly sensitive tests be considered. However, the benefit
of faster results, sometimes <10 minutes, which ensures more expedited initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy for patients with
GAS pharyngitis, may be of value.
GAS infection can also be diagnosed retrospectively on the basis of
an elevated or increasing streptococcal antibody titer. The anti–streptolysin O assay is the streptococcal antibody test most often used. The
test is not specific for group A infection because streptolysin O also
is produced by groups C and G streptococci. The anti–streptolysin O
response can be feeble after streptococcal skin infection. In contrast,
the anti–DNase B responses are generally present after either skin or
throat infections. A significant antibody increase is usually defined as
an increase in titer of two or more dilution increments (≥ fourfold rise)
between the acute-­phase and convalescent-­phase specimens, regardless of the actual height of the antibody titer. Physicians frequently
misinterpret streptococcal antibody titers because of a failure to appreciate that the normal levels of these antibodies are substantially higher
among school-­age children than adults. Both the traditional anti–
streptolysin O and the anti–DNase B tests are neutralization assays.
Newer tests use latex agglutination or nephelometric assays. Unfortunately, these newer tests often have not been well standardized against
the traditional neutralization assays. Physicians should be aware of
these potential problems when interpreting the results of streptococcal
serologic testing.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 229 u Group A Streptococcus
Differential Diagnosis

Viruses are the most common cause of acute pharyngitis in children.
Respiratory viruses such as influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, rhinovirus, coronavirus, adenovirus, and RSV are frequent causes of acute
pharyngitis. Other viral causes of acute pharyngitis include enteroviruses and herpes simplex virus. Epstein-­Barr virus is a frequent cause
of acute pharyngitis that is often accompanied by other clinical findings of infectious mononucleosis (e.g., splenomegaly, generalized
lymphadenopathy). Systemic infections with other viral agents, including cytomegalovirus, rubella virus, measles virus, and HIV, may be
associated with acute pharyngitis.
GAS is by far the most common cause of bacterial pharyngitis,
accounting for 15–30% of cases of acute pharyngitis in children and a
lower proportion in adults. Groups C and G β-­hemolytic streptococcus also cause acute pharyngitis, typically in teens and young adults
(see Chapter 231). Arcanobacterium haemolyticum and Fusobacterium necrophorum are additional, less common causes. Neisseria gonorrhoeae can occasionally cause acute pharyngitis in sexually active
adolescents and adults. Other bacteria, such as Francisella tularensis
and Yersinia enterocolitica, as well as mixed infections with anaerobic bacteria (Vincent angina), are very rare causes of acute pharyngitis. Chlamydia pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae have
been implicated as causes of acute pharyngitis, particularly in adults.
Corynebacterium diphtheriae is a serious cause of pharyngitis but is
very rare in areas with universal immunization (see Chapter 233).
Although other bacteria (e.g., S. aureus, Haemophilus influenzae,
Streptococcus pneumoniae) are frequently cultured from the throats
of children with acute pharyngitis, their etiologic role in pharyngitis
has not been established, because they are often isolated from healthy
children.
GAS pharyngitis is the only common cause of acute pharyngitis for
which antibiotic therapy is definitely indicated. Therefore when confronted with a patient with acute pharyngitis, the clinical decision that
usually needs to be made is whether or not the pharyngitis is attributable to GAS.

TREATMENT OF GAS PHARYNGITIS

Timely antibiotic therapy for patients with GAS pharyngitis can prevent
acute rheumatic fever (RF), shorten the clinical course of the illness,
reduce transmission of the infection to others, and prevent suppurative
complications. For the patient with classic scarlet fever, antibiotic therapy should be started immediately, but for the majority of patients, who
present with much less distinctive findings, treatment should be withheld
until there is laboratory confirmation by throat culture, molecular assay,
or rapid antigen detection test. Rapid antigen detection tests, because
of their high degree of specificity, allow initiation of antibiotic therapy
immediately for the patient with a positive test result.
GAS is exquisitely sensitive to penicillin and cephalosporins, and
resistant strains have never been encountered. Penicillin or amoxicillin is therefore the drug of choice (except in patients who are allergic
to penicillins) for pharyngeal infections and for suppurative complications. Oral penicillin V (250 mg/dose 2 or 3 times daily [bid-­tid] for
children weighing ≤60 lb and 500 mg/dose bid-­tid for children >60
lb) is recommended but must be taken for a full 10 days, even though
symptomatic improvement may occur within 2-­3 days. Penicillin V
(phenoxymethylpenicillin) is preferred over penicillin G, because it
may be given without regard to mealtime. The major concern with
all forms of oral therapy is the risk that the drug will be discontinued before the 10-­day course has been completed. Therefore when
oral treatment is prescribed, the necessity of completing a full course
of therapy must be emphasized. If the parents seem unlikely to comply with oral therapy because of family disorganization, difficulties
in comprehension, or other reasons, parenteral therapy with a single
intramuscular (IM) injection of benzathine penicillin G (600,000 IU
for children weighing ≤60 lb and 1.2 million IU for children >60 lb) is
the most efficacious and often the most practical method of treatment.
Disadvantages include soreness around the site of injection, which may
last for several days, and potential for injection into nerves or blood

1709

vessels if not administered correctly. The local reaction is diminished
when the refrigerated drug is warmed to room temperature and when
benzathine penicillin G is combined in a single injection with procaine
penicillin G, although it is necessary to ensure that an adequate dose of
benzathine penicillin G is administered.
In several comparative clinical trials, once-­daily amoxicillin (50 mg/
kg, maximum: 1,000 mg) for 10 days has been demonstrated to be as
effective in treating GAS pharyngitis as amoxicillin administered orally
multiple times per day. This somewhat broader-­spectrum agent has the
advantage of once-­daily dosing, which may enhance adherence. In
addition, amoxicillin is relatively inexpensive and is considerably more
palatable than penicillin V suspension.
A 10-­day course of a narrow-­spectrum oral cephalosporin is recommended for most penicillin-­allergic individuals. It has been suggested that a 10-­day course with an oral cephalosporin is superior to 10
days of oral penicillin in eradicating GAS from the pharynx. Analysis
of these data suggests that the difference in eradication is mainly the
result of a higher rate of eradication of GAS carriage included unintentionally in these clinical trials. Some penicillin-­allergic persons (up
to 10%) are also allergic to cephalosporins, and these agents should
be avoided in patients with immediate (anaphylactic-­type) hypersensitivity to penicillin. Most oral broad-­spectrum cephalosporins are considerably more expensive than penicillin or amoxicillin and are more
likely to select for antibiotic-­resistant flora.
Oral clindamycin is an appropriate agent for treating penicillin-­
allergic patients, and resistance to clindamycin among GAS isolates in
the United States is currently <6%. An oral macrolide (erythromycin
or clarithromycin) or azalide (azithromycin) is also an appropriate
agent for patients allergic to penicillins. Ten days of therapy is indicated except for azithromycin, which is given at 12 mg/kg on day 1 and
then 6 mg/kg on days 2-­5. Erythromycin is associated with substantially higher rates of gastrointestinal side effects than the other agents.
In recent years, macrolide resistance rates among pharyngeal isolates
of GAS in most areas of the United States have been approximately
5–10%. Sulfonamides and the tetracyclines are not recommended
for treatment of GAS pharyngitis. However, studies showed that
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) is highly active in vitro
against GAS and was comparable to IM penicillin for GAS impetigo
in clinical trials.
Most oral antibiotics must be administered for the conventional 10
days to achieve maximal pharyngeal eradication rates of GAS and prevention of RF, but certain newer agents are reported to achieve comparable bacteriologic and clinical cure rates when given for ≤5 days.
However, definitive results from comprehensive studies are not available to allow full evaluation of these proposed shorter courses of oral
antibiotic therapy, which therefore cannot be recommended at this
time. In addition, these antibiotics have a much broader spectrum than
penicillin and are generally more expensive, even when administered
for short courses.
The majority of patients with GAS pharyngitis respond clinically
to antimicrobial therapy, and GAS is eradicated from the pharynx.
Posttreatment throat cultures are indicated only in the relatively few
patients who remain symptomatic, whose symptoms recur, or who
have had RF or rheumatic heart disease and are therefore at unusually
high risk for recurrence.

Treatment of GAS Skin Infections

Antibiotic therapy for a patient with nonbullous impetigo can prevent
local extension of the lesions, spread to distant infectious foci, and
transmission of the infection to others. However, the ability of antibiotic therapy to prevent poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis has not
been definitively demonstrated. Patients with a few superficial, isolated
lesions and no systemic signs can be treated with topical antibiotics.
Mupirocin is a safe and effective agent that has become the topical
treatment of choice. If there are widespread lesions or systemic signs,
oral therapy with coverage for both GAS and S. aureus is needed. With
the rapid emergence of methicillin-­resistant S. aureus in many communities, one should consider using clindamycin alone or a combination

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1710 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
of TMP-­SMX and amoxicillin as first-­line therapy. Oral cefuroxime is
an effective treatment of perianal streptococcal disease.

in a highly conserved region of M protein to provide broad immunity.
All these vaccines are in relatively early stages of development.

Treatment of Invasive GAS Infection

Poststreptococcal Reactive Arthritis

Theoretical considerations and experimental data suggest that intravenous clindamycin is a more effective agent for the treatment of severe,
invasive GAS infections than IV penicillin. However, because approximately 4–6% of GAS isolates in the United States are resistant to
clindamycin, clindamycin initially should be used in combination with
penicillin for these infections until susceptibility to clindamycin has
been established. If necrotizing fasciitis is suspected, immediate surgical exploration may be required to identify a deep soft tissue infection
that should be debrided immediately. Patients with streptococcal TSS
require rapid and aggressive fluid replacement, management of respiratory or cardiac failure, if present, and anticipatory management of multiorgan system failure. Limited data suggest that intravenous immune
globulin (IVIG) is effective as adjunctive therapy in the management
of streptococcal TSS.

COMPLICATIONS

Suppurative complications from the spread of GAS to adjacent structures were extremely common in the preantibiotic era. Cervical lymphadenitis, peritonsillar abscess, retropharyngeal abscess, otitis media,
mastoiditis, and sinusitis still occur in children in whom the primary
illness has gone unnoticed or in whom treatment of the pharyngitis has
been inadequate. GAS pneumonia can also occur.
Acute rheumatic fever (see Chapter 229.1) and acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis (see Chapter 559.4) are both nonsuppurative sequelae of infections with GAS that occur after an asymptomatic
latent period. These complications occur after the initial GAS infection
resolves and involves sites distal to the initial GAS infection site. These
sequelae are thought to be the result of the immune response and not
of direct GAS infection. Acute RF and acute glomerulonephritis differ
in their clinical manifestations, epidemiology, and potential morbidity.
In addition, acute glomerulonephritis follows a GAS infection of either
the upper respiratory tract or the skin, but acute RF is only proven to
follow an infection of the upper respiratory tract. Some investigators
have suggested that in some highly endemic areas, particularly in New
Zealand and Australia, GAS skin infection may trigger acute RF, but
this remains controversial.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for appropriately treated GAS pharyngitis is excellent,
and complete recovery is the rule. When therapy is instituted within
9 days of the onset of symptoms and continued for the full course,
acute RF is almost always prevented. There is no comparable evidence that acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis can be prevented once pharyngitis or pyoderma with a nephritogenic strain
of GAS has occurred. In rare instances, particularly in neonates or
in children whose response to infection is compromised, fulminant
pneumonia, septicemia, and death may occur despite usually adequate therapy.

PREVENTION

The only specific indication for long-­term use of an antibiotic to prevent GAS infections is for patients with a history of acute RF and/or
rheumatic heart disease. Mass prophylaxis is generally not feasible
except possibly to reduce the number of infections during epidemics
of impetigo and to control epidemics of pharyngitis in military populations and in schools. Because the ability of antimicrobial agents to prevent GAS infections is limited, a group A streptococcal vaccine would
offer the possibility of a more effective approach.
Several candidate vaccines are in development, including a 30-­valent
M protein–based recombinant vaccine, another recombinant vaccine
that includes several conserved non–M protein epitopes that induce
protective antibody, and an M-­protein vaccine that includes an epitope

Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis (PSRA) describes a syndrome
characterized by the onset of acute arthritis after an episode of GAS
pharyngitis in a patient whose illness does not fulfill the Jones Criteria for diagnosis of acute RF. It is still unclear whether this entity
represents a distinct syndrome or is a variant of acute RF. Although
PSRA usually involves the large joints, similar to the arthritis of
acute RF, it may also involve small peripheral joints and the axial
skeleton and is typically nonmigratory, a characteristic distinct from
the arthritis of acute RF. The latent period between the antecedent
episode of GAS pharyngitis and PSRA may be considerably shorter
(usually <10 days) than that typically seen with acute RF (usually
14-­21 days). In contrast to the arthritis of acute RF, PSRA does not
respond dramatically to therapy with aspirin or other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). In addition, fewer patients
with PSRA than with acute RF have a temperature >38°C (100.4°F).
Even though no more than half of PSRA patients with throat culture have GAS isolated, all have serologic evidence of a recent GAS
infection. Because a very small proportion of patients with PSRA
have been reported to develop valvular heart disease subsequently,
these patients should be carefully observed for several months for
clinical evidence of carditis. Some recommend that these patients
receive secondary antistreptococcal prophylaxis for up to 1 year. If
clinical evidence of carditis is not observed at that point, the prophylaxis can be discontinued. If valvular disease is detected, the
patient should be classified as having had acute RF and should
continue to receive secondary prophylaxis appropriate for RF
patients.

Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders
Associated with Streptococcus pyogenes

Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with
S. pyogenes (PANDAS) is a term proposed for a group of neuropsychiatric disorders (originally obsessive-­
compulsive disorder
[OCD], tic disorder, and Tourette syndrome, or only OCD or feeding abnormality) for which a possible relationship with GAS infections has been hypothesized (see Chapter 37). This relationship has
not been proved. It has been proposed that this subset of patients
with OCDs may produce autoimmune antibodies in response to
a GAS infection that cross-­react with brain tissue, similar to the
autoimmune response believed to be responsible for the manifestations of Sydenham chorea. It has also been suggested that secondary prophylaxis that prevents recurrences of rheumatic fever,
including Sydenham chorea, might also be effective in preventing
exacerbations of OCDs in these patients, but clinical trials have not
confirmed this. It has also been proposed that these patients may
benefit from immunoregulatory therapy such as plasma exchange
or IVIG, but these unproven modalities should only be used in a
clinical research trial. That PANDAS may represent an extension
of the spectrum of acute RF is intriguing, but it should be considered only as a yet-­unproven hypothesis. Until carefully designed
and well-­controlled studies have established a causal relationship
between neurobehavioral abnormalities and GAS infections, routine diagnostic laboratory testing for GAS and antistreptococcal
antibodies, long-­term antistreptococcal prophylaxis, or immunoregulatory therapy (e.g., IVIG, plasma exchange) to treat exacerbations of this disorder clearly are not recommended (see Chapter
37). It has also been suggested that a broad spectrum of infectious
agents may have the ability to trigger exacerbations in children
with these neurobehavioral disorders, which have been termed
pediatric acute-­onset neuropsychiatric syndrome (PANS), but this
remains highly controversial.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 229 u Group A Streptococcus

229.1 Rheumatic Fever
Stanford T. Shulman and Ami B. Patel
See also Chapter 487.
Overwhelming evidence supports the link between antecedent
GAS pharyngitis and acute rheumatic fever (RF) and rheumatic
heart disease. As many as two thirds of patients with an acute episode of RF have a history of an upper respiratory tract infection
several weeks before; the peak age and seasonal incidence of acute
RF closely parallel that of GAS pharyngitis. Patients with acute RF
almost always have serologic evidence of a recent GAS infection.
Their antibody titers are usually considerably higher than those seen
in patients with uncomplicated GAS infections. Outbreaks of GAS
pharyngitis in closed communities, such as boarding schools or military bases, may be followed by community outbreaks of acute RF.
Antimicrobial therapy that eliminates GAS from the pharynx also
prevents initial episodes of acute RF, and long-­term, continuous antibiotic prophylaxis that prevents GAS pharyngitis also prevents recurrences of acute RF.
Not all serotypes of GAS can cause RF. When some GAS strains
(e.g., M type 4) caused acute pharyngitis in a very susceptible rheumatic population, there were no recurrences of RF. In contrast,
episodes of pharyngitis caused by other serotypes in the same population led to frequent recurrences of acute RF, suggesting that the latter organisms were rheumatogenic. The concept of rheumatogenicity
is further supported by the observation that although serotypes of
GAS frequently associated with skin infection can be isolated also
from the upper respiratory tract, they rarely cause recurrences of RF
in individuals with a previous history of RF or first episodes of RF. In
addition, certain serotypes of GAS (M types 1, 3, 5, 6, 18, and 29) are
more frequently isolated from patients with acute RF than are other
serotypes.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The annual incidence of acute RF in some developing countries exceeds
50 per 100,000 children, and very high rates are also seen in ethnic
minority populations within Australia and New Zealand. Worldwide,
rheumatic heart disease remains the most common form of acquired
heart disease in all age-­groups, accounting for up to 50% of all cardiovascular disease and 50% of all cardiac admissions in many developing countries. Striking differences in the incidence of acute RF and
rheumatic heart disease among different ethnic groups are often evident within the same country; these differences are partially related
to differences in socioeconomic status, and there is a genetic basis for
increased susceptibility.
In the United States at the beginning of the 20th century, acute RF
was a leading cause of death among children and adolescents, with
annual incidence rates of 100-­200 per 100,000 population. In addition, rheumatic heart disease was a leading cause of heart disease
among adults <40 years old. At that time, as many as 25% of pediatric hospital beds in the United States were occupied by patients with
acute RF or its complications. By the 1940s, the annual incidence of
acute RF had decreased to 50 per 100,000 population, and over the
next 4 decades, the decline in incidence accelerated rapidly. By the
early 1980s, the annual incidence in some areas of the United States
was as low as 0.5 per 100,000 population, and rates of acute RF since
the 1980s have declined substantially. This sharp decline in the incidence of acute RF has been observed in other industrialized countries
as well.
The explanation for this dramatic decline in the incidence of acute
RF and rheumatic heart disease in the United States and other industrialized countries is not clear but is likely related in large part to a decline
in circulating rheumatogenic strains causing acute pharyngitis. Historically, acute RF was associated with poverty and overcrowding, particularly in urban areas. Much of the decline in the incidence of acute RF
in industrialized countries during the preantibiotic era was probably
the result of improved living conditions. Of the various manifestations
of poverty, crowding, which facilitates the spread of GAS infections,

1711

is most closely associated with the incidence of acute RF. The decline
in incidence of acute RF in industrialized countries over the past 4
decades is also attributable to the greater availability of medical care
and to the widespread use of antibiotics. Antibiotic therapy of GAS
pharyngitis is important in preventing initial attacks and, particularly,
recurrences of the disease. In addition, the decline in the United States
is attributed to a shift in the prevalent strains of GAS causing pharyngitis from mostly rheumatogenic to nonrheumatogenic.
Certain rheumatogenic serotypes (types 1, 3, 5, 6, and 18) that were
isolated less often during the 1970s and early 1980s dramatically reappeared during rheumatic fever outbreaks, and their appearance in
selected communities was probably a major factor. GAS that are associated with rheumatogenicity often form highly mucoid colonies on
throat culture plates.
In addition to the specific characteristics of the infecting strain of
GAS, the risk of developing acute RF also depends on various host
factors. The incidence of both initial attacks and recurrences of acute
RF peaks in children 5-­15 years old, the age of greatest risk for GAS
pharyngitis. Patients who have had an attack of acute RF tend to have
recurrences, and the clinical features of the recurrences tend to mimic
those of the initial attack. In addition, there appears to be a genetic
predisposition to acute RF. Studies in twins show a higher concordance
rate of acute RF in monozygotic than in dizygotic twin pairs. Preliminary studies from Oceania in a population with high rates of rheumatic
heart disease have identified an allele of interest that increases one’s risk
of rheumatic heart disease.

PATHOGENESIS

The cytotoxicity theory suggests that a GAS toxin is involved in the
pathogenesis of acute RF and rheumatic heart disease. GAS produces
a number of enzymes that are cytotoxic for mammalian cardiac cells,
such as streptolysin O, which has a direct cytotoxic effect on mammalian cells in tissue culture. A major problem with the cytotoxicity
hypothesis is its inability to explain the substantial latent period (usually 10-­21 days) between GAS pharyngitis and onset of acute RF.
An immune-­mediated pathogenesis for acute RF and rheumatic
heart disease has been suggested by its clinical similarity to other illnesses with an immunopathogenesis and by the latent period between
the GAS infection and acute RF. The immunologic cross-­reactivity of
several GAS cellular and extracellular epitopes with cardiac antigenic
epitopes also lends support to the hypothesis of molecular mimicry.
Common epitopes are shared between certain GAS components (e.g.,
M protein, cell membrane, group A cell wall carbohydrate, capsular
hyaluronate) and specific mammalian tissues (e.g., heart valve, sarcolemma, brain, joint).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

The current Jones Criteria, as revised in 2015 by the American Heart
Association (AHA), are intended for diagnosis of the initial attack of
acute RF and recurrent attacks (Table 229.2). There are five major and
four minor criteria and a requirement for evidence of recent GAS
infection. The 2015 revision includes separate criteria for low-­risk
populations (defined as those with incidence ≤2 per 100,000 school-­
age children per year or all-­age rheumatic heart disease prevalence
of ≤1 per 1,000 population) and moderate/high-­risk populations
(defined as those with higher incidence or prevalence rates). Virtually
all of the United States, Canada, and Western Europe are low-­risk,
whereas moderate/high-­risk populations include Maoris in New Zealand, aborigines in Australia, Pacific Islanders, and most developing
countries. Diagnosis of a first attack or recurrent attack of acute RF
can be established when a patient fulfills two major or one major and
two minor criteria and has evidence of preceding GAS infection.
Diagnosis of recurrent acute RF can also be made only in the moderate/high-­risk population by the presence of three minor criteria with
evidence of preceding GAS infection. In the 2015 Jones Criteria, a
major change from previous versions expands the definition of the
major criterion carditis to include subclinical evidence (e.g., in the
absence of a murmur, echocardiographic evidence of mitral regurgitation [MR] meeting specific criteria to distinguish physiologic from

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1712 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 229.2  Guidelines for the Diagnosis of an Initial or Recurrent Attack of Rheumatic Fever (Jones Criteria, Updated
2015)1–5
MAJOR MANIFESTATIONS

MINOR MANIFESTATIONS

SUPPORTING EVIDENCE OF ANTECEDENT
GROUP A STREPTOCOCCAL INFECTION

Carditis
Polyarthritis
Erythema marginatum
Subcutaneous nodules
Chorea

Clinical features:
Arthralgia
Fever

Positive throat culture or rapid streptococcal antigen
test
Elevated or increasing streptococcal antibody titer

Laboratory features:
Elevated acute-­phase reactants:
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
C-­reactive protein
Prolonged P-­R interval

1Initial attack: Two major manifestations or one major and two minor manifestations plus evidence of recent GAS infection. Recurrent attack: Two major, or one major and two minor,

or three minor manifestations (the latter only in the moderate/high-­risk population), plus evidence of recent GAS infection (see text).
2Low-­risk population is defined as acute rheumatic fever (ARF) incidence <2 per 100,000 school-­age children per year or all-­age rheumatic heart disease (RHD) prevalence of <1 per

1,000 population. Moderate/high-­risk population is defined as ARF incidence >2 per 100,000 school-­age children per year or all-­age RHD prevalence of >1 per 1,000 population.

3Carditis is now defined as clinical and/or subclinical (echocardiographic valvulitis). See Table 229.3.

4Arthritis (major) refers only to polyarthritis in low-­risk populations but also to monoarthritis or polyarthralgia in moderate/high-­risk populations.
5Minor criteria for moderate/high-­risk populations only include monoarthralgia (polyarthralgia for low-­risk populations), fever of >38°C (>38.5°C in low-­risk populations), and ESR >30

mm/hr (>60 mm/hr in low-­risk populations).
From Gewitz MH, Baltimore RS, Tani LY, et al. Revision of the Jones Criteria for the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever in the era of Doppler echocardiography: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;131(20):1806–1818.

pathologic MR) (see Table 487.1). Areas in which the Jones Criteria
differ in low-­risk from moderate/high-­risk populations relate to the
major criterion of arthritis and the minor criteria of arthralgia, definition of fever, and elevated inflammatory markers (see Table 229.2
and text that follows). These changes are designed to make it easier to
fulfill the Jones Criteria in patients from moderate/high-­risk populations. Even with strict application of the criteria, overdiagnosis and
underdiagnosis of acute RF may occur. The diagnosis of acute RF can
be made without strict adherence to the Jones Criteria in three circumstances: (1) when chorea occurs as the only major manifestation
of acute RF, (2) when indolent carditis is the only manifestation in
patients who first come to medical attention only months after the
apparent onset of acute RF, and (3) in a limited number of patients
with recurrence of acute RF in particularly high-­risk populations.

The Five Major Criteria
Migratory Polyarthritis

Arthritis occurs in approximately 75% of patients with acute RF and
typically involves larger joints, particularly the knees, ankles, wrists,
and elbows. Involvement of the spine, small joints of the hands and
feet, or hips is uncommon. Rheumatic joints are classically hot, red,
swollen, and exquisitely tender, with even the friction of bedclothes
being uncomfortable. The pain can precede and can appear to be disproportionate to the objective findings. The joint involvement is characteristically migratory in nature; that is, a severely inflamed joint
can become normal within 1-­3 days without treatment, even as one
or more other large joints become involved. Severe arthritis can persist for several weeks in untreated patients. Monoarticular arthritis
is unusual unless antiinflammatory therapy is initiated prematurely,
aborting the progression of the migratory polyarthritis. If a child with
fever and arthritis is suspected to have acute RF, it is frequently useful
to withhold antiinflammatory medications like salicylates or NSAIDs
and observe for migratory progression. A dramatic response to even
low doses of salicylates is another characteristic feature of the arthritis, and the absence of such a response should suggest an alternative
diagnosis.
Rheumatic arthritis is almost never deforming. Synovial fluid in
acute RF usually has 10,000-­100,000 white blood cells/μL with a predominance of neutrophils, protein level of approximately 4 g/dL, normal glucose level, and formation of a good mucin clot. Frequently,
arthritis is the earliest manifestation of acute RF and may correlate
temporally with peak antistreptococcal antibody titers. There is often
an inverse relationship between the severity of arthritis and the severity of cardiac involvement. In moderate/high-­risk populations only,

monoarthritis in the absence of prior inflammatory therapies, or even
polyarthralgia without frank objective signs of arthritis, can fulfill this
major criterion. Before polyarthralgia should be considered a major
criterion in the moderate/high-­risk population, other potential causes
should be excluded.

Carditis

A major change in the 2015 revision of the Jones Criteria is the acceptance of subclinical carditis (defined as without a murmur of valvulitis
but with echocardiographic evidence of valvulitis) or clinical carditis
(with a valvulitis murmur) as fulfilling the major criterion of carditis in
all populations. The echocardiographic features of subclinical carditis
must meet those included in Table 487.1 in Chapter 487 to distinguish
pathologic from physiologic degrees of valve regurgitation. Silent or
latent rheumatic heart disease describes echocardiographic evidence of
rheumatic heart disease in individuals with no known history of acute
RF and no clinical symptoms. In endemic regions, active surveillance
via screening echocardiography has emerged as a potential strategy to
detect asymptomatic subclinical rheumatic heart disease.
Carditis and resultant chronic rheumatic heart disease are the most
serious manifestations of acute RF and account for essentially all the
associated morbidity and mortality. Rheumatic carditis is characterized by pancarditis, with active inflammation of the myocardium,
pericardium, and endocardium (see Chapter 487). Cardiac involvement during acute RF varies in severity from fulminant, potentially
fatal exudative pancarditis to mild, transient cardiac involvement.
Endocarditis (valvulitis) is a universal finding in rheumatic carditis, whereas the presence of pericarditis or myocarditis is variable.
Myocarditis and/or pericarditis without clinical evidence of endocarditis almost never is rheumatic carditis; alternative etiologies
(especially viral) need to be sought. Most rheumatic heart disease is
isolated mitral valvular disease or combined aortic and mitral valvular disease. Isolated aortic or right-­sided valvular involvement is quite
uncommon. Serious and long-­term illness is related entirely to the
severity of valvular heart disease as a consequence of a single attack or
recurrent attacks of acute RF. Valvular insufficiency is characteristic
of both acute and convalescent stages of acute RF, whereas mitral and/
or aortic valvular stenosis usually appears years or even decades after
the acute illness. However, in developing countries, where acute RF
often occurs at a younger age, mitral stenosis and aortic stenosis may
develop sooner after acute RF than in developed countries and can
occur in young children.
Acute rheumatic carditis usually presents as tachycardia and cardiac murmurs, with or without evidence of myocardial or pericardial

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 229 u Group A Streptococcus
involvement. Moderate to severe rheumatic carditis can result in cardiomegaly and heart failure with hepatomegaly and peripheral and pulmonary edema. Echocardiographic findings include pericardial effusion,
decreased ventricular contractility, and aortic and/or mitral regurgitation. Mitral regurgitation is characterized typically by a high-­pitched
apical holosystolic murmur radiating to the axilla. In patients with significant MR, this may be associated with an apical mid-­diastolic murmur of relative mitral stenosis. Aortic insufficiency is characterized by
a high-­pitched decrescendo diastolic murmur at the left sternal border.
Carditis occurs in approximately 50–60% of all cases of acute RF.
Recurrent attacks of acute RF in patients who had carditis with their
initial attack are associated with high rates of carditis with increasing
severity of cardiac disease. The major consequence of acute rheumatic
carditis is chronic, progressive valvular disease, particularly valvular
stenosis, which can require surgical intervention.

Chorea

Sydenham chorea occurs in approximately 10–15% of patients
with acute RF and usually presents as an isolated, frequently subtle,
movement disorder. Emotional lability, incoordination, poor school
performance, uncontrollable movements, and facial grimacing are
characteristic, all exacerbated by stress and disappearing with sleep.
Chorea occasionally is unilateral (hemichorea). The latent period
from acute GAS infection to chorea is usually substantially longer
than for arthritis or carditis and can be months. The onset can be
insidious, with symptoms being present for several months before
recognition. Clinical maneuvers to elicit features of chorea include
(1) demonstration of milkmaid’s grip (irregular contractions and
relaxations of the muscles of the fingers while squeezing the examiner’s fingers), (2) spooning and pronation of the hands when the
patient’s arms are extended, (3) wormian darting movements of the
tongue on protrusion, and (4) examination of handwriting to evaluate fine motor movements. Diagnosis is based on clinical findings
with supportive evidence of GAS antibodies. However, in the usual
patient with a long latent period from the inciting streptococcal
infection to onset of chorea, antibody levels have often declined to
normal. Although the acute illness is distressing, chorea rarely, if
ever, leads to permanent neurologic sequelae.

Erythema Marginatum

Erythema marginatum is a rare (approximately 1% of patients with
acute RF) but characteristic rash of acute RF. It consists of erythematous, serpiginous, macular lesions with pale centers that are not pruritic (Fig. 229.2). It occurs primarily on the trunk and extremities, but
not on the face, and it can be accentuated by warming the skin.

Subcutaneous Nodules

Subcutaneous nodules are a rare (≤1% of patients with acute RF) finding and consist of firm nodules approximately 0.5-­1 cm in diameter
along the extensor surfaces of tendons near bony prominences. There
is a correlation between the presence of these nodules and significant
rheumatic heart disease.

Minor Criteria

These are more nonspecific than major criteria, and the 2015 revised
Jones Criteria have included some changes from the previous criteria.
The first of the two clinical minor criteria involve joint manifestations (only if arthritis is not used as a major criterion) and is defined
as polyarthralgia in low-­risk populations and monoarthralgia in moderate/high-­risk populations. The second clinical minor manifestation
is fever, defined as at least 38.5°C in low-­risk populations and at least
38.0°C in moderate/high-­risk populations. The two laboratory minor
criteria are (1) elevated acute-­phase reactants, defined as erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) at least 60 mm/hr and/or C-­reactive protein
(CRP) at least 3.0 mg/dL (30 mg/L) in low-­risk populations and ESR at
least 30 mm/hr and/or CRP at least 3.0 mg/dL (30 mg/L) in moderate/
high-­risk populations and (2) prolonged P-­R interval on ECG (unless
carditis is a major criterion). However, a prolonged P-­R interval alone
does not constitute evidence of carditis or predict long-­term cardiac
sequelae.

Recent Group A Streptococcus Infection

An absolute requirement for the diagnosis of acute RF is supporting
evidence of a recent GAS infection. Acute RF typically develops 10-­21
days after an acute episode of GAS pharyngitis at a time when clinical
findings of pharyngitis are no longer present and when only 10–20%
of patients still harbor GAS in the throat. One third of patients with
acute RF have no history of an antecedent clinically symptomatic pharyngitis. Therefore evidence of an antecedent GAS infection is usually
based on elevated or rising serum antistreptococcal antibody titers.
If only a single antibody is measured (usually anti–streptolysin O),
only 80–85% of patients with acute RF have an elevated titer; however,
95–100% have an elevation if three different antibodies (anti–streptolysin O, anti–DNase B, anti-hyaluronidase) are measured. Therefore
when acute RF is suspected clinically, multiple antibody tests should
be performed. Except for chorea, the clinical findings of acute RF generally coincide with peak antistreptococcal antibody responses. Most
patients with chorea have elevation of antibodies to at least one GAS
antigen. However, in patients with a long latent period from the inciting GAS infection, antibody levels may have declined to within the
normal range. The diagnosis of acute RF should not be made in those
patients with elevated or increasing streptococcal antibody titers who
do not fulfill the Jones Criteria.

Differential Diagnosis

Fig. 229.2 Polycyclic red borders of erythema marginatum in a febrile
child with acute rheumatic fever. (From Schachner LA, Hansen RC, eds.
Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2003:808.)

1713

The differential diagnosis of RF includes many infectious and
noninfectious illnesses (Table 229.3). When children present with
arthritis, a collagen vascular disease must be considered. Juvenile
idiopathic arthritis (JIA) must be distinguished from acute RF.
Children with JIA tend to be younger and usually have less joint
pain relative to their other clinical findings than those with acute RF.
Spiking fevers, nonmigratory arthritis, lymphadenopathy, and splenomegaly are more suggestive of JIA than acute RF. The response
to salicylate therapy is also much less dramatic with JIA than with
acute RF. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) can usually be distinguished from acute RF by antinuclear antibodies in SLE. Other
causes of arthritis such as pyogenic arthritis, malignancies, serum
sickness, Lyme disease, sickle cell disease, and reactive arthritis
related to gastrointestinal infections (e.g., Shigella, Salmonella, Yersinia) should also be considered. Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis
is discussed earlier (see Chapter 229).
When carditis is the sole major manifestation of suspected acute
RF, viral myocarditis, viral pericarditis, Kawasaki disease, and infective endocarditis should also be considered. Patients with infective

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1714 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 229.3  Differential Diagnosis of Acute Rheumatic Fever
ARTHRITIS

CARDITIS

CHOREA

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Reactive arthritis (e.g., Shigella, Salmonella, Yersinia)
Serum sickness
Sickle cell disease
Malignancy
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi)
Pyogenic arthritis
Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis

Viral myocarditis
Viral pericarditis
Infective endocarditis
Kawasaki disease
Congenital heart disease
Mitral valve prolapse
Innocent murmurs
MIS-­C
Lyme disease

Huntington chorea
Wilson disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Tic disorder
Hyperactivity
Encephalitis (infectious or autoimmune)

MIS-­C, Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (COVID-­19).

endocarditis may present with both joint and cardiac manifestations.
These patients can usually be distinguished from patients with acute RF
by blood cultures and the presence of extracardiac findings (e.g., hematuria, splenomegaly, splinter hemorrhages). When chorea is the sole
major manifestation of suspected acute RF, Huntington chorea, Wilson
disease, SLE, and various encephalitides should also be considered.

Termination of the antiinflammatory therapy may be followed by
the reappearance of clinical manifestations or of elevation in ESR
and CRP (rebound). It may be prudent to increase salicylates or corticosteroids until near-­normalization of inflammatory markers is
achieved.

TREATMENT

Because chorea often occurs as an isolated manifestation after the resolution of the acute phase of the disease, antiinflammatory agents are
usually not indicated. Sedatives may be helpful early in the course of
chorea; phenobarbital (16-­32 mg every 6-­8 hours PO) is the drug of
choice. If phenobarbital is ineffective, haloperidol (0.01-­0.03 mg/kg/24
hr divided twice daily PO) or chlorpromazine (0.5 mg/kg every 4-­6
hours PO) should be initiated. Some patients may benefit from a few-­
week course of corticosteroids.

All patients with acute RF should be placed on bed rest and monitored
closely for evidence of carditis. They can be allowed to ambulate when
the signs of acute inflammation have improved. However, patients with
carditis require longer periods of bed rest.

Antibiotic Therapy

Once the diagnosis of acute RF has been established and regardless of
the throat culture results, the patient should receive 10 days of orally
administered penicillin or amoxicillin or a single IM injection of benzathine penicillin to ensure eradication of GAS from the upper respiratory tract. If penicillin allergic, 10 days of erythromycin, 5 days of
azithromycin, or 10 days of clindamycin is indicated. After this initial
course of antibiotic therapy, long-­term antibiotic prophylaxis for secondary prevention should be instituted (see later).

Antiinflammatory Therapy

Antiinflammatory agents (e.g., salicylates, corticosteroids) should be
withheld if arthralgia or atypical arthritis is the only clinical manifestation of presumed acute RF. Premature treatment with one of these
agents may interfere with the development of the characteristic migratory polyarthritis and thus obscure the diagnosis of acute RF. Acetaminophen can be used to control pain and fever while the patient is
being observed for more definite signs of acute RF or for evidence of
another disease.
Patients with typical migratory polyarthritis and those with carditis without cardiomegaly or congestive heart failure should be treated
with oral salicylates. The usual dose of aspirin is 50-­70 mg/kg/day in
four divided doses orally (PO) for 3-­5 days, followed by 50 mg/kg/day
in four divided doses PO for 2-­3 weeks and half that dose for another
2-­4 weeks. Determination of the serum salicylate level is not necessary
unless the arthritis does not respond or signs of salicylate toxicity (tinnitus, hyperventilation) develop. There is no evidence that NSAIDs are
more effective than salicylates.
Patients with carditis and more than minimal cardiomegaly and/or
congestive heart failure should receive corticosteroids. The usual dose
of prednisone is 2 mg/kg/day in four divided doses for 2-­3 weeks, followed by half the dose for 2-­3 weeks, and then tapering of the dose by
5 mg/24 hr every 2-­3 days. When prednisone is being tapered, aspirin
should be started at 50 mg/kg/day in four divided doses for 6 weeks
to prevent rebound of inflammation. Supportive therapies for patients
with moderate to severe carditis include digoxin, fluid and salt restriction, diuretics, and oxygen. The cardiac toxicity of digoxin is enhanced
with myocarditis.

Sydenham Chorea

COMPLICATIONS

The arthritis and chorea of acute RF resolve completely without
sequelae. Therefore the long-­term sequelae of RF are essentially limited
to the heart (see Chapter 487).
The AHA has published updated recommendations regarding the
use of prophylactic antibiotics to prevent infective endocarditis (see
Chapter 486). The AHA recommendations no longer suggest routine
endocarditis prophylaxis for patients with rheumatic heart disease who
are undergoing dental or other procedures. However, the maintenance
of optimal oral healthcare remains an important component of an overall healthcare program. For the relatively few patients with rheumatic
heart disease in whom infective endocarditis prophylaxis remains recommended, such as those with a prosthetic valve or prosthetic material used in valve repair, the current AHA recommendations should be
followed (see Chapter 486). These recommendations advise using an
agent other than a penicillin to prevent infective endocarditis in those
receiving penicillin prophylaxis for RF because oral α-­hemolytic streptococci are likely to have developed resistance to penicillin.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for patients with acute RF depends on the clinical manifestations present at the initial episode, the severity of the initial episode,
and the prevention of recurrences. Approximately 50–70% of patients
with carditis during the initial episode of acute RF recover with no
residual heart disease; the more severe the initial cardiac involvement,
the greater the risk for residual heart disease. Patients without carditis
during the initial episode are less likely to have carditis with recurrent
attacks, but there is a stepwise increase in cardiac involvement as the
number of episodes increases. In contrast, patients with carditis during
the initial episode are very likely to have carditis with recurrences, and
the risk for permanent heart damage increases with each recurrence.
Patients who have had acute RF are susceptible to recurrent attacks
after reinfection of the upper respiratory tract with GAS, with approximately 50% risk with each GAS pharyngitis. Therefore these patients
require long-­term continuous chemoprophylaxis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 229 u Group A Streptococcus

1715

Table 229.4  Chemoprophylaxis for Recurrences of Acute Rheumatic Fever (Secondary Prophylaxis)
DRUG

DOSE

Penicillin G benzathine

ROUTE

600,000 IU for children weighing ≤60 lb and 1.2
million IU for children >60 lb, every 4 wk*

Intramuscular

250 mg, twice daily

Oral

500 mg once daily for patients weighing ≤60 lb

Oral

or
Penicillin V
or
Sulfadiazine or sulfisoxazole

1000 mg once daily for patients weighing >60 lb
FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE ALLERGIC TO PENICILLIN AND SULFONAMIDE DRUGS
Macrolide or azalide
Variable

Oral

*In high-­risk situations, administration every 3 wk is recommended.
Adapted from Gerber MA, Baltimore RS, Eaton CB, et al. Prevention of rheumatic fever and diagnosis and treatment of acute streptococcal pharyngitis: a scientific statement from
the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young. Circulation. 2009;119:1541–
1551.

Before antibiotic prophylaxis was available, 75% of patients who had
an initial episode of acute RF had one or more recurrences in their
lifetime. These recurrences were a major source of morbidity and mortality. The risk of recurrence is highest in the first 5 years after the initial
episode and decreases with time.
Approximately 20% of patients who present with isolated chorea
who are not given secondary prophylaxis develop rheumatic heart
disease within 20 years. Therefore patients with chorea, even in the
absence of other manifestations of RF, require long-­term antibiotic
prophylaxis (Table 229.4).

PREVENTION

Prevention of both initial and recurrent episodes of acute RF depends
on controlling GAS infections of the upper respiratory tract. Prevention of initial attacks (primary prevention) depends on identification
and eradication of GAS causing acute pharyngitis. A New Zealand
study in a population with very high rates of acute RF showed that
a school-­based GAS pharyngitis screening and management program
using oral amoxicillin substantially decreased pharyngeal GAS prevalence and rates of acute RF. Individuals who have already suffered an
attack of acute RF are particularly susceptible to recurrences of RF
with any subsequent GAS upper respiratory tract infection, whether
or not they are symptomatic. Therefore these patients should receive
continuous antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent recurrences (secondary
prevention).

Primary Prevention

Appropriate antibiotic therapy instituted before the ninth day of symptoms of acute GAS pharyngitis is highly effective in preventing the first
attacks of acute RF. However, approximately 30% of patients with acute
RF do not recall a preceding episode of pharyngitis and did not seek
therapy.

Secondary Prevention

Secondary prevention is directed at preventing acute GAS pharyngitis
in patients at substantial risk of recurrent acute RF. Secondary prevention requires continuous antibiotic prophylaxis, which should begin
as soon as the diagnosis of acute RF has been made and immediately
after a full course of antibiotic therapy has been completed. Because
patients who have had carditis with their initial episode of acute RF are
at higher risk for having carditis with recurrences and for sustaining
additional cardiac damage, they should receive long-­term antibiotic
prophylaxis well into adulthood and perhaps for life (see Table 229.4
and Table 229.5).
Patients who did not have carditis with their initial episode of acute
RF have a relatively low risk for carditis with recurrences. Antibiotic
prophylaxis should continue in these patients until the patient reaches

Table 229.5  Duration of Prophylaxis for People Who
Have Had Acute Rheumatic Fever: AHA
Recommendations
CATEGORY

DURATION

Rheumatic fever without carditis

5 yr or until 21 yr of age,
whichever is longer

Rheumatic fever with carditis but
without residual heart disease
(no valvular disease*)

10 yr or until 21 yr of age,
whichever is longer

Rheumatic fever with carditis
and residual heart disease
(persistent valvular disease*)

10 yr or until 40 yr of age,
whichever is longer; sometimes
lifelong prophylaxis

*Clinical or echocardiographic evidence.
Adapted from Gerber MA, Baltimore RS, Eaton CB, et al. Prevention of rheumatic fever
and diagnosis and treatment of acute streptococcal pharyngitis: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association (AHA) Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and
Kawasaki Disease Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young.
Circulation. 2009;119:1541–1551.

21 years of age or until 5 years have elapsed since the last RF attack,
whichever is longer. The decision to discontinue prophylactic antibiotics should be made only after careful consideration of potential risks
and benefits and of epidemiologic factors such as the risk for exposure
to GAS infections.
The regimen of choice for secondary prevention is a single IM injection of benzathine penicillin G (600,000 IU for children weighing ≤60
lb and 1.2 million IU for those >60 lb) every 4 weeks (see Table 229.4).
In certain high-­risk patients and in certain areas of the world where
the incidence of RF is particularly high, use of benzathine penicillin
G every 3 weeks may be necessary because serum concentrations of
penicillin may decrease to marginally effective levels after 3 weeks. In
the United States, administration of benzathine penicillin G every 3
weeks is recommended only for those who have recurrent acute RF
despite adherence to a 4-­week regimen. In compliant patients, continuous oral antimicrobial prophylaxis can be used. Penicillin V (250 mg
twice daily) and sulfadiazine or sulfisoxazole (500 mg for those weighing ≤60 lb or 1,000 mg for those >60 lb, once daily) are equally effective
when used in such patients. For the exceptional patient who is allergic to both penicillin and sulfonamides, a macrolide (erythromycin
or clarithromycin) or azalide (azithromycin) may be used. Table 229.5
notes the duration of secondary prophylaxis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1716 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Group B Streptococcus (GBS), or Streptococcus agalactiae, is a major
cause of neonatal bacterial sepsis worldwide. Although advances in
prevention strategies have led to a decline in the incidence of neonatal disease, GBS remains a dangerous pathogen for neonates, pregnant
women, and nonpregnant adults.

such as diabetes mellitus, cirrhosis, or malignancy, GBS may cause serious infections such as bacteremia, skin and soft tissue infections, bone
and joint infections, endocarditis, pneumonia, and meningitis. In the
era of maternal chemoprophylaxis, most invasive GBS infections occur
in nonpregnant adults. Unlike neonatal disease, the incidence of invasive GBS disease in adults has increased substantially, roughly tripling
between 1990 and 2016.
The serotypes most frequently associated with neonatal GBS disease
are types Ia, III, and V. Strains of serotype III are the most common
subtype isolated from colonized pregnant women and are also the
most frequent cause of invasive disease among newborns and adults.
Global epidemiologic studies have revealed regional variation in subtype prevalence, some of which may reflect local dietary and healthcare
practices.

ETIOLOGY

PATHOGENESIS

2.0

First AAP and ACOG statement

1.5

Early-onset disease
Late-onset disease

Consensus guidelines

1.0
Universal screening
0.5

0
20
2

5
20
1

0
20
1

5
20
0

0

0.0

20
0

GBS emerged as a prominent neonatal pathogen in the late 1960s. For
the next 2 decades, the incidence of neonatal GBS disease remained
fairly constant, affecting 1.0-­5.4 per 1,000 liveborn infants in the United
States. Two patterns of disease were seen: early-­onset disease, which
presents at <7 days of age, and late-­onset disease, which presents at
≥7 days of age. Since the early 1990s, widespread implementation of
maternal intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis has led to a striking
decrease in the incidence of early-­onset neonatal GBS disease in the
United States, from 1.7 to 0.19 per 1,000 live births in recent years. This
strategy has not had a significant effect on the incidence of late-­onset
disease, which has remained stable at approximately 0.3-­0.4 per 1,000
live births (Fig. 230.1). The incidence of neonatal GBS disease is higher
in premature and low birthweight infants, although most cases occur in
full-­term infants. Rates of both early-­and late-­onset disease are higher
in Black infants.
Colonization by GBS in healthy adults is common. Vaginal or rectal
colonization occurs in up to approximately 30% of pregnant women
and is the usual source for GBS transmission to newborn infants. In
the absence of maternal antibiotic prophylaxis, approximately 50% of
infants born to colonized women acquire GBS colonization, and 1–2%
of infants born to colonized mothers develop early-­onset disease.
Heavy maternal colonization increases the risk for infant colonization
and development of early-­onset disease. Additional risk factors for
early-­onset disease include prolonged rupture of membranes, intrapartum fever, prematurity, maternal bacteriuria during pregnancy, and
previous delivery of an infant who developed GBS disease. Risk factors
for late-­onset disease are less well defined. Whereas late-­onset disease
may follow vertical transmission, horizontal acquisition from nursery
or other community sources (such as family, healthcare providers, or
environmental exposure) has also been described.
GBS is also an important cause of invasive disease in adults. GBS may
cause urinary tract infections, bacteremia, endometritis, chorioamnionitis, and wound infection in pregnant and parturient women. In nonpregnant adults, especially those with underlying medical conditions

5

EPIDEMIOLOGY

A major risk factor for the development of early-­onset neonatal GBS
infection is maternal vaginal or rectal colonization by GBS. Infants
acquire GBS by ascending infection or during passage through the
birth canal. Fetal aspiration of infected amniotic fluid may occur. The
incidence of early-­onset GBS infection increases with the duration of
rupture of membranes. Infection may also occur through transcellular
passage across intact membranes. In cases of late-­onset infection, GBS
may be vertically transmitted or acquired later from maternal or nonmaternal sources.
Several bacterial factors are implicated in the pathogenesis of invasive GBS disease, primarily the type-­specific capsular polysaccharide.
Strains that are associated with invasive disease in humans elaborate
more capsular polysaccharide than do colonizing isolates. All GBS capsular polysaccharides are high molecular weight polymers composed
of repeating oligosaccharide subunits that include a short side chain
terminating in N-­acetylneuraminic acid (sialic acid). Studies of type
III GBS show that the sialic acid component of the capsular polysaccharide prevents activation of the alternative complement pathway in
the absence of type-­specific antibody. Sialylated capsular polysaccharide on the GBS surface also interacts with sialic acid–binding lectins
or siglecs on human leukocytes to dampen inflammatory gene activation. Thus the capsular polysaccharide appears to exert a virulence
effect by protecting the organism from opsonophagocytosis in the nonimmune host and by downregulating leukocyte activation. In addition,
type-­specific virulence attributes are suggested by the fact that type III
strains are implicated in most cases of late-­onset neonatal GBS disease
and meningitis. Type III strains are taken up by brain endothelial cells

19
9

Group B streptococci are facultative, anaerobic, gram-­positive cocci
that form chains or diplococci in broth and small, gray-­white or
orange-­tinged colonies on solid medium. GBS is definitively identified
by demonstration of the Lancefield group B carbohydrate antigen, such
as with latex agglutination techniques widely used in clinical laboratories. Presumptive identification can be established on the basis of a
narrow zone of β-­hemolysis on blood agar, resistance to bacitracin and
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX), lack of hydrolysis of bile
esculin, and elaboration of CAMP factor (named for the discoverers,
Christie, Atkins, and Munch-­Petersen), an extracellular protein that, in
the presence of the β toxin of Staphylococcus aureus, produces a zone
of enhanced hemolysis on sheep blood agar. Individual GBS strains are
serologically classified according to the presence of one of the structurally distinct capsular polysaccharides, which are important virulence
factors and stimulators of antibody-­associated immunity. Ten GBS
capsular types have been identified: types Ia, Ib, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII,
VIII, and IX.

0

Thomas A. Hooven

19
9

Group B Streptococcus

Rate per 1,000 live births

Chapter 230

Fig. 230.1 Incidence of early-­and late-­onset invasive group B strep-

tococcal (GBS) disease–active bacterial core surveillance areas, 1990-­
2019, and activities for prevention of GBS disease. AAP, American
Academy of Pediatrics; ACOG, American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. (Adapted from Jordan HT, Farley MM, Craig A, et al. Revisiting the need for vaccine prevention of late-­onset neonatal group B
streptococcal disease: a multistate, population-­based analysis. Pediatr
Infect Dis J. 2008;27:1057–1064.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 230 u Group B Streptococcus
more efficiently in vitro than are strains of other serotypes, although
studies using acapsular mutant strains demonstrate that the capsule
by itself does not facilitate cellular invasion. A single clade of type
III GBS is highly associated with late-­onset disease and meningitis.
This clonal group, ST-­17, produces a surface-­anchored protein called
hypervirulent GBS adhesin (HvgA) that is not present in other GBS
isolates. HvgA contributes to GBS adherence to intestinal and endothelial cells and mediates invasion into the central nervous system
(CNS) in an experimental infection model in mice. Other putative
GBS virulence factors include GBS surface proteins, which may play
a role in adhesion to host cells; C5a peptidase, which is postulated to
inhibit the recruitment of polymorphonuclear cells to sites of infection; β-­
hemolysin/cytolysin, which has been associated with cell
injury in vitro; and hyaluronidase, which has been postulated to act as
a spreading factor in host tissues.
In a classic study of pregnant women colonized with type III GBS,
those who gave birth to healthy infants had higher levels of capsular
polysaccharide-­specific antibody than those who gave birth to infants
who developed invasive disease. In addition, there is a high correlation
between antibody titer to GBS type III in the mother and titer in the
paired infants. These observations indicate that transplacental transfer of maternal antibody is critically involved in neonatal immunity to
GBS. Optimal immunity to GBS also requires an intact complement
system. The classical complement pathway is an important component of GBS immunity in the absence of specific antibody; in addition,
antibody-­mediated opsonophagocytosis may proceed by the alternative
complement pathway. These and other results indicate that anticapsular
antibody can overcome the prevention of C3 deposition on the bacterial
surface by the sialic acid component of the type III capsule.
The precise steps between GBS colonization and invasive disease
remain unclear. In vitro studies showing GBS entry into alveolar epithelial cells and pulmonary vasculature endothelial cells suggest that
GBS may gain access to the bloodstream by invasion from the alveolar
space, perhaps after intrapartum aspiration of infected amniotic fluid.
β-­hemolysin/cytolysin may facilitate GBS entry into the bloodstream
after inoculation into the lungs. Other studies have demonstrated
intestinal GBS colonization preceding invasive disease among newborns, suggesting translocation across the intestinal wall as a pathogenic mechanism.
GBS induces the release of proinflammatory cytokines. The group
B antigen and the peptidoglycan component of the GBS cell wall are
potent inducers of tumor necrosis factor-­α release in vitro, whereas
purified type III capsular polysaccharide is not. Even though the capsule plays a central role in virulence through avoidance of immune
clearance, the capsule does not directly contribute to cytokine release
and the resultant inflammatory response.
The complete genome sequences of hundreds of GBS strains have
been reported, facilitating a genomic approach to better understanding GBS. Analysis of these sequences shows that GBS is closely related
to Streptococcus pyogenes and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Many known
and putative GBS virulence genes are clustered in the genome in pathogenicity islands that also contain mobile genetic elements, suggesting

1717

that interspecies acquisition of genetic material plays an important role
in genetic diversity.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Two syndromes of neonatal GBS disease are distinguishable on the
basis of age at presentation, epidemiologic characteristics, and clinical features (Table 230.1). Early-­onset neonatal GBS disease presents
within the first 6 days of life and is often associated with maternal
obstetric complications, including chorioamnionitis, prolonged rupture of membranes, and premature labor. Infants may appear ill at
the time of delivery, and most infants become ill within 24 hours of
birth. In utero infection may result in septic abortion or immediate
distress after birth. More than 80% of early-­onset GBS disease presents as sepsis; pneumonia and meningitis are other common manifestations. Asymptomatic bacteremia is uncommon but can occur. In
symptomatic patients, nonspecific signs such as hypothermia or fever,
irritability, lethargy, apnea, and bradycardia may be present. Respiratory signs are prominent regardless of the presence of pneumonia
and include cyanosis, apnea, tachypnea, grunting, flaring, and retractions. A fulminant course with hemodynamic abnormalities, including
tachycardia, acidosis, and shock, may ensue. Persistent fetal circulation
may develop. Clinically and radiographically, pneumonia associated
with early-­onset GBS disease is difficult to distinguish from respiratory distress syndrome. Patients with meningitis often present with
nonspecific findings as described for sepsis or pneumonia, with more
specific signs of CNS involvement initially absent.
Late-­onset neonatal GBS disease presents at ≥7 days of life. Most
cases occur within the first 3 months of life, but later presentations are
also possible. Like early-­onset disease, late-­onset illness usually manifests as bacteremia (45–65%), often accompanied by meningitis (25–
35%). Focal infections involving bone and joints, skin and soft tissue,
the urinary tract, or lungs may also be seen. Cellulitis and adenitis are
often localized to the submandibular or parotid regions. In contrast to
early-­onset disease, maternal obstetric complications are not risk factors for the development of late-­onset GBS disease. Infants with late-­
onset disease are often less severely ill on presentation than infants with
early-­onset disease, and the disease is often less fulminant.
Invasive GBS disease in children beyond early infancy is uncommon. Bacteremia without a focus is the most common syndrome
associated with childhood GBS disease beyond early infancy. Focal
infections may include meningitis, pneumonia, endocarditis, and bone
and joint infections.

DIAGNOSIS

A major challenge is distinguishing between respiratory distress syndrome and invasive neonatal GBS infection in preterm infants because
the two illnesses share clinical and radiographic features. Severe apnea,
early onset of shock, abnormalities in the peripheral leukocyte count,
and greater lung compliance may be more likely in infants with GBS
disease. Other neonatal pathogens, including Escherichia coli and Listeria monocytogenes, may cause illness that is clinically indistinguishable
from that caused by GBS.

Table 230.1  Characteristics of Early-­and Late-­Onset Group B Streptococcus Disease
EARLY-­ONSET DISEASE

LATE-­ONSET DISEASE

Age at onset

0-­6 days

7-­90 days

Increased risk after obstetric complications

Yes

No

Common clinical manifestations

Sepsis, pneumonia, meningitis

Bacteremia, meningitis, osteomyelitis,
other focal infections

Common serotypes

Ia, III, V

Ia, III

Case fatality rate

4.5%

3.3%

Adapted from Seale AC, Bianchi-­Jassir F, Russell NJ, et al. Estimates of the burden of Group B streptococcal disease worldwide for pregnant women, stillbirths, and children. Clin
Infect Dis. 2017;65(Suppl 2):S200–S219.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1718 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
The diagnosis of invasive GBS disease is established by isolation
and identification of the organism from a normally sterile site, such as
blood, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Isolation of GBS from gastric or tracheal aspirates or from skin or mucous membranes indicates
colonization and is not diagnostic of invasive disease. CSF should be
examined in all neonates suspected of having sepsis because specific
CNS signs are often absent in the presence of meningitis, especially
in early-­onset disease. Antigen detection methods that use group B
polysaccharide–specific antiserum, such as latex particle agglutination, are available for testing of urine, blood, and CSF, but these tests
are less sensitive than culture. Moreover, antigen is often detected in
urine samples collected by bag from otherwise healthy neonates who
are colonized with GBS on the perineum or in the rectum. Commercially available methods for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of GBS-­specific DNA sequences from blood or CSF samples
are increasingly available, allowing earlier presumptive diagnosis than
traditional culture. When possible, PCR-­based diagnosis should be
verified with a sterilely obtained culture; however, in certain cases the
PCR result may be more accurate than the culture. A common example
is a PCR performed on CSF sampled from an infant who has already
received empiric antibiotic therapy, in which case the culture may
remain negative despite the persistence of PCR-­detectable GBS DNA.
Test results must therefore be interpreted in the context of a patient’s
specific clinical history.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Frequently present are abnormalities in the peripheral white blood cell
count, including an increased or decreased absolute neutrophil count,
elevated band count, increased ratio of bands to total neutrophils, or
leukopenia. An elevated C-­reactive protein level has been investigated
as a potential early marker, but this test is nonspecific and cannot be
used in isolation to diagnose GBS disease. Findings on chest radiograph
are often indistinguishable from those of respiratory distress syndrome
and may include reticulogranular patterns, patchy infiltrates, generalized opacification, pleural effusions, or increased interstitial markings.
GBS meningitis is diagnosed based on a positive microbiologic test
(culture or PCR), usually in combination with elevated CSF protein
levels, leukocytic infiltration, and hypoglycorrhachia (decreased CSF
glucose concentration).

TREATMENT

Penicillin G is the treatment of choice for confirmed GBS infection.
Empirical therapy of neonatal sepsis that could be caused by GBS generally includes ampicillin and an aminoglycoside, both for the need
for broad coverage pending organism identification and for synergistic
bactericidal activity. Once GBS has been definitively identified and a
good clinical response has occurred, therapy may be completed with
penicillin alone. Especially in patients with meningitis, high doses of
penicillin (450,000-­500,000 units/kg/day) or ampicillin (300 mg/kg/
day) are recommended because of the relatively high mean inhibitory
concentration (MIC) of penicillin for GBS and the potential for a high
initial CSF inoculum. The duration of therapy varies according to the

Table 230.2  Recommended Duration of Therapy for
Manifestations of Group B Streptococcus
Disease
TREATMENT

DURATION

Bacteremia without a focus

10 days

Uncomplicated meningitis

14 days

Ventriculitis

At least 4 wk

Septic arthritis or osteomyelitis

3-­4 wk

Data from the American Academy of Pediatrics. Group B streptococcal infections. In
Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Red Book: 2021-­2024 Report
of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American
Academy of Pediatrics; 2021:707–713.

site of infection and should be guided by clinical circumstances (Table
230.2). Extremely ill near-­term patients with respiratory failure have
been successfully treated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
Although some experts recommend that, in culture-­proven meningitis, additional CSF be sampled at 24-­48 hours to determine whether
sterility has been achieved, there is no strong evidence to support this
practice. A repeat lumbar puncture, preferably paired with intracranial imaging such as MRI or CT, may be considered in patients with
persistent neurologic symptoms after initiation of appropriately dosed
antibiotics. The purpose in such a case is to rule out the presence of an
abscess or other focal nidus of infection that may be escaping effective
antibiotic exposure.
For recurrent neonatal GBS disease, standard intravenous antibiotic therapy recommendations for the infant should be followed.
GBS recurrence can be caused by contaminated breast milk. Therefore
breastfed infants with more than one episode of GBS infection should
receive formula or pasteurized breast milk until expressed breast milk
can be cultured for the presence of GBS. If breast milk contamination
is confirmed, the mother should be counseled to consider a 5-­to 7-­day
course of amoxicillin or rifampin to eradicate GBS carriage, followed
by retesting of the milk.

PROGNOSIS

Studies from the 1970s and 1980s showed that up to 30% of infants
surviving GBS meningitis had major long-­term neurologic sequelae,
including developmental delay, spastic quadriplegia, microcephaly, seizure disorder, cortical blindness, or deafness. A study of infants who
survived GBS meningitis diagnosed from 1998 through 2006 found
that 19% had severe neurologic impairment and 25% had mild to
moderate impairment at long-­term follow-­up. Periventricular leukomalacia and severe developmental delay may result from GBS disease
and accompanying shock in premature infants, even in the absence of
meningitis. The outcome of focal GBS infections outside the CNS is
generally favorable.
In 2015, a global survey on the impact of GBS disease found the
case fatality rates associated with early-­and late-­onset neonatal GBS
disease in developed countries were 4.5% and 3.3%, respectively. Case
fatality rates were higher in developing countries. Mortality is higher
in premature infants; one study reported a case fatality rate of 30% in
infants at gestational age <33 weeks and 2% in those ≥37 weeks. The
case fatality rate in children age 3 months to 14 years was 9% and was
11.5% in nonpregnant adults.

PREVENTION

Persistent morbidity and mortality from perinatal GBS disease
despite advances in neonatal care have spurred intense investigation
into modes of prevention. Two basic approaches to GBS prevention
have been investigated: elimination of colonization from the mother
or infant (chemoprophylaxis) and induction of protective immunity
(immunoprophylaxis).

Chemoprophylaxis

Administration of antibiotics to pregnant women before the onset of
labor does not reliably eradicate maternal GBS colonization and is not
an effective means of preventing neonatal GBS disease. Interruption of
neonatal colonization is achievable through administration of antibiotics to the mother during labor. Infants born to GBS-­colonized
women with premature labor or prolonged rupture of membranes
who were given intrapartum chemoprophylaxis had a substantially
lower rate of GBS colonization (9% vs 51%) and early-­onset disease
(0% vs 6%) than did the infants born to women who were not treated.
Maternal postpartum febrile illness was also decreased in the treatment
group.
In the mid-­1990s, guidelines for chemoprophylaxis were issued that
specified administration of intrapartum antibiotics to women identified as high risk by either culture-­based or risk factor–based criteria.
These guidelines were revised in 2002 after epidemiologic data indicated the superior protective effect of the culture-­based approach in
the prevention of neonatal GBS disease, and further revised guidelines

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 230 u Group B Streptococcus
were issued in 2010 and 2020. According to current recommendations,
vaginorectal GBS screening cultures or PCR testing (where available) should be performed for all pregnant women at 36 0/7 to
37 6/7 weeks of gestation, except for those with GBS bacteriuria
during the current pregnancy or a previous infant with invasive
GBS disease. Any woman with a positive prenatal screening culture,
GBS bacteriuria during pregnancy, or a previous infant with invasive GBS disease should receive intrapartum antibiotics. Women
whose culture status is unknown (culture not done, incomplete,
or results unknown) and present in labor with a substantial risk of
preterm birth, prolonged rupture of membranes (≥18 hr), or intrapartum fever (≥38°C [100.4°F]) should also receive intrapartum chemoprophylaxis (Table 230.3). Routine intrapartum prophylaxis is

1719

not recommended for women with GBS colonization undergoing
planned cesarean delivery who have not begun labor or had rupture of membranes.
Penicillin remains the preferred agent for maternal chemoprophylaxis because of its narrow spectrum and the universal penicillin
susceptibility of GBS isolates associated with human infection (Fig.
230.2). Ampicillin is an acceptable alternative. If amnionitis is suspected, broad-­spectrum antibiotic therapy that includes an agent
active against GBS should replace GBS prophylaxis. Occasional GBS
isolates have demonstrated increased MICs to penicillin and other β-­
lactam antibiotics in association with mutations in penicillin-­binding
proteins. However, the clinical significance of these higher MIC values is unclear.

Table 230.3  Summary and References for GBS Prevention/Treatment Guidelines
AT-­RISK POPULATION

KEY PREVENTION/
TREATMENT PRACTICES

PRACTICE GUIDELINE GOVERNING BODY

Women with history of a previous neonate with
invasive GBS disease

Administer IAP during labor*

ACOG

Women with GBS bacteriuria during current
pregnancy

Administer IAP during labor*

ACOG

Women with uncomplicated pregnancy

Perform prospective GBS colonization
screening at 36 0/7 to 37 6/7 weeks of
gestation

ACOG

Administer IAP to colonized women during
labor*
Women who present in term labor with
unknown GBS status may qualify for IAP
depending on additional clinical details
Mothers with PROM, preterm labor, preterm
intraamniotic infection, and unknown GBS
colonization status

Administer IAP

ACOG

Term or late preterm (>34 wk) newborns with
risk factors for GBS infection

For persistent clinical symptoms consistent
with sepsis, obtain a blood culture and start
empiric antibiotics with anti-­GBS activity

AAP Redbook
AAP Pediatrics

In the absence of clinical symptoms, three
possible approaches are available:
1.	Categorical risk-­based management
2.	Use of an online Bayesian sepsis risk
calculator to guide management
3.	Serial observation of the infant
Preterm newborns ≤34 wk with risk factors for
GBS

For persistent clinical symptoms consistent
with sepsis, obtain a blood culture and start
empiric antibiotics with anti-­GBS activity

AAP Redbook
AAP Pediatrics

If delivery followed spontaneous preterm
labor, PROM, or concern for intraamniotic
infection, obtain a blood culture and
administer empiric antibiotics
If delivery followed induction of labor and
there was concern for intraamniotic infection
or if IAP was indicated but not provided,
obtain a blood culture and administer
empiric antibiotics
Infants with signs of late-­onset GBS disease

For empiric therapy of late-­onset GBS disease
in those who are not critically ill and in
whom meningitis is not suspected, initial
empiric therapy with ampicillin plus either
gentamicin or cefotaxime is appropriate.
If meningitis is suspected, ampicillin plus
cefotaxime is recommended

AAP Redbook

*Infants born by cesarean section for maternal indications with no preceding labor or ROM: postnatal management should be guided by the newborn’s clinical status and subsequent
risk of GBS exposure.
AAP, American Academy of Pediatrics; ACOG, American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology; IAP, Intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis; PROM, Preterm rupture of membranes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1720 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Percent resistant*

80

60

40

Erythromycin
Clindamycin†
Cefotaxime
Penicillin
Vancomycin

20

19

20

17
18
20

20

15
16
20

20

13
14
20

12

20

11

20

20

09
10
20

08

20

20

20

20

06
07

0

Year

Fig. 230.2 GBS antibiotic resistance rates measured through Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention active bacterial core surveillance,
2006-­2019. *Resistant includes those isolates intermediate or fully resistant to antibiotics tested. †Before 2011, only constitutive resistance
to clindamycin was tested. In 2011 and beyond, both constitutive and
inducible resistance to clindamycin were tested. (Courtesy Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.)

For women who report a penicillin allergy but who have not undergone formal sensitivity testing, the American College of Obstetrics
and Gynecology recommends allergy skin testing, which can be performed safely during pregnancy. Because of frequent resistance of
GBS to clindamycin (up to 46%), first-­
generation cephalosporins
(such as cefazolin) should be used for intrapartum chemoprophylaxis for penicillin-­intolerant women with a low risk of anaphylaxis.
For penicillin-­allergic women at high risk for anaphylaxis, clindamycin should be used only if isolates are demonstrated to be susceptible.
Vancomycin should be used if isolates are resistant to, or demonstrate
inducible resistance to, clindamycin or if clindamycin susceptibility is
unknown.
In 2019, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) published
updated guidelines with recommendations for prevention of early-­
onset GBS disease in newborns with risk factors (see Table 230.3).
These replaced earlier prevention guidelines released by the AAP and
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. A key point of these
revised recommendations is that newborns with risk factors for
GBS disease (such as inadequately treated maternal colonization
or preterm delivery) who have persistent signs of infection after
birth (beyond those attributable to transitional physiology) should
undergo a laboratory evaluation that includes a blood culture and
should receive empiric antibiotic therapy until infection has been
ruled out. For asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic infants born
after 35 0/7 weeks of gestation, the extent of newborn evaluation and
the decision to institute empiric antibiotics may be guided by one
of three systems for risk assessment: a categorical decision chart
based on the presence or absence of specific risk factors, repeated
clinical evaluations, or a validated online “sepsis calculator” tool,
developed from large datasets, which can estimate a newborn’s risk of
early-­onset disease based on historical factors and clinical presentation. For infants born before 35 0/7 weeks of gestation, the AAP
recommends a blood culture and empiric antibiotics in all cases
where spontaneous preterm labor, preterm rupture of the membranes, or any concern of intraamniotic infection preceded birth.
Empiric treatment is also recommended in any case of a vaginal
delivery before 35 0/7 weeks in which maternal chemoprophylaxis
was indicated but not administered (see Table 230.3).
Increasingly, there is recognition that decisions about whether to
start empiric antibiotics for well-­appearing infants with sepsis risk
factors must also take into consideration the local resources available

for systematic, serial examination. In medical environments where
well-­trained staff are available for careful, repeated observations of
the newborn for 36-­48 hours after birth, the threshold for initiating
empiric antibiotics may be higher than sites where serial examinations
are not possible. Of note, in the era of maternal chemoprophylaxis,
most cases of early-­onset disease are seen in infants born to women
with negative prenatal screening cultures. Data from a large epidemiologic study indicate that the administration of maternal intrapartum
antibiotics does not change the clinical spectrum or delay the onset of
clinical signs in infants who developed GBS disease despite maternal
prophylaxis.
A significant concern with maternal intrapartum chemoprophylaxis has been that large-­scale antibiotic use among parturient
women might lead to increased rates of antimicrobial resistance or
infection in infants with organisms other than GBS, but this has not
been borne out. In a population-­based study of early-­onset neonatal
infection from 2005 to 2014, the incidence of early-­onset sepsis both
overall and caused by E. coli remained stable. At present, the substantial decline in early-­onset neonatal GBS disease favors continued
broad-­scale intrapartum chemoprophylaxis, but continued surveillance is required.
A limitation of the maternal chemoprophylaxis strategy is that intrapartum antibiotic use is unlikely to have an impact on late-­onset neonatal disease, miscarriages, or stillbirths attributed to GBS or adult GBS
disease. In addition, with wider implementation of maternal chemoprophylaxis, an increasing percentage of early-­onset neonatal disease
has been detected in patients born to women with negative cultures,
that is, false-­negative screens.

Maternal Immunization

Human studies demonstrate that transplacental transfer of naturally
acquired maternal antibody to the GBS capsular polysaccharide
protects newborns from invasive GBS infection and that efficient
transplacental passage of vaccine-­induced GBS antibodies occurs.
Conjugate vaccines composed of the GBS capsular polysaccharides
coupled to carrier proteins have been produced for human use.
In early clinical trials, conjugate GBS vaccines were well tolerated
and induced levels of functional antibodies well above the range
believed to be protective in >90% of recipients. A trivalent vaccine
containing three subtypes of GBS capsule polysaccharide coupled
to CRM197 was safely administered to pregnant women in a phase
2 clinical trial, eliciting functionally active type-­specific antibodies
that were efficiently transported to the fetus remaining detectable
in the newborn. A more recent hexavalent vaccine candidate led to
protective antibodies against six GBS capsular subtypes in experimental animal pregnancy models and generated robust antibody
elaboration in nonpregnant adults in a phase 1/2 trial. Vaccines
containing GBS surface proteins have been considered as a means
to provide serotype-­independent GBS protection, and availability
of whole genome sequencing has enabled identification of vaccine
protein candidates.
A successful GBS maternal vaccine administered before or during
pregnancy should lead to transplacental passage of vaccine-­induced
antibody that protects the fetus and newborn against infection by
several GBS serotypes. Such a vaccine would eliminate the need for
cumbersome cultures during pregnancy, circumvent the various risks
associated with large-­scale antibiotic prophylaxis, likely have an impact
on both early-­and late-­onset disease, and provide a prevention strategy
in middle-­and low-­income countries, where maternal chemoprophylaxis may not be feasible. Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis will likely
remain an important aspect of prevention, particularly for women in
whom opportunities for GBS immunization are missed and for infants
born so early that levels of transplacentally acquired antibodies may
not be high enough to be protective.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 231 u Non–Group A or B Streptococci

Chapter 231

Non–Group A or B
Streptococci
David B. Haslam
The genus Streptococcus is exceptionally diverse and includes the major
human pathogens Streptococcus pyogenes (group A Streptococcus Streptococcus agalactiae (group B Streptococcus), and Streptococcus pneumoniae (Table 231.1). Other important pathogens include large-­colony
species bearing groups C and G Lancefield antigens and numerous
small-­colony variants that may or may not express Lancefield carbohydrate antigen included among the viridans streptococci (see Table
231.1). This chapter focuses on Streptococcus dysgalactiae subspecies
equisimilis (SDSE), commonly known as “group C and G streptococci,”
while Chapter 228 discusses S. pneumoniae and Chapter 232 discusses
enterococci.
All members of the genus Streptococcus are gram-­positive, catalase-­
negative organisms. Lancefield carbohydrate antigen, hemolytic activity, and colony morphology have classically been used to further
distinguish and classify streptococci. These features provide a useful
framework for the clinician and are still the most commonly used
classification schema. However, grouping based on these phenotypic
features does not precisely correlate with genetic relatedness, and
it is becoming clear that disease propensity is better correlated with
sequence homology than Lancefield grouping or hemolytic activity.
In this chapter, groups C and G streptococci refer exclusively to
the large colony-­forming organisms, often called S. pyogenes–like, as
their microbiologic and clinical features tend to mimic those of group
A Streptococcus. Despite their different Lancefield antigens, the large-­
colony-­forming C and G streptococci are grouped together as SDSE.
The remaining large-­
colony group C streptococci, predominantly

1721

animal pathogens, are grouped as S. dysgalactiae subspecies dysgalactiae. Nonhuman group G isolates are often considered part of a single
species designated Streptococcus canis and are genetically distinct from
the SDSE group G organisms.
The groups C and G streptococci share a number of virulence factors
with S. pyogenes, including the production of streptolysin O, M protein,
streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin B, and hyaluronidase. The M protein
is similar to that of S. pyogenes and may account for the postinfectious
glomerulonephritis that is occasionally seen after infection with these
organisms. A toxic shock–like syndrome associated with groups C and
G streptococcal infection has been related to M protein type and production of a pyrogenic exotoxin by SDSE.
SDSE are common habitants of the pharynx, being detected in up
to 5% of asymptomatic children. Other potential sites of colonization
include the skin and gastrointestinal tract. Colonization of the vagina
is reported and may be the source of occasional SDSE isolated from the
umbilicus of healthy neonates.
Clinical manifestations of disease caused by SDSE overlap those of S.
pyogenes. In children, these organisms are implicated most commonly
in pharyngitis. The true role of these organisms as a cause of pharyngitis is difficult to determine because asymptomatic colonization is common. Nevertheless, several epidemics of SDSE pharyngitis have been
reported, including foodborne outbreaks. A large study from Sweden
recently demonstrated similar rates of detection of S. pyogenes (15%)
and SDSE (14%) in children with pharyngitis. S. pyogenes was most
prevalent in young children, whereas SDSE predominated in older
children and adolescents. The clinical presentation of SDSE is indistinguishable from S. pyogenes–associated pharyngitis. Isolated case
reports have described SDSE pneumonia in children, which is commonly complicated by abscess formation, empyema, and bacteremia.
Additional respiratory infections include rare reports of epiglottitis and
sinusitis.
SDSE are a significant cause of skin and soft tissue infections. As with
S. pyogenes, lymphangitis can complicate superficial infections caused
by SDSE. Necrotizing fasciitis caused by SDSE is being described with
increasing frequency. Musculoskeletal infections, particularly pyogenic
arthritis, occasionally are caused by SDSE. Pediatric cases are uncommon but may be increasing in incidence.

Table 231.1  Relationship of Large-­Colony Streptococci Identified by Hemolysis and Lancefield Grouping to Sites of
Colonization and Disease
GROUP A STREPTOCOCCUS
(S. pyogenes)

GROUP B STREPTOCOCCUS
(S. agalactiae)

OTHER β-­HEMOLYTIC
STREPTOCOCCI

VIRIDANS STREPTOCOCCI

Hemolysis

β

β

β

α

Lancefield group

A

B

C-­H, K-­V
Especially C and G

Species or strains

M types (>180)

Serotypes (Ia, Ib, II, III, IV, V, VI,
VII, and VIII)

S. dysgalactiae subspecies
equisimilis
S. dysgalactiae subspecies
dysgalactiae
S. canis

Streptococcus bovis
Streptococcus mitis
Streptococcus mutans
Streptococcus sanguis
Many others

Normal flora

Pharynx, skin, anus

Gastrointestinal and
genitourinary tract

Pharynx, skin,
gastrointestinal and
genitourinary tracts

Pharynx, nose, skin,
genitourinary tract

Common human
diseases

Pharyngitis, tonsillitis,
erysipelas, impetigo,
septicemia, wound
infections, necrotizing
fasciitis, cellulitis, meningitis,
pneumonia, scarlet fever,
toxic shock–like syndrome,
rheumatic fever, acute
glomerulonephritis

Puerperal sepsis,
chorioamnionitis,
endocarditis, neonatal
sepsis, meningitis,
osteomyelitis, pneumonia

Wound infections, cellulitis, Endocarditis, human bite
necrotizing fasciitis,
infections
pneumonia, endocarditis,
brain abscess, sepsis,
nosocomial infections,
opportunistic infections

α, Partial hemolysis; β, complete hemolysis; γ, no hemolysis (nonhemolytic).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1722 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Reactive arthritis has been described after SDSE infection; however,
unlike S. pyogenes, the association between SDSE infection and acute
rheumatic fever has not clearly been defined, and antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended after reactive arthritis with this organism.
Endocarditis, bacteremia, brain abscess, and toxic shock syndrome
caused by SDSE have all been described but are uncommon in children. These infections generally occur in children with immune deficits or in adolescents after delayed recognition of sinusitis.
These organisms can cause neonatal septicemia similar to early-­
onset group B streptococcal disease. Risk factors include prematurity
and prolonged rupture of membranes. Respiratory distress, hypotension, apnea, bradycardia, and disseminated intravascular coagulation
may be seen, and associated maternal infection is common. Neonatal
toxic shock syndrome associated with SDSE has also been described.
Treatment of SDSE infections is similar to that of S. pyogenes. These
organisms retain susceptibility to penicillin and other β-­lactams. Other
agents with reliable activity include linezolid, daptomycin, and vancomycin, though occasional isolates demonstrate tolerance to vancomycin. Clindamycin and macrolides have poor bactericidal activity against
these organisms, and resistance rates are significant. Resistance to quinolones is reported, and up to 70% of SDSE are resistant to tetracycline.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 232

Enterococcus
David B. Haslam
Enterococcus has long been recognized as a pathogen in select populations and has become a common and particularly troublesome cause of
hospital-­acquired infection in recent years. Enterococci were formerly
classified with Streptococcus bovis and Streptococcus equinus as Lancefield group D streptococci but are now placed in a separate genus and
are notorious for their propensity to cause infection in compromised
hosts and frequent resistance to antibiotics.

ETIOLOGY

Enterococci are gram-­positive, catalase-­negative facultative anaerobes
that grow in pairs or short chains. Most are nonhemolytic (also called
γ-­hemolytic) on sheep blood agar, although some isolates have α-­ or β-­
hemolytic activity. Enterococci are distinguished from most Lancefield
groupable streptococci by their ability to grow in bile and hydrolyze
esculin. They are able to grow in 6.5% NaCl and hydrolyze L-­pyrrolidonyl-­
β-­naphthylamide, features used by clinical laboratories to distinguish
enterococci from group D streptococcus. Identification at the species
level is enabled by differing patterns of carbohydrate fermentation.

Only rarely are other species, such as Enterococcus gallinarum and
Enterococcus casseliflavus, associated with invasive infection, but
these organisms are notable for their intrinsic low-­level vancomycin resistance. Whole genome sequencing suggests that the patient’s
indigenous flora is the source of enterococcal infection in most cases.
However, direct spread from person to person or from contaminated
medical devices may occur, particularly within newborn nurseries
and intensive care units, where nosocomial spread has resulted in
hospital outbreaks.

PATHOGENESIS

Enterococci are not aggressively invasive organisms, usually causing
disease only in children with damaged mucosal surfaces or an impaired
immune system. Their dramatic emergence as a cause of nosocomial
infection is predominantly a result of their resistance to antibiotics
commonly used in the hospital setting. Hospital-­associated enterococci
generally lack CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) elements that defend against phage-­mediated horizontal gene transfer, an important source of antimicrobial-­resistance
genes. Secreted and cell-­surface molecules are implicated in pathogenesis. Adhesion-­promoting factors such as the surface protein Eps likely
account for the propensity of these organisms to cause endocarditis
and urinary tract infections (UTIs). The ability to form biofilms likely
facilitates the colonization of urinary and vascular catheters. Other
proposed virulence factors include cytolysin, aggregation substance,
gelatinase, and extracellular superoxide.

Antimicrobial Resistance

Enterococci are highly resistant to cephalosporins and semisynthetic
penicillins such as nafcillin, oxacillin, and methicillin. They are moderately resistant to extended-­spectrum penicillins such as ticarcillin and
carbenicillin. Ampicillin and penicillin are the most active β-­lactams
against these organisms. Some strains of E. faecalis and E. faecium demonstrate decreased resistance to β-­lactam antibiotics because of mutations in one of the penicillin-­binding proteins. In addition, occasional
strains of E. faecalis produce a plasmid-­encoded β-­lactamase similar
to that found in Staphylococcus aureus. These isolates are completely
resistant to penicillins, necessitating the combination of a penicillin
plus a β-­lactamase inhibitor or the use of imipenem or vancomycin.
Any active drug may be insufficient if used alone for serious infections
wherein high bactericidal activity is desired (Tables 232.1 and 232.2).
All enterococci have intrinsic low-­
level resistance to aminoglycosides because these antibiotics are poorly transported across the
Enterococcus cell wall. Concomitant use of a cell wall–active agent, such
as a β-­lactam or glycopeptide antibiotic, improves the permeability of
the cell wall for the aminoglycosides, resulting in synergistic killing.
However, some isolates demonstrate high-­level resistance, defined as
mean inhibitory concentration (MIC) >2,000 μg/mL and a result of
modification or inactivation of aminoglycoside agents. Strains demonstrating high-­level resistance and even some isolates with moderate-­
level resistance are not affected synergistically by aminoglycosides and
cell wall–active antibiotics.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Enterococci are normal inhabitants of the gastrointestinal tract of
humans and organisms throughout the animal kingdom, suggesting they are highly evolved to occupy this niche. Oral secretions and
dental plaque, the upper respiratory tract, skin, and vagina may also
be colonized by these organisms. Enterococcus faecalis is the predominant enterococcal species, with colonization commonly occurring in
the first week of life. By the time of adulthood, E. faecalis colonization is nearly ubiquitous. Enterococcus faecium colonization is less consistent, although approximately 25% of adults harbor this organism.
Disruption of the normal intestinal microbiota by antibiotic exposure
or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation markedly enriches for fecal
enterococcal abundance and dramatically increases the risk of subsequent bloodstream infection (BSI).
E. faecalis accounts for approximately 80% of enterococcal infections, with almost all of the remaining infections caused by E. faecium.

Table 232.1  Intrinsic Resistance Mechanisms Among
Enterococci
ANTIMICROBIAL

MECHANISM

Ampicillin, penicillin

Altered binding protein

Aminoglycoside (low level)

Decreased permeability, altered
ribosomal binding

Clindamycin

Altered ribosomal binding

Erythromycin

Altered ribosomal binding

Tetracyclines

Efflux pump

Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole

Utilize exogenous folate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 232 u Enterococcus
Table 232.2  Acquired Resistance Mechanisms Among
Enterococci
ANTIMICROBIAL

MECHANISM

Ampicillin, penicillin (high level)

Mutation of PBP5

Aminoglycoside (high level)

Enzyme modification

Quinolones

DNA gyrase mutation

Chloramphenicol

Efflux pump

Glycopeptide

Altered cell wall binding

Quinupristin/dalfopristin

Ribosomal modification, efflux
pump

Linezolid

Point mutation

Daptomycin

Unknown

Resistance to almost all other antibiotic classes, including tetracyclines, macrolides, and glycopeptides, has been described among the
enterococci, necessitating individual susceptibility testing for these
antibiotics when their use is considered. Despite apparent susceptibility
in vitro, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole has poor activity in vivo and
should not be used as the primary agent against enterococcal infections.
Vancomycin has traditionally been effective against Enterococcus isolates, but resistance to vancomycin, defined as MIC >32 μg/mL, and other
glycopeptides, including teicoplanin, is increasingly common. The emergence of vancomycin-­resistant Enterococcus (VRE) has become a major
challenge in the care of hospitalized patients. In particular, mortality in
patients with VRE BSIs is considerable, and treatment is complicated by
frequent resistance of VRE to most other antibiotic classes. High-­level
vancomycin resistance (MIC ≥64 μg/mL) can be transferred by way of
conjugation and usually results from plasmid-­mediated transfer of the
vanA gene. High-­level resistance is most common among E. faecium
but is increasingly seen among E. faecalis isolates. Moderate-­level resistance (MIC 8-­256 μg/mL) results from a chromosomal homolog of vanA
known as vanB. Isolates that harbor the vanB gene are only moderately
resistant to vancomycin and initially demonstrate susceptibility to teicoplanin, although resistance can emerge during therapy. Resistance to
newer agents, including linezolid and daptomycin, is rare thus far. Linezolid resistance is a result of mutations in the 26S ribosomal subunit,
whereas daptomycin resistance is associated with pathogenic variants in
genes required for membrane synthesis and repair.

1723

Enterococci are an occasional cause of meningitis. In neonates in
particular, meningitis usually occurs as a complication of septicemia.
Alternatively, the organism may gain access to the central nervous system by way of contiguous spread, such as through a neural tube defect
or in association with an intraventricular shunt. Enterococcal meningitis can be associated with minimal abnormality of cerebrospinal fluid.

Infections in Older Children

Enterococcus rarely causes UTIs in healthy children but accounts for
approximately 15% of cases of nosocomially acquired UTIs in both
children and adults. Presence of an indwelling urinary catheter is
the major risk factor for nosocomial UTIs. Enterococcus is frequently
isolated in intraabdominal infections after intestinal perforation or
surgery. The significance of enterococci in polymicrobial infections
has been questioned, although reported mortality rates are higher
when intraabdominal infections include enterococci. Enterococcus
is increasingly common as a cause of nosocomial bacteremia; these
organisms accounted for approximately 10% of nosocomial BSIs in
children, ranking second only to coagulase-­negative staphylococci.
Predisposing factors for enterococcal bacteremia and endocarditis
include an indwelling central venous catheter, gastrointestinal surgery,
immunodeficiency, and cardiovascular abnormalities. Risk factors
for vancomycin-­resistant enterococcal bacteremia include prolonged
mechanical ventilation, immunosuppression, and recent vancomycin
exposure.

TREATMENT

Enterococcus infections traditionally occurred predominantly in newborn infants; infection in older children is increasingly common. Most
enterococcal infections occur in patients with breakdown of normal
physical barriers such as the gastrointestinal tract, skin, or urinary
tract. Other risk factors for enterococcal infection include prolonged
hospitalization, indwelling vascular catheters, prior use of antibiotics,
and compromised immunity.

Treatment of invasive enterococcal infections must recognize that
these organisms are resistant to antimicrobial agents frequently used
as empirical therapy. In particular, cephalosporins should not be
relied upon in situations where Enterococcus is known or suspected to
be involved. In general, in the immunocompetent host, minor localized infections caused by susceptible Enterococcus can be treated with
ampicillin alone. Antibiotics containing β-­lactamase inhibitors (clavulanate or sulbactam) provide advantage only for the very few organisms whose resistance is caused by the production of β-­lactamase. In
uncomplicated UTIs, nitrofurantoin is efficacious when the organism
is known to be sensitive to this antibiotic.
Invasive infections such as sepsis and meningitis have traditionally
been treated with a combination of penicillin or ampicillin and an aminoglycoside when the isolate is susceptible. Recent experience suggests
that adjunctive aminoglycosides may increase the risk of nephrotoxicity
without improving outcomes in uncomplicated BSIs. Vancomycin can be
substituted for the penicillins in allergic patients but should be used with
an aminoglycoside because vancomycin alone is not bactericidal. Endocarditis from strains possessing high-­level aminoglycoside resistance
may relapse even after prolonged therapy. Continuous-­infusion penicillin or the combination of ampicillin plus ceftriaxone has been proposed
for treatment of these infections in adults, yet ultimately valve replacement may be necessary. In patients with catheter-­associated enterococcal bacteremia, the catheter should be removed promptly in most cases,
although salvage of infected lines has occurred with the combined use of
ampicillin or vancomycin with an aminoglycoside.

Neonatal Infections

Treatment of Vancomycin-­Resistant Enterococci

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Enterococcus accounts for up to 15% of all neonatal bacteremia and
septicemia. Like group B streptococcus infections, enterococcal infections are seen in two distinct settings in neonatal patients. Early-­onset
infection (<7 days of age) may mimic early-­onset group B streptococcus
septicemia but tends to be milder. Early-­onset enterococcal sepsis most
often occurs in full-­term infants who are otherwise healthy. Late-­onset
infection (≥7 days of age) is associated with risk factors such as extreme
prematurity, presence of an intravascular catheter, or necrotizing enterocolitis or follows an intraabdominal surgical procedure. Symptoms in
late-­onset disease are more severe than those in early-­onset disease and
include apnea, bradycardia, and deteriorating respiratory function. Focal
infections such as scalp abscess and catheter infection are commonly
associated. Mortality rates range from 6% in early-­onset septicemia to
15% in late-­onset infections associated with necrotizing enterocolitis.

The treatment of serious infections caused by multiresistant,
vancomycin-­resistant strains is particularly challenging. The two most
commonly used antibiotics are linezolid and daptomycin. Linezolid,
an oxazolidinone antibiotic that inhibits protein synthesis, is bacteriostatic against most E. faecium and E. faecalis isolates, including
vancomycin-­resistant isolates. Response rates to linezolid are generally
over 90%, including cases of bacteremia and sepsis, and this antibiotic
is currently the only drug approved by the FDA for treatment of VRE
infections. Anecdotal reports reveal the success of linezolid in treating
meningitis caused by VRE. Unfortunately, as seen with other antibiotics, linezolid resistance is documented, and nosocomial spread of resistant organisms can occur. Linezolid frequently causes reversible bone
marrow suppression after prolonged use and is associated with rare
occurrences of lactic acidosis and irreversible peripheral neuropathy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1724 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Serotonin syndrome may be seen in patients taking concomitant selective serotonin uptake inhibitor antidepressants. Newer oxazolidinones
include tedizolid, which has better in vitro activity against enterococci
and appears to have favorable pharmacokinetic and toxicity profiles
when compared to linezolid.
Daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide that is rapidly bactericidal against
a broad range of gram-­positive organisms. The antibiotic inserts into
the bacterial cell wall, causing membrane depolarization and cell death.
It has been approved for the treatment of adults with serious skin and
soft tissue infections, right-­sided endocarditis, and bacteremia caused
by susceptible organisms. Most strains of VRE (both E. faecium and E.
faecalis) are susceptible to daptomycin in vitro, and daptomycin has
become the first-­line agent for VRE treatment in many centers. However, treatment failures occur when administered at the standard dose
of 6 mg/kg/day, necessitating higher treatment doses in patients with
severe invasive infections. Furthermore, daptomycin dosages may need
to be higher in children when compared with adults because of more
rapid renal clearance. The addition of a β-­lactam antibiotic, such as
ampicillin or ceftaroline, may enhance activity of daptomycin and provide benefit over daptomycin alone for severe VRE infections, including endocarditis. Daptomycin has unreliable activity in the lung and
therefore should not be used as a sole agent to treat pneumonia. Resistance of both S. aureus and Enterococcus to daptomycin has rarely been
described, sometimes arising during therapy.
Several studies and meta-­
analyses have suggested that clinical
outcomes of invasive VRE infection are similar when linezolid and
daptomycin are used. However, infection-­related mortality remains
significant, especially among adults, and alternative or combination
therapies continue to be explored.
Ceftaroline, a fifth-­generation cephalosporin with activity against
methicillin-­resistant S. aureus, has activity against many E. faecalis strains but is inadequate when used alone for the treatment of E.
faecium.
Newer tetracyclines have been developed with activity against VRE,
including tigecycline, omadacycline, and eravacycline. Tigecycline is
approved for use in complicated intraabdominal and skin and soft tissue infections but fails to achieve high serum concentrations and may
be associated with treatment failure for VRE BSIs. Gastrointestinal side
effects are common with tigecycline and may be intolerable. Experience with omadacycline and eravacycline in treatment of pediatric
patients with VRE infection is lacking.
Lipoglycopeptides are a newer class of antibiotics that possess a core
structure similar to vancomycin with the addition of a lipid substituent.
Lipoglycopeptides include telavancin, dalbavancin, and oritavancin.
Only oritavancin has reliable activity against VRE, but resistance may
develop, and thus far clinical experience in children is limited.

PREVENTION

Strategies for preventing enterococcal infections include timely
removal of urinary and intravenous catheters and debridement of
necrotic tissue. Infection control strategies, including surveillance cultures, patient and staff cohorting, and strict gown and glove isolation,
are effective at decreasing colonization rates with VRE. Unfortunately,
these organisms may persist on inanimate objects such as stethoscopes,
complicating efforts to limit their nosocomial spread. In order to prevent the emergence and spread of vancomycin-­resistant organisms, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has developed a series of
guidelines for prudent vancomycin use. Antibiotics with broad activity
against anaerobic organisms are also thought to contribute to colonization with VRE, suggesting that prudent use of such antibiotics may
also help limit spread of VRE. Decolonization strategies have been
attempted but are generally ineffective in eradicating skin or gastrointestinal carriage of VRE. In particular, antimicrobial therapy is not
indicated for this purpose. The role of probiotic agents in eliminating
VRE colonization is currently unclear but may be a useful adjunct to
prudent antimicrobial usage and other infection control interventions
in limiting nosocomial spread of VRE.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 233

Diphtheria
(Corynebacterium
diphtheriae)
Amruta Padhye and Stephanie A. Fritz
Diphtheria is an acute toxic infection caused by toxin-­
producing
strains of Corynebacterium diphtheriae and, less often, by toxin-­
producing strains of Corynebacterium ulcerans. Non–toxin-­producing
C. diphtheriae can also cause disease, although less severe. C. ulcerans is
more often isolated from animal sources and can cause human disease
similar to C. diphtheriae.
Although respiratory and cutaneous presentations of diphtheria are
the most common, mortality is substantially higher with respiratory
diphtheria. Classic respiratory diphtheria caused by toxigenic Corynebacterium species is the main focus of World Health Organization
(WHO) case surveillance. In the United States, the case definition was
modified in 2019, and currently toxigenic cases of diphtheria, including respiratory and nonrespiratory (e.g., skin, wound, conjunctiva, ear,
genital mucosa) forms, are reportable to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

ETIOLOGY

Corynebacteria are aerobic, nonencapsulated, non–spore-­
forming,
mostly nonmotile, pleomorphic, gram-­positive bacilli. C. diphtheriae
is by far the most frequently isolated agent of diphtheria. Toxigenic
C. ulcerans can cause mastitis in cattle and respiratory infections in
animals and can spread to humans through close contact with secretions. It can cause cutaneous and respiratory illnesses that are clinically indistinguishable from diphtheria in humans. Person-­to-­person
transmission of C. ulcerans is possible, though not well established. A
selective medium (e.g., cystine-­tellurite blood agar or Tinsdale agar)
that inhibits growth of competing organisms is required for isolation
and, when reduced by C. diphtheriae, renders colonies gray-­black.
Differentiation of C. diphtheriae from C. ulcerans is based on urease
activity; C. ulcerans is urease-­positive. Four C. diphtheriae biotypes
(mitis, intermedius, belfanti, gravis) are capable of causing diphtheria
and are differentiated by colony morphology, hemolysis, and fermentation reactions. The ability of either C. diphtheriae or C. ulcerans to
produce diphtheritic toxin results from acquisition of a lysogenic corynebacteriophage, which encodes the diphtheritic toxin gene and confers diphtheria-­producing potential in these strains. Demonstration of
diphtheritic toxin production by the modified Elek test, an agar immunoprecipitin technique, alone or in conjunction with polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) testing for carriage of the toxin gene, is necessary to
confirm disease. Toxigenic and nontoxigenic strains are indistinguishable by colony type, microscopic features, or biochemical test results.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Unlike other diphtheroids (coryneform bacteria), which are ubiquitous
in nature, C. diphtheriae is an exclusive inhabitant of human mucous
membranes and skin. Spread is primarily by respiratory droplets,
direct contact with respiratory secretions of symptomatic individuals, or exudate from infected skin lesions. Asymptomatic respiratory
tract carriage is important in transmission. In areas where diphtheria
is endemic, 3–5% of healthy individuals can carry toxigenic organisms,
but carriage is exceedingly rare in nonendemic areas. Skin infection
and skin carriage are silent reservoirs of C. diphtheriae, and organisms
can remain viable in dust or on fomites for up to 6 months.
In the 1920s, >125,000 diphtheria cases and 10,000 diphtheria-related
deaths were reported annually in the United States, with the highest fatality

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 233 u Diphtheria (Corynebacterium diphtheriae) 1725
rates among very young and elderly persons. The incidence then began to
decrease and, with widespread use of diphtheria toxoid in the United States
after World War II, declined steadily through the late 1970s. From 1996 to
2018, only 14 cases of respiratory diphtheria, including 1 fatal case, were
reported in the United States, an average of ≤1 case annually. During this
same period, five cases of culture-­confirmed respiratory diphtheria-­like illness caused by toxigenic C. ulcerans were also identified.
Despite the worldwide decrease in disease incidence, diphtheria
remains endemic in many developing countries with poor immunization rates against diphtheria. Since the introduction of toxoid immunization, the disease has shifted from affecting children <15 years old
to adults who lack natural exposure to toxigenic C. diphtheriae in the
vaccine era and have low rates of booster immunization. The largest
outbreak of diphtheria in the developed world since the 1960s occurred
from 1990 to 1996 in the newly independent countries of the former
Soviet Union, involving >150,000 cases in 14 countries. Of these, >60%
of cases occurred in individuals >14 years old. Case fatality rates ranged
from 3% to 23% by country. Factors contributing to the epidemic
included a large population of underimmunized adults, decreased
childhood immunization rates, population migration, crowding, and
failure to respond aggressively during early phases of the epidemic.
Cases of diphtheria among travelers from these endemic areas were
transported to many countries in Europe.
WHO surveillance reports indicate that most cases of diphtheria
worldwide occur in the Southeast Asia and Africa regions, reporting
more than 10,000 cases worldwide in 2020. India contributes a substantial proportion to the global burden of diphtheria, with an average
of over 4,000 cases annually reported to the WHO in the past decade.
Although diphtheria was reduced from a major cause of childhood
death to a medical rarity in the Western Hemisphere in the early 20th
century, recurring reminders of the fragility of this success, particularly in conflict areas, emphasize the need to continue vigorous promotion of those same control principles across the global community.
The largest diphtheria outbreak in the refugee setting occurred when
the Rohingya people were displaced from Myanmar to Bangladesh in
2017, eventually lasting over 2 years and with 7064 cases and 45 deaths
reported as of November 2019. Along with outbreaks in Venezuela,
Haiti, Yemen, and more recently Nigeria, these are stark reminders
of the threat of re-­emergence that vaccine-­preventable diseases pose.
Improving surveillance, vaccination coverage, and public awareness of
the disease are key for control of disease during outbreaks.
When diphtheria was common, cutaneous diphtheria accounted
for more than 50% of reported C. diphtheriae isolates in the United
States. This indolent local infection, compared with mucosal infection,
is associated with more prolonged bacterial shedding, greater contamination of the environment, and increased transmission to the pharynx
and skin of close contacts. Outbreaks are associated with homelessness,
crowding, poverty, alcoholism, poor hygiene, contaminated fomites,
underlying dermatosis, and introduction of new strains from exogenous sources. It is no longer a tropical or subtropical disease; 1,100 C.
diphtheriae infections were documented in a Seattle neighborhood (the
site of the last major U.S. outbreak) from 1971 to 1982; 86% were cutaneous, and 40% involved toxigenic strains. The incidence of C. diphtheriae isolates from cutaneous infections has risen dramatically over the
past decade. Cutaneous diphtheria is an important source of toxigenic
C. diphtheriae in the United States, and its importation from endemic
areas is frequently the source of subsequent sporadic cases of respiratory tract diphtheria. Between 2015 and 2018, the CDC confirmed four
cases of cutaneous diphtheria from toxin-­producing C. diphtheriae in
U.S. residents returning from travel to endemic areas. Cutaneous diphtheria caused by C. ulcerans from travel to tropical countries or animal
contact has also been increasingly reported.
In Europe, increasing reports of respiratory and systemic infections
have been attributed to C. ulcerans; animal contact is the predominant
risk factor. In the United Kingdom, from 2008 to 2017, of the 33 toxigenic cases of diphtheria, just over half of the cases were caused by C.
diphtheriae, and the remainder were caused by C. ulcerans. Most of the
C. diphtheriae cases were cutaneous, while the C. ulcerans cases were
equally respiratory and cutaneous. Travel to an endemic area was the

major risk factor for C. diphtheriae acquisition, while contact with a
companion animal was the major factor associated with acquisition of
C. ulcerans. Incomplete vaccination status was strongly associated with
the risk of hospitalization and death.

PATHOGENESIS

Both toxigenic and nontoxigenic strains of C. diphtheriae cause skin
and mucosal infection and can rarely cause invasive disease, including endocarditis and bacteremia. The organism usually remains in the
superficial layers of skin lesions or respiratory tract mucosa, inducing
a local inflammatory reaction. The major virulence of the organism
lies in its ability to produce a potent polypeptide exotoxin, the diphtheritic toxin, which inhibits protein synthesis and causes local tissue
necrosis and the resultant local inflammatory response. Within the first
few days of respiratory tract infection (usually in the pharynx), a dense
necrotic coagulum of organisms, epithelial cells, fibrin, leukocytes, and
erythrocytes forms, initially white and advancing to become a gray-­
brown, leather-­like, adherent pseudomembrane (diphtheria is Greek
for leather). Removal is difficult and reveals a bleeding, edematous submucosa. Paralysis of the palate and hypopharynx is an early local effect
of diphtheritic toxin. Toxin absorption can lead to systemic manifestations: kidney tubule necrosis, thrombocytopenia, cardiomyopathy,
and demyelination of nerves. Because the latter two complications can
occur 2-­10 weeks after mucocutaneous infection, the pathophysiology
in some cases is suspected to be immunologically mediated. Among
infected adults in the Seattle outbreak, 3% with cutaneous infections
and 21% with symptomatic nasopharyngeal infection demonstrated
toxic myocarditis, neuropathy, or obstructive respiratory tract complications. All had received at least 20,000 units of equine antitoxin at the
time of hospitalization.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The manifestations of C. diphtheriae infection are influenced by the
anatomic site of infection, the immune status of the host, and the production and systemic distribution of toxin. Although 98% of infections
occur in the respiratory tract, other sites include cutaneous, conjunctival, ear, and vaginal mucosa.
New estimates of epidemiologic and clinical aspects of diphtheria from a comprehensive update by Truelove et al., with systematic
reviews including recent literature, are summarized in Figure 233.1.

Respiratory Tract Diphtheria

The pharynx or tonsils is the most common location of infection in the
respiratory tract (75–94%), followed by the larynx (25%). Although the
incubation period has traditionally been regarded to be 2-­5 days (range
1-­10 days), emerging data suggest that the median time from infection to onset of prodromal symptoms is only 1.4 days. An estimated
80% of untreated symptomatic cases progress to membranous diphtheria in an average of 2-­3 days after symptom onset. In tonsillar and
pharyngeal diphtheria, sore throat is the universal early symptom.
Only half of patients have fever, and fewer have dysphagia, hoarseness,
malaise, or headache. Mild pharyngeal injection is followed by unilateral or bilateral tonsillar membrane formation, which can extend to
involve the uvula (which may cause toxin-­mediated paralysis), soft palate, posterior oropharynx, hypopharynx, or glottic areas (Fig. 233.2).
Underlying soft tissue edema and enlarged lymph nodes can cause a
bull-­neck appearance. The degree of local extension correlates directly
with profound prostration, bull-­neck appearance, and fatality caused
by airway compromise or toxin-­mediated complications (Fig. 233.3).
In infants, infection of the anterior nares is more common and causes
serosanguineous, purulent, erosive rhinitis with membrane formation.
Shallow ulceration of the external nares and upper lip is characteristic.
The characteristic adherent pseudomembrane, extension beyond
the faucial area, dysphagia, and relative lack of fever help differentiate
diphtheria from exudative pharyngitis caused by Streptococcus pyogenes or Epstein-­Barr virus. Vincent angina, infective phlebitis with
thrombosis of the jugular veins (Lemierre syndrome), and mucositis
in patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy are usually differentiated
by the clinical setting. Infection of the larynx, trachea, and bronchi

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1726 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Infection with
toxigenic Clostridium
diphtheriae

Unvaccinated
individual

70%
Prodromal
symptoms
develop

80%
Membranous
diphtheria develops

5–50%
Death from
complications

Vaccinated
individual

30%
Asymptomatic
carriage

10%
Prodromal
symptoms
develop

90%
Asymptomatic
carriage

20%
Recovery without
developing fulminant
disease

50–95%
Recovery

Fig. 233.1 Clinical manifestations of Clostridium diphtheriae infection among unvaccinated and vaccinated individuals. Among unvaccinated

individuals infected with toxigenic C. diphtheriae, prodromal symptoms develop in ∼70%, of whom 80% develop membranous diphtheria. Of those
with membranous diphtheria, case fatality can be as high as 5–50%. Among vaccinated individuals infected with toxigenic C. diphtheriae, the toxoid
vaccine provides protection from symptoms; 10% develop prodromal symptoms, whereas 90% become asymptomatic carriers. These symptomatic
vaccinated individuals have a lower risk of severe disease and death and are more likely to recover. (Adapted from Truelove SA, Keegan LT, Moss WJ,
et al. Clinical and epidemiological aspects of diphtheria: a systematic review and pooled analysis. Clin Infect Dis. 2020;71[1]:89–97.)

Fig. 233.3 Diphtheria. Bull-­neck appearance of diphtheritic cervical

lymphadenopathy. (From the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]. Public health image library [PHIL], image #5325. Available
at: https://phil.cdc.gov/Details.aspx?pid=5325.)

Fig. 233.2 Tonsillar diphtheria. (Courtesy Franklin H. Top, MD, Profes-

sor and Head of the Department of Hygiene and Preventive Medicine,
State University of Iowa, College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA; and Parke,
Davis & Company’s Therapeutic Notes.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 233 u Diphtheria (Corynebacterium diphtheriae) 1727
can be primary or a secondary extension from the pharyngeal infection, presenting with hoarseness, stridor, dyspnea, and croupy cough.
Differentiation from bacterial epiglottitis, severe viral laryngotracheobronchitis, and staphylococcal or streptococcal tracheitis hinges partially on the relative paucity of other signs and symptoms in patients
with diphtheria and primarily on visualization of the adherent pseudomembrane at laryngoscopy and intubation.
Patients with laryngeal diphtheria are at significant risk for suffocation
because of local soft tissue edema and airway obstruction by the diphtheria membrane. This progression of airway obstruction in laryngeal infection within 1-­2 weeks after symptom onset is responsible for 60–65% of
overall deaths. Establishment of an artificial airway and resection of the
pseudomembrane can be lifesaving, but further obstructive complications are common, and systemic toxic complications are inevitable.

Cutaneous Diphtheria

Classic cutaneous diphtheria is an indolent, nonprogressive infection
characterized by a superficial, ecthyma-­like, nonhealing ulcer with a
gray-­brown membrane. Diphtheria skin infections cannot always be
differentiated from streptococcal or staphylococcal impetigo, and these
conditions frequently coexist. In most cases, a primary process, such
as dermatosis, laceration, burn, bite, or impetigo, becomes secondarily
infected with C. diphtheriae. Extremities are more often affected than
the trunk or head. Pain, tenderness, erythema, and exudate are typical.
Local hyperesthesia or hypesthesia is unusual. Respiratory tract colonization or symptomatic infection with toxic complications occurs in the
minority of patients with cutaneous diphtheria.

Infection at Other Sites

C. diphtheriae occasionally causes mucocutaneous infections at other
sites, such as the ear (otitis externa), the eye (purulent and ulcerative
conjunctivitis), and the genital tract (purulent and ulcerative vulvovaginitis). The clinical setting, ulceration, membrane formation, and submucosal bleeding help differentiate diphtheria from other bacterial and
viral causes. Rare cases of septicemia are described and are universally
fatal. Sporadic cases of endocarditis occur, and clusters among intravenous drug users have been reported in several countries; the skin was
the probable portal of entry, and almost all strains were nontoxigenic.
Sporadic cases of pyogenic arthritis, mainly from nontoxigenic strains,
have been reported in adults and children. Diphtheroids isolated from
sterile body sites should not be routinely dismissed as contaminants
without careful consideration of the clinical setting.

DIAGNOSIS

Specimens for culture should be obtained from the nose and throat
and any other mucocutaneous lesion. A portion of membrane should
be removed and submitted for culture along with underlying exudate.
The laboratory must be notified to use selective medium. C. diphtheriae
survives drying. If obtained in a remote area, a dry swab specimen can
be placed in a silica gel pack and sent to the laboratory. Evaluation of a
direct smear using Gram stain or specific fluorescent antibody is unreliable. Culture isolates of coryneform organisms should be identified to
the species level, and toxigenicity and antimicrobial susceptibility tests
should be performed for C. diphtheriae isolates. It is recommended that
all isolates be sent to a reference laboratory. In the United States, the
CDC’s Pertussis and Diphtheria Laboratory provides support to local
and state health departments needing assistance with isolation, identification, and subtyping of C. diphtheriae and C. ulcerans.

COMPLICATIONS

Respiratory tract obstruction by pseudomembranes may require bronchoscopy or intubation and mechanical ventilation. Two other tissues
usually remote from sites of C. diphtheriae infection can be significantly affected by diphtheritic toxin: the heart and the nervous system.

Toxic Cardiomyopathy

Toxic cardiomyopathy occurs in 10–25% of patients with respiratory
diphtheria, resulting in death in 35–60% of cases with this complication
and responsible for 20–25% of deaths overall. Subtle signs of myocarditis

can be detected in most patients, especially the elderly, but the risk for significant complications correlates directly with the extent and severity of
exudative local oropharyngeal disease, along with a delay in administration of antitoxin. The first evidence of cardiac toxicity characteristically
occurs 7-­14 days after the onset of respiratory symptoms but can appear
acutely as early as the first week of illness, a poor prognostic sign, or as
late as the sixth week. Tachycardia disproportionate to fever is common
and may be evidence of cardiac toxicity or autonomic nervous system
dysfunction. A prolonged P-­R interval and changes in the ST-­T wave on
an electrocardiographic tracing are relatively frequent findings; dilated
and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy detected by echocardiogram has been
described. Single or progressive cardiac dysrhythmias can occur, including first-­, second-­, and third-­degree heart block. Temporary transvenous
pacing may improve outcomes. Atrioventricular dissociation and ventricular tachycardia are also described, the latter having a high associated mortality. Heart failure may appear insidiously or acutely. Elevation
of the serum aspartate transaminase concentration closely parallels the
severity of myonecrosis. Severe dysrhythmia portends death. Histologic
postmortem findings are variable: little or diffuse myonecrosis with acute
inflammatory response. Recovery from toxic myocardiopathy is usually
complete, although survivors of more severe dysrhythmias can have permanent conduction defects.

Toxic Neuropathy

Neurologic complications occur in 20–25% of untreated cases, resulting in death in 50% of cases who develop them and responsible for 15%
of deaths overall. They parallel the severity of primary infection and are
multiphasic in onset. Acutely or 2-­3 weeks after onset of oropharyngeal inflammation, hyperesthesia and local paralysis of the soft palate
typically occur. Weakness of the posterior pharyngeal, laryngeal, and
facial nerves may follow, causing a nasal quality in the voice, difficulty
in swallowing, and risk for aspiration. Cranial neuropathies characteristically occur in the fifth week, leading to oculomotor and ciliary
paralysis, which can cause strabismus, blurred vision, or difficulty with
accommodation. Symmetric demyelinating polyneuropathy has onset
10 days to 3 months after oropharyngeal infection and causes principally motor deficits with diminished deep tendon reflexes. Nerve conduction velocity studies and cerebrospinal fluid findings in diphtheritic
polyneuropathy are indistinguishable from those of Guillain-­Barré
syndrome. Paralysis of the diaphragm may ensue. Complete neurologic
recovery is likely, but rarely vasomotor center dysfunction 2-­3 weeks
after onset of illness can cause hypotension or cardiac failure.
Recovery from myocarditis and neuritis is often slow but usually
complete. Corticosteroids do not diminish these complications and are
not recommended.

TREATMENT

Specific diphtheria antitoxin is the mainstay of therapy and should be
administered as soon as possible, without delay on the basis of clinical diagnosis. Because it neutralizes only free toxin, antitoxin efficacy
diminishes with elapsed time after the onset of mucocutaneous symptoms. Equine diphtheria antitoxin is available in the United States only
from the CDC. Physicians treating a case of suspected diphtheria should
contact the CDC Emergency Operations Center at 1-­
770-­
488-­
7100
after consulting with their state health department. Antitoxin is available from CDC under expanded access investigational new drug application protocol. Antitoxin is administered as a single empirical dose of
20,000-­100,000 units based on the degree of severity, site, and duration
of illness. Skin testing for hypersensitivity must be performed before
administration of antitoxin. Patients with positive sensitivity testing or
with a history of hypersensitivity reaction to horse equine protein should
be desensitized. Antitoxin is probably of no value for local manifestations
of cutaneous diphtheria, but its use is prudent because toxic sequelae
can occur. Commercially available intravenous immunoglobulin preparations contain low titers of antibodies to diphtheria toxin; their use for
therapy of diphtheria is not proven or approved. Antitoxin is not recommended for asymptomatic carriers.
The role of antimicrobial therapy is to halt toxin production,
treat localized infection, and prevent transmission of the organism

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1728 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
to contacts. Although C. diphtheriae is usually susceptible to various agents in vitro, including penicillins, erythromycin, clindamycin, rifampin, and tetracycline, only erythromycin or penicillin are
recommended for treatment. Erythromycin is marginally superior to
penicillin for eradication of nasopharyngeal carriage. Resistance to
erythromycin is common in populations where the drug has been used
broadly, and resistance to penicillin has also been reported. Appropriate therapy is erythromycin (40-­50 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours
by mouth [PO] or intravenously [IV]; maximum 2 g/day), aqueous
crystalline penicillin G (150,000 - 250,000 units/kg/day divided every
6 hr IV or intramuscularly [IM], up to 2-3 million units/day), or procaine penicillin (300,000 units every 12 hr IM for those ≤10 kg in
weight; 600,000 units every 12 hr IM for those >10 kg in weight) for
14 days. Once oral medications are tolerated, oral erythromycin (see
dosing above) or penicillin V (50 mg/kg/day, divided every 6 hr, maximum 2 g per day) may be used for the remaining duration of therapy.
Antibiotic therapy is not a substitute for antitoxin therapy. Some patients
with cutaneous diphtheria have been treated for 7-­10 days. Elimination of the organism should be documented by negative results of at
least two successive cultures of specimens from the nose and throat (or
skin) obtained at least 24 hours apart, collected 24 hours after completion of antimicrobial therapy. Treatment with erythromycin should be
repeated if either culture yields C. diphtheriae.
Individuals untreated with antibiotics, including those with either
symptomatic or asymptomatic infection, remain colonized with C.
diphtheriae for an average of 18.5 days, with 5% remaining colonized
longer than 48 days. With antibiotic treatment, they clear C. diphtheriae colonization within an average of 5.2 days, reducing the duration
of infectiousness by 2 weeks.

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Droplet precautions are instituted for patients with pharyngeal diphtheria;
for patients with cutaneous diphtheria, contact precautions are observed
until the results of specimen cultures taken after cessation of therapy are
negative. Cutaneous wounds are cleaned thoroughly with soap and water.
Bed rest is essential during the acute phase of disease, usually for ≥2 weeks
until the risk for symptomatic cardiac damage has passed, with return to
physical activity guided by the degree of toxicity and cardiac involvement.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for patients with diphtheria depends on the virulence
of the organism (subspecies gravis has the highest fatality rate), patient
age, immunization status, site of infection, and speed of administration
of the antitoxin. Mechanical obstruction from laryngeal diphtheria or
bull-­neck diphtheria and the complications of myocarditis account for
most diphtheria-­related deaths. The case fatality ratio for untreated,
never-­vaccinated cases is 29%, improving to 10% with antitoxin treatment. The risk of fatality increases with every day of delayed antitoxin
treatment. Children age <5 years are more likely to die from symptomatic infection than adults >20 years of age, whereas children 5-­19 years
of age are less likely to die from infection than adults age >20 years. At
recovery, administration of diphtheria toxoid is indicated to complete
the primary series or booster doses of immunization, because not all
patients develop antibodies to diphtheria toxin after infection.

PREVENTION

Protection against serious disease caused by imported or indigenously
acquired C. diphtheriae depends on immunization. In the absence of
a precisely determined minimum protective level for diphtheria antitoxin, the presumed minimum is 0.01-­0.10 IU/mL. In outbreaks, 90%
of individuals with clinical disease have had antibody values <0.01
IU/mL, and 92% of asymptomatic carriers have had values >0.1 IU/
mL. In serosurveys in the United States and Western Europe, where
almost universal immunization during childhood has been achieved,
25% to >60% of adults lack protective antitoxin levels, with typically
very low levels in elderly persons. A serosurvey in the United States
(1988–1994) indicated that 60% of the overall population had protective immunity against diphtheria; however, this level of protection
declined from 80% in persons age 12-­19 years to about 30% in persons age 60-­69 years.

All suspected diphtheria cases should be reported to local and state
health departments. Investigation is aimed at preventing secondary
cases in exposed individuals and at determining the source and carriers
to halt spread. The serial interval, or time between symptom onset of
the infector/infectee pair, is a median of 5.9 days, with 5% of intervals
<0.8 days and 5% longer than 21 days.

Asymptomatic Case Contacts

All household contacts and people who have had intimate respiratory
or habitual physical contact with a patient are closely monitored for illness for 7 days. Cultures of the nose, throat, and any cutaneous lesions
are performed. Antimicrobial prophylaxis is presumed effective and is
administered regardless of immunization status, using a single injection of benzathine penicillin G (600,000 units IM for patients weighing
<30kg, or 1,200,000 units IM for patients weighing ≥30 kg or adults,) or
erythromycin (40-­50 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hr PO for 7-10 days;
max 1 g/day). Diphtheria toxoid vaccine, in age-­appropriate form, is
given to immunized individuals who have not received a booster dose
within 5 years. Children who have not received their fourth dose should
be vaccinated. Those who have received fewer than three doses of diphtheria toxoid or who have uncertain immunization status should be
immunized with an age-­appropriate preparation on a primary schedule.

Asymptomatic Carriers

When an asymptomatic carrier is identified, antimicrobial prophylaxis
is given for 10-­14 days, and an age-­appropriate preparation of diphtheria
toxoid vaccination is administered immediately if a booster has not been
given within 1 year. Droplet precautions (respiratory tract colonization)
or contact precautions (cutaneous colonization only) are observed until
at least two subsequent cultures obtained at least 24 hours apart, collected 24 hours after cessation of therapy, have negative results.
Repeat cultures are performed about 2 weeks after completion of
therapy for cases and carriers; if results are positive, an additional 10-­
day course of oral erythromycin should be given and follow-­up cultures performed. Susceptibility testing of isolates should be performed,
as erythromycin resistance is reported. Neither penicillin nor erythromycin eradicates carriage in 100% of individuals. In one report, a single
course of therapy failed in 21% of carriers. Transmission of diphtheria
in modern hospitals is rare. Only those who have an unusual contact
with respiratory or oral secretions should be managed as contacts.
Investigation of the casual contacts of patients and carriers or persons
in the community without known exposure has yielded extremely low
carriage rates and is not routinely recommended.

Vaccine

Universal immunization with diphtheria toxoid throughout life,
designed to provide constant protective antitoxin antibody levels and
to reduce severity of C. diphtheriae disease, is the only effective control
measure. Although immunization does not preclude subsequent respiratory or cutaneous carriage of toxigenic C. diphtheriae, it decreases
local tissue spread, prevents toxic complications, diminishes transmission of the organism, and provides herd immunity when at least
80–85% of a population is immunized.
Full vaccination is highly effective in preventing symptomatic disease (87% with three or more doses, increasing to 99% with five doses),
severe disease (defined as local and systemic symptoms plus a major
complication; 81%), and death (93%). Even though vaccines do not
prevent colonization, they reduce transmission by 60%, likely through
reduced symptomatic shedding. Asymptomatic carriers are still able to
transmit infection, albeit at only 24% the rate of symptomatic cases.
In an outbreak setting, both vaccination and antibiotic treatment to
clear colonization are necessary to interrupt transmission. Although
full vaccination coverage can interrupt transmission in only 27% of
outbreak settings, this figure increases to 70% when rapid antibiotic
treatment is initiated in 90% of symptomatic cases.
The COVID-­19 pandemic resulted in disruptions in immunization
services in 2020, leading to 3.5 million children missing their first dose
of diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis vaccine (DTP) as compared with
2019. Global annual vaccination coverage for first-­dose DTP vaccine
decreased from 90% in 2019 to 87% in 2020; third-­dose DTP vaccine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 234 u Listeria monocytogenes
decreased from 86% in 2019 to 83% in 2020. The impact this will
have on the resurgence of vaccine-­preventable infections is yet to be
determined.
Diphtheria toxoid is prepared by formaldehyde treatment of toxin,
standardized for potency and adsorbed to aluminum salts, enhancing
immunogenicity. Two preparations of diphtheria toxoids are formulated according to the limit of flocculation (Lf) content, a measure of
the quantity of toxoid. The pediatric (6 months to 6 years) preparations (i.e., DTaP [diphtheria and tetanus toxoids with acellular pertussis vaccine] and DT [diphtheria and tetanus toxoids vaccine]) contain
6.7-­25.0 Lf units of diphtheria toxoid per 0.5 mL dose; tetanus toxoid
with vaccines for ≥7 years (Td [tetanus and diphtheria toxoid vaccine] and Tdap [diphtheria and tetanus toxoids with acellular pertussis
vaccine]) contain no more than 2-­2.5 Lf units of toxoid per 0.5 mL
dose. The higher-­potency (D) formulation of toxoid is used for primary
series and booster doses for children through 6 years of age, given its
superior immunogenicity and minimal reactogenicity. For individuals
≥7 years old, Td or Tdap is recommended for the primary series and
booster doses because the lower concentration of diphtheria toxoid is
adequately immunogenic and increasing the content of diphtheria toxoid heightens reactogenicity with increasing age.
For children 6 weeks to 6 years of age, five 0.5-­mL doses of diphtheria-­
containing (D) vaccine (DTaP preferred) are given in the primary
series, including doses at 2, 4, and 6 months of age, and a fourth dose,
an integral part of the primary series, at 15-­18 months. Dose 4 may
be administered as early as age 12 months if at least 6 months have
elapsed since dose 3. A booster dose is given at 4-­6 years of age (unless
the fourth primary dose was administered at ≥4 years). For persons ≥7
years to 18 years not previously immunized for diphtheria, three 0.5-­
mL doses of lower-­level diphtheria-­containing (d) vaccine are given in
a primary series of two doses at least 4 weeks apart and a third dose 6
months after the second dose. The first dose should be Tdap, and subsequent doses can be Td or Tdap.
A booster dose, consisting of Tdap, is recommended at 11-­12 years of
age. Tdap may be administered regardless of the interval since the last
tetanus-­and diphtheria-­toxoid-­containing vaccine. Adolescents 13-­18
years old who have not received Tdap at 11-­12 years should receive a
single dose of Tdap, then a Td or Tdap booster every 10 years. Pregnant
women should receive a single dose of Tdap during every pregnancy,
preferably during gestational weeks 27-­36. Adults who have never
received Tdap should receive a single dose of Tdap, regardless of when
they last got Td. A Td or Tdap booster should be given every 10 years.
Updated recommendations allow for use of either Td or Tdap vaccine in situations where previously only Td was recommended. This
includes the decennial Td booster, tetanus prophylaxis for wound management, and for additional required doses in the catch-­up immunization schedule if a person has received at least one Tdap dose.
The only contraindication to tetanus and diphtheria toxoid is a history of neurologic or severe hypersensitivity reaction after a prior dose.
For children <7 years old in whom pertussis immunization is contraindicated, DT is used. Those whose immunization is begun with DTaP
or DT before 1 year of age should have a total of five 0.5-­mL doses of
diphtheria-­containing (D) vaccines by 6 years of age. For those whose
immunization is begun at around 1 year old, the primary series is three
0.5-­mL doses of diphtheria-­containing (D) vaccine, with a booster given
at 4-­6 years, unless the third dose was given after the fourth birthday.
There is no association of DT or Td with seizures. Local adverse
effects alone do not preclude continued use. The rare patient who
experiences an Arthus-­type hypersensitivity reaction or a temperature
>39.4°C (103°F) after a dose of Td usually has high serum tetanus antitoxin levels and should not be given Td more frequently than every
10 years, even if the patient sustains a significant tetanus-­prone injury.
The DT or Td preparation can be given concurrently with other vaccines. Meningococcal and pneumococcal conjugate vaccines containing diphtheria toxoid or a variant of diphtheria toxin, CRM197 protein,
are not substitutes for diphtheria toxoid immunization and do not
affect reactogenicity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1729

Chapter 234

Listeria monocytogenes
Ashley C. Howard and Thomas S. Murray
Listeriosis in humans is caused principally by Listeria monocytogenes, 1 of 17 species of the genus Listeria that are widely distributed in the environment and throughout the food chain. Human
infections can usually be traced to an animal reservoir. Infection
usually occurs at the extremes of age. In the pediatric population,
perinatal infections predominate and usually occur secondary to
maternal infection or colonization. Outside the newborn period,
disease is most often encountered in immunosuppressed (usually
T-­
cell deficiencies) children and adults and in elderly persons.
For most people the major risk for infection with Listeria is food-­
borne transmission. In the United States, food-­borne outbreaks are
caused by improperly processed dairy products and contaminated
vegetables and principally affect the same individuals at risk for sporadic disease.

ETIOLOGY

Members of the genus Listeria are facultatively anaerobic, non–
spore-­forming, motile, gram-­positive bacilli that are catalase positive. The 17 Listeria species are divided into two genomically distinct
groups on the basis of DNA-­DNA hybridization studies. One group
contains the species L. grayi, and 10 others discovered since 2009
are considered nonpathogenic. The second group contains six species: the nonhemolytic species L. innocua, L. welshimeri, and L.
marthii and the hemolytic species L. monocytogenes, L. seeligeri,
and L. ivanovii. L. ivanovii is pathogenic primarily in animals, and
the vast majority of both human and animal disease is caused by L.
monocytogenes.
Subtyping of L. monocytogenes isolates for epidemiologic purposes
is now performed predominately with whole genome sequencing. This
demonstrates the clonal structure of populations of L. monocytogenes as
well as the sharing of populations between human and animal sources.
Subtyping is an important component of determining whether cases
are connected or sporadic but usually requires collaboration with a
specialized laboratory.
Historically, selected biochemical tests, together with the demonstration of tumbling motility, an umbrella-­type formation below the
surface in semisolid medium, hemolysis, and a typical cyclic adenosine monophosphate test, are usually sufficient to establish a presumptive identification of L. monocytogenes. Once growth is present, L.
monocytogenes can now be rapidly identified with matrix-­assisted
laser desorption/ionization time of flight (MALDI-­
TOF) mass
spectrometry.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

L. monocytogenes is widespread in nature, has been isolated throughout the environment, and is associated with epizootic disease and
asymptomatic carriage in >42 species of wild and domestic animals
and 22 avian species. Epizootic disease in large animals (e.g., sheep,
cattle) is associated with abortion and “circling disease,” a form of basilar meningitis. L. monocytogenes is isolated from sewage, silage, and
soil, where it survives for >295 days. Human-­to-­human transmission
rarely occurs except in maternal-­fetal transmission. The annual incidence of listeriosis decreased by 36% between 1996 and 2004 and has
remained level since then, estimated between two and five cases per
year per million people. However, food-­borne outbreaks continue to
occur. The rate of Listeria infections varies among states. Epidemic
human listeriosis has been associated with food-­borne transmission in
several large outbreaks, especially in association with aged soft cheeses;
improperly pasteurized milk and milk products; contaminated raw
and ready-­to-­eat beef, pork, and poultry and packaged meats and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1730 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
salads; and vegetables, both fresh and frozen, harvested from farms
where the ground is contaminated with the feces of colonized animals.
In 2017-­2018, the largest Listeria outbreak ever recorded occurred in
South Africa with >900 cases and 200 deaths related to a processed
contaminated meat product, “polony.” U.S. food-­
borne outbreaks
from 2019 to 2020 included deli meats and cheeses, packaged hard
boiled eggs, and enoki mushrooms. The ability of L. monocytogenes
to grow at temperatures as low as 4°C (39.2°F) increases the risk for
transmission from aged soft cheeses and stored contaminated food.
Listeriosis is an uncommon but important recognized etiology of neonatal sepsis and meningitis. Small clusters of nosocomial person-­to-­
person transmission have occurred in hospital nurseries and obstetric
suites. Sporadic endemic listeriosis is less well characterized. Likely
routes include food-­borne infection and zoonotic spread. Zoonotic
transmission with cutaneous infections occurs in veterinarians and
farmers who handle sick animals.
Reported cases of listeriosis are clustered at the extremes of age.
Some studies show higher rates in males and a seasonal predominance in the late summer and fall in the Northern Hemisphere. In
the United States, there is an increased risk of infection in nonpregnant non-­Hispanic Asians, non-­Hispanic Blacks, and Hispanics
compared with non-­Hispanic Whites. Outside the newborn period
and during pregnancy, disease is usually reported in patients with
underlying immunosuppression, with a 100-­300 times increased
risk in HIV-­infected persons and in the elderly population (Table
234.1). In a prospective cohort study for listeriosis, 82.5% of participants had at least one immunocompromising condition, and
those with bacteremia and neurolisteriosis disease were found to
have a fivefold increased risk of death if there was an underlying
malignancy.
The incubation period, which is defined only for common-­source
food-­borne disease, is 21-­30 days but in some cases may be longer.
Asymptomatic carriage and fecal excretion are reported in 1–5% of
healthy persons and 5% of abattoir workers, but duration of excretion,
when studied, is short (<1 month).

PATHOLOGY

One of the major concepts of Listeria pathology and pathogenesis
is its ability to survive as an intracellular pathogen. Listeria incites
a mononuclear response and elaboration of cytokines, producing
multisystem disease, particularly pyogenic meningitis. Granulomatous reactions and microabscess formation develop in many organs,
including the liver, lungs, adrenals, kidneys, central nervous system (CNS), and notably the placenta. Animal models demonstrate
translocation, the transfer of intraluminal organisms across intact
intestinal mucosa. Histologic examination of tissues, including the
placenta, shows granulomatous inflammation and microabscess formation. Intracellular organisms can often be demonstrated with special stains.

Table 234.1  Types of Listeria monocytogenes Infections
Listeriosis in pregnancy
Neonatal listeriosis
Early onset
Late onset
Food-­borne outbreaks/febrile gastroenteritis
Listeriosis in normal children and adults (rare)
Focal Listeria infections (e.g., meningitis, endocarditis, pneumonia,
liver abscess, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis)
Listeriosis in immunocompromised persons
Lymphohematogenous malignancies
Collagen vascular diseases
Diabetes mellitus
HIV infection
Transplantation
Renal failure with peritoneal dialysis
Listeriosis in elderly persons

PATHOGENESIS

Listeria organisms usually enter the host through the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Gastric acidity provides some protection, and drugs
that raise gastric pH may promote infection. Studies of intracellular
and intercellular spread of L. monocytogenes have revealed a complex pathogenesis. Four pathogenic steps are described: internalization, escape from the vacuole, nucleation of actin filaments, and
cell-­to-­cell spread. Listeriolysin O, a hemolysin, mediates lysis of
vacuoles and is responsible for the zone of hemolysis around colonies
on blood-­containing solid media. In cell-­to-­cell spread, locomotion
proceeds via polymerization of actin filaments, which extrude the
bacteria in pseudopods, which in turn are internalized by adjacent
cells, necessitating escape from a double-­membrane vacuole. This
mechanism protects intracellular bacteria from the humoral arm
of immunity and is responsible for the well-­known requirement of
T-­cell–mediated activation of monocytes by lymphokines for clearance of infection and establishment of immunity. The significant
risk for listeriosis in patients with depressed T-­cell immunity speaks
for the role of this arm of the immune system. The role of opsonizing antibody in protecting against infection is unclear. In addition,
siderophores scavenge iron from the host, enhancing growth of the
organism and likely explaining the relatively high risk of listeriosis in
iron overload syndromes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical presentation of listeriosis depends greatly on the age of the
patient and the circumstances of the infection.

Listeriosis in Pregnancy

Pregnant women have increased susceptibility to Listeria infections
(approximately 20 times higher than nonpregnant women), probably because of a relative impairment in cell-­mediated immunity. L.
monocytogenes has been grown from placental and fetal cultures of
pregnancies ending in spontaneous abortion. The usual presentation in the second and third trimesters is a flulike illness that may
result in seeding of the uterine contents by bacteremia. Rarely is
maternal listeriosis severe, but meningitis in pregnancy has been
reported. Recognition and treatment at this stage are associated
with normal pregnancy outcomes, but the fetus may not be infected
even if listeriosis in the mother is not treated. In other instances,
placental listeriosis develops with infection of the fetus that may
be associated with stillbirth or premature delivery. Delivery of an
infected premature fetus is associated with very high infant mortality. Disseminated disease is apparent at birth, often with a diffuse
pustular rash. Infection in the mother usually resolves without specific therapy after delivery, but postpartum fever and infected lochia
may occur.

Neonatal Listeriosis

Two clinical presentations are recognized for neonatal listeriosis: early-­
onset neonatal disease (<5 days, usually within 1-­2 days of birth),
which is a predominantly septicemic form, and late-­onset neonatal disease (>5 days, mean 14 days of life), which is a predominantly
meningitic form (Table 234.2). The principal characteristics of the two
presentations resemble the clinical syndromes described for group B
Streptococcus (see Chapter 230).
Early-­onset disease occurs with milder transplacental or ascending
infections from the female genital tract. There is a strong association
with recovery of L. monocytogenes from the maternal genital tract,
obstetric complications, prematurity, and neonatal sepsis with multiorgan involvement, including rash, but without CNS localization (Fig.
234.1). The mortality rate is approximately 20–30%.
The epidemiology of late-­onset disease is poorly understood. Onset
is usually after 5 days but before 30 days of age. Affected infants frequently are full-­term, and the mothers are culture negative and asymptomatic. The presenting syndrome is usually purulent meningitis with
parenchymal brain involvement, which, if adequately treated, has a
mortality rate of <20%.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 234 u Listeria monocytogenes
Table 234.2  Characteristic Features of Early-­and
Late-­Onset Neonatal Listeriosis
EARLY ONSET (<5 DAYS)

LATE ONSET (≥5 DAYS)

Positive result of maternal
Listeria culture

Negative results of maternal
Listeria culture

Obstetric complications

Uncomplicated pregnancy

Premature delivery

Term delivery

Low birthweight

Normal birthweight

Neonatal sepsis

Neonatal meningitis

Mean age at onset 1.5 days

Mean age at onset 14.2 days

Mortality rate <30%

Mortality rate <20%
Nosocomial outbreaks

1731

infections may also be useful. It is helpful to alert the laboratory to
suspected cases so that Listeria isolates are not discarded as contaminating diphtheroids.
Histologic examination of the placenta is also useful. Molecular
assays are now commercially available to detect L. monocytogenes from
CNS samples and directly from positive blood culture bottles. Serodiagnostic tests are not useful.

Differential Diagnosis

Listeriosis is indistinguishable clinically from neonatal sepsis and
meningitis caused by other organisms. The presence of increased
peripheral blood monocytes suggests listeriosis. Monocytosis or
lymphocytosis may be modest or striking. Beyond the neonatal
period, L. monocytogenes CNS infection is associated with fever,
headache, seizures, and signs of meningeal irritation. The brainstem may be characteristically affected. The white blood cell
concentration may vary from normal to slightly elevated, and
the CSF laboratory findings are variable and less striking than in
the more common causes of bacterial meningitis. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes or mononuclear cells may predominate, with
shifts from polymorphonuclear to mononuclear cells in sequential lumbar puncture specimens. The CSF glucose concentration
may be normal, but a low level mirrors the severity of disease. The
CSF protein concentration is moderately elevated. L. monocytogenes is isolated from the blood in 40–75% of cases of meningitis
caused by the organism. Deep focal infections from L. monocytogenes, such as endocarditis, osteomyelitis, and liver abscess, are
also indistinguishable clinically from such infections from more
common organisms. Cutaneous infections should be suspected in
patients with a history of contact with animals, especially products of conception.

TREATMENT

Fig. 234.1 Listeria monocytogenes. The generalized maculopapu-

lar rash present at birth disappeared within a few hours of life. (From
Benitez-­Segura I, Fiol-­Jaume M, Balliu PR, Tejedor M. Listeria monocytogenes: generalized maculopapular rash may be the clue. Arch Dis
Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2013;98[1]:F64, Fig. 1.)

Postneonatal Infections

Listeriosis beyond the newborn period may rarely occur in otherwise
healthy children but is most often encountered in association with
underlying malignancies (especially lymphomas) or immunosuppression. When associated with food-­borne outbreaks, disease may cause
GI symptoms or any of the Listeria syndromes. The clinical presentation is usually meningitis, less commonly sepsis, and rarely other CNS
involvement, such as cerebritis, meningoencephalitis, brain abscess,
spinal cord abscess, or a focus outside the CNS, such as suppurative
arthritis, osteomyelitis, endocarditis, peritonitis (associated with peritoneal dialysis), or liver abscess. It is not known whether the frequent
GI signs and symptoms result from enteric infection because the mode
of acquisition is often unknown.

DIAGNOSIS

Listeriosis should be included in the differential diagnosis of infections in pregnancy, of neonatal sepsis and meningitis, and of sepsis
or meningitis in older children who have underlying malignancies
(lymphomas), are receiving immunosuppressive therapy, or have
undergone transplantation. The diagnosis is established by culture of
L. monocytogenes from blood or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Cultures
from the maternal cervix, vagina, lochia, and placenta, if possible,
should be obtained when intrauterine infections lead to premature
delivery or early-­onset neonatal sepsis. Cultures from closed-­space

The emergence of multiantibiotic resistance mandates routine susceptibility testing of all isolates. The recommended therapy is ampicillin (100-­200 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours intravenously [IV];
300-­400 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours IV if meningitis is present), alone or in combination with an aminoglycoside (2.0-­3.0 mg/
kg/day IV divided every 8-­24 hours depending on postnatal age).
The aminoglycoside enhances the bactericidal activity and is generally recommended in cases of endocarditis and meningitis. The adult
dose is ampicillin 4-­6 g/day divided every 6 hours plus an aminoglycoside. The ampicillin dose is doubled if meningitis is present. Special attention to dosing is required for neonates, who require longer
dosing intervals because of the longer half-­lives of the antibiotics
in their bodies. L. monocytogenes is not susceptible to the cephalosporins, including third-­generation cephalosporins. If these agents
are used for empirical therapy for neonatal sepsis or meningitis in
a newborn, ampicillin must be added for possible L. monocytogenes
infection. Vancomycin, vancomycin plus an aminoglycoside, and
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole are alternatives to ampicillin. The
duration of therapy is usually 2-­3 weeks, with 3 weeks recommended
for immunocompromised persons and patients with meningitis. A
longer course is needed for endocarditis, brain abscess, and osteomyelitis. Antibiotic treatment is unnecessary for gastroenteritis without
invasive disease.

PROGNOSIS

Early gestational listeriosis may be associated with abortion or
stillbirth, although maternal infection with sparing of the fetus has
been reported. There is no convincing evidence that L. monocytogenes is associated with repeated spontaneous abortions in humans.
The mortality rate is >50% for premature infants infected in utero,
30% for early-­onset neonatal sepsis, 15% for late-­onset neonatal
meningitis, and <10% in older children with prompt institution of
appropriate antimicrobial therapy. Mental retardation, hydrocephalus, and other CNS sequelae are reported in survivors of Listeria
meningitis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1732 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 234.3  Prevention of Food-­Borne Listeriosis
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS TO PREVENT LISTERIA
INFECTION
FDA recommendations for washing and handling food:
• Rinse raw produce, such as fruits and vegetables, thoroughly under
running tap water before eating, cutting, or cooking. Even if the
produce will be peeled, it should still be washed first.
• Scrub firm produce, such as melons and cucumbers, with a clean
produce brush.
• Dry the produce with a clean cloth or paper towel.
• Separate uncooked meats and poultry from vegetables, cooked
foods, and ready-­to-­eat foods.
Keep your kitchen and environment cleaner and safer:
• Wash hands, knives, countertops, and cutting boards after handling
and preparing uncooked foods.
• Be aware that Listeria monocytogenes can grow in foods in the
refrigerator. Use an appliance thermometer, such as a refrigerator
thermometer, to check the temperature inside your refrigerator. The
refrigerator should be 4.5°C (40°F) or lower and the freezer −17.8°C
(0°F) or lower.
• Clean up all spills in your refrigerator promptly, especially juices from
hot dog and lunch meat packages, raw meat, and raw poultry.
• Clean the inside walls and shelves of your refrigerator with hot water
and liquid soap, then rinse.
Cook meat and poultry thoroughly:
• Thoroughly cook raw food from animal sources, such as beef, pork,
or poultry, to a safe internal temperature. For a list of recommended
temperatures for meat and poultry, visit the safe minimum cooking
temperatures chart at http://www.FoodSafety.gov.
Store foods safely:
• Use precooked or ready-­to-­eat food as soon as you can. Do not
store the product in the refrigerator beyond the use-­by date; follow
USDA refrigerator storage time guidelines:
• Hot dogs: store opened package no longer than 1 wk and
unopened package no longer than 2 wk in the refrigerator.
• Luncheon and deli meat: store factory-­sealed, unopened
package no longer than 2 wk. Store opened packages and
meat sliced at a local deli no longer than 3-­5 days in the
refrigerator.
• Divide leftovers into shallow containers to promote rapid, even
cooling. Cover with airtight lids or enclose in plastic wrap or
aluminum foil. Use leftovers within 3-­4 days.
Choose safer foods:
• Do not drink raw (unpasteurized) milk, and do not eat foods that
have unpasteurized milk in them.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PERSONS AT HIGHER RISK*
In addition to the recommendations listed above, include:
Meats
• Do not eat hot dogs, luncheon meats, cold cuts, other deli meats
(e.g., bologna) or fermented or dry sausages unless they are heated
to an internal temperature of 73.9°C (165°F) or until steaming hot
just before serving.
• Avoid getting fluid from hot dog and lunch meat packages on other
foods, utensils, and food preparation surfaces, and wash hands after
handling hot dogs, luncheon meats, and deli meats.
• Pay attention to labels. Do not eat refrigerated pâté or meat spreads
from a deli or meat counter or from the refrigerated section of a store.
Foods that do not need refrigeration, such as canned or shelf-­stable
pâté and meat spreads, are safe to eat. Refrigerate after opening.
Cheeses
• Do not eat soft cheese such as feta, queso blanco, queso fresco,
brie, Camembert, blue-­veined, or panela (queso panela) unless it
is labeled as made with pasteurized milk. Make sure the label says
“Made With Pasteurized Milk.”
Seafood
• Do not eat refrigerated smoked seafood, unless it is contained in a
cooked dish, such as a casserole, or unless it is a canned or shelf-­
stable product.
• Refrigerated smoked seafood, such as salmon, trout, whitefish, cod,
tuna, and mackerel, is most often labeled as “nova-­style,” “lox,”
“kippered,” “smoked,” or “jerky.”
• These fish are typically found in the refrigerator section or
sold at seafood and deli counters of grocery stores and
delicatessens.
• Canned and shelf-­stable tuna, salmon, and other fish products are
safe to eat.
Follow this general FDA advice for melon safety:
• C onsumers and food preparers should wash their hands with
warm water and soap for at least 20 sec before and after
handling any whole melon, such as cantaloupe, watermelon, or
honeydew.
• Scrub the surface of melons, such as cantaloupes, with a clean
produce brush under running water and dry them with a clean
cloth or paper towel before cutting. Be sure that your scrub brush
is sanitized after each use to avoid transferring bacteria between
melons.
• Promptly consume cut melon or refrigerate promptly. Keep your cut
melon refrigerated ≤4.5°C (40°F) (0–1.1°C [32–34°F] is best) for no
more than 7 days.
• Discard cut melons left at room temperature for >4 hours.

*Including pregnant women, persons with a weakened immune system, and older adults.
FDA, Food and Drug Administration; USDA, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Listeria (listeriosis): prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/listeria/prevention.html.

PREVENTION

Listeriosis can be prevented by pasteurization and thorough cooking of
foods. Irradiation of meat products may also be beneficial. Consumption of unpasteurized or improperly processed dairy products should
be avoided, especially aged soft cheeses, uncooked and precooked meat
products that have been stored at 4°C (39.2°F) for extended periods,
and unwashed vegetables (Table 234.3). This avoidance is particularly
important during pregnancy and for immunocompromised persons.
Infected domestic animals should be avoided when possible. Education
regarding risk reduction is aimed particularly at pregnant women and
people being treated for cancer.
Careful handwashing is essential to prevent nosocomial spread
within obstetric and neonatal units. Immunocompromised patients

given prophylaxis with trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole are protected
from Listeria infections. Cases, and especially outbreaks, should be
reported immediately to public health authorities so that timely investigation can be initiated in order to interrupt transmission from the
contaminated source.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to acknowledge Robert S. Baltimore, MD, for his contribution to this chapter and Michelle R. Rychalsky, PharmD, for reviewing antibiotic dosing regimens.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 235 u Actinomyces

Chapter 235

Actinomyces
Hamid Bassiri
TAXONOMY AND MICROBIOLOGY

Members of the phylum Actinobacteria are common soil and water
gram-­positive bacteria with high guanine and cytosine DNA content
and play important roles in the decomposition of organic materials. A
proportion of Actinobacteria form filamentous and branching structures (similar to Nocardia spp.) that resemble fungal mycelia; these are
included in the class Actinomycetia. The genus Actinomyces (which
translates literally to “ray fungus”) belongs to the order Actinomycetales (along with Mycobacteria and Nocardia) and family Actinomycetaceae and constitutes several microaerophilic to facultatively anaerobic
nonmotile species that are fastidious and slow growing.
More than 50 species of Actinomyces have been identified using
16S rRNA sequencing, with more than half of these species associated
with human infection. Actinomyces israelii is the predominant species
causing human actinomycosis. Other species associated with infection
include but are not limited to A. odontolyticus, A. meyeri, A. naeslundii,
A. graevenitzii, A. neuii, and A. turicensis.

1733

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of actinomycosis relies on identification of the organism in
tissues of affected areas via culture, molecular methods, and/or histopathology. However, growth in cultures can take up to 2-­3 weeks, and
up to 50% of cultures may reveal no growth because of prior antibiotic exposure, failure to maintain anaerobic conditions during sample
transport, or inadequate incubation.
The presence of sulfur granules on macroscopic or microscopic
evaluation (Fig. 235.1) of involved tissue is suggestive of actinomycosis.
Despite their name, these granules are not composed of sulfur, instead
deriving this designation because of their typical yellow color on macroscopic appearance; they can also be white, gray, or brown. Similar
granules can be formed by Nocardia brasiliensis, Streptomyces madurae (which can cause mycetomas), and Staphylococcus aureus (which
can cause botryomycosis). Microscopically, these granules appear on
hematoxylin-­eosin or Gomori methenamine silver stains as masses of
gram-­positive, branching, filamentous rods surrounded by the host
immune cells (e.g., polymorphonuclear neutrophils) and a milieu of
eosinophilic staining inert material, often referred to as the Splendore-­
Hoeppli phenomenon. Notably, A. meyeri is nonbranching and A.
odontolyticus does not form sulfur granules.
Nocardia are indistinguishable from Actinomyces on Gram stain,
but Nocardia take up the modified acid-­fast stain, whereas Actinomyces spp. do not. Although suggestive of actinomycosis, sulfur granules are often absent, and thus additional testing such as cultures
are necessary for the diagnosis. Affected tissues can be cultured on

PATHOGENESIS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Actinomyces are commensal organisms of the human oropharynx and
gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts, and infections by these organisms (termed actinomycosis) typically emanate from these anatomic
sites. The hallmark of actinomycosis is contiguous spread that fails to
respect tissue or fascial planes. As such, these infections can extend
to contiguous structures and form abscesses and chronically suppurative granulomatous infections and sinus tracts. Cicatricial healing can
then ensue, from which the organism can further spread by burrowing along fascial planes, causing deeply communicating scarred sinus
tracts. Sites of infection show dense cellular infiltrates and suppuration
that form many interconnecting abscesses and sinus tracts. Bacteremia
and infections of more distal sites (such as endocarditis, pericarditis,
and central nervous system [CNS] infections) have also been documented. Notably, polymicrobial infections are typical, especially with
copathogens such as Aggregatibacter (formerly Actinobacillus) actinomycetemcomitans, as well as Fusobacterium, Clostridia, Eikenella,
Enterococcus, Bacteroides, and Peptostreptococcus spp.
Knowledge regarding the epidemiology of actinomycosis is limited
to case reports and case series. Based on these reports, actinomycosis
appears to affect people of all ages, with no racial or ethnic predilection, seasonality, or occupational associations. Actinomycosis occurs
in immunocompetent and immunocompromised hosts. However,
pediatric actinomycosis only represents approximately 3% of reported
cases. Risk factors in children include trauma, dental caries, debilitation, and poorly controlled diabetes. Although actinomycosis is not
a common opportunistic infection, disease has been associated with
corticosteroid use, leukemia, renal failure, congenital immunodeficiencies, HIV infection, and solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.
Given the sites of colonization, the most common presentations
of Actinomyces infections include cervicofacial, abdominal/pelvic,
and thoracic regions (in order of frequency). Importantly, certain
medical interventions can result in mucosal barrier injuries and
infection. For instance, use of intrauterine contraceptive devices
can predispose to pelvic actinomycosis, and aspiration events, poor
dentition, and recent dental procedures can result in involvement
of the thoracic region. However, more than one third of patients
do not have an identifiable antecedent event that would explain the
onset of actinomycosis. Importantly, actinomyces infections are not
contagious.

A

B
Fig. 235.1 Actinomycosis. A, Small cluster of Actinomyces on left,

with sulfur granule and surrounding mixed inflammation demonstrating
the Splendore-­Hoeppli phenomenon (×200). B, Gomori methenamine
silver stain of the same field, highlighting the filamentous forms (×200).
(From Johnson MM. Ear, nose, and throat infections. In: Kradin RL, ed.
Diagnostic Pathology of Infectious Disease, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 7.6.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1734 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
brain-­heart infusion agar incubated at 37°C anaerobically and aerobically to reveal organisms within the lines of streak at 24-­48 hours.
A. israelii colonies appear as loose masses of delicate, branching filaments with a characteristic spider-­like growth. Unfortunately, even
under the right conditions, it is challenging to grow Actinomyces, and
the yield of different culturing techniques varies by species. Additionally, conventional biochemical testing for speciation is complex and
may result in misclassifications. The evolution of diagnostic tools
such as 16S rRNA sequence analysis and matrix-­assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight (MALDI-­TOF) mass spectrometry has
improved the accuracy of speciation of cultured organisms and highlighted the potential for detection of Actinomyces directly from the
involved tissue without culture.
Importantly, actinomycosis is usually, if not always, polymicrobial
in nature. In a large study of >650 cases, infection with Actinomyces
was identified in pure culture in only 1 case. Cultures usually also
identify other endogenous flora, including members of the HACEK
group, which includes Haemophilus spp. (typically H. aphrophilus,
H. parainfluenzae, or H. paraphrophilus), A. actinomycetemcomitans,
Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella kingae. A.
actinomycetemcomitans is a fastidious, gram-­negative bacillus that is
part of the oral flora and has been implicated in periodontal disease.
Other bacteria frequently isolated concomitantly in human actinomycosis include Fusobacterium, Bacteroides, Capnocytophaga, and aerobic
and anaerobic streptococci.
CT or MRI of involved areas is often employed in the initial patient
evaluation. Imaging evidence of an invasive process spreading across
tissue planes and ignoring anatomic boundaries is highly suggestive of
actinomycosis. Furthermore, imaging can be helpful in establishing the
extent of the infection, guiding subsequent diagnostic and therapeutic
interventions, and monitoring for disease resolution.

actinomycosis and nocardiosis. Whereas predisposing factors for cervicofacial actinomycosis are not well defined for children, adult cases
are often preceded by a history of oral trauma, oral surgery, dental
procedures, or caries, facilitating entry of organisms into cervicofacial
tissues.

COMMON CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS
Cervicofacial Actinomycosis

Thoracic Actinomycosis

Cervicofacial disease is the most common form of pediatric actinomycosis and often manifests as a neck or submandibular mass that persists for weeks to months. Less than half of patients will have associated
pain, and less than one third of patients will have fever. A minority of
patients will report dysphagia or have a draining sinus (Fig. 235.2).
Less frequently, cervicofacial actinomycosis manifests clinically as an
acute pyogenic infection with a tender, fluctuant mass with trismus,
firm swelling, and fistulas with drainage containing sulfur granules.
Bone is not involved early in the disease, but periostitis, mandibular
osteomyelitis, or perimandibular abscess may subsequently develop.
Infection may spread through sinus tracts to cranial bones, possibly
leading to meningitis. The ability of Actinomyces to burrow through
tissue planes, including the periosteum, is a key difference between

Abdominal and Pelvic Actinomycosis

Of all the forms of actinomycosis, delayed diagnosis is most typical
for abdominal and pelvic infection. A disruption of the mucosa of
the gastrointestinal (GI) tract (e.g., acute GI perforation, abdominal
trauma, prior abdominal surgery) is often postulated as the inciting
event for adult-­onset abdominopelvic actinomycosis. In pediatric
patients, however, medical history sometimes fails to identify prior
evidence of mucosal barrier injury. In a contemporary pediatric case
series of abdominal and pelvic actinomycosis, prior abdominal surgery (all appendectomies) was reported in only 21% of patients and
dental caries in 11%. In two thirds to three fourths of patients, the
presenting signs are abdominal pain and a palpable mass on physical exam. Fever accompanies the abdominal pain in more than half
of cases, with weight loss in almost one third. As with other forms
of actinomycosis, abdominopelvic infection can spread across tissue
planes by contiguous extension involving any tissue or organ, including muscle, solid abdominopelvic viscera, and walls of the intestinal tract. Imaging studies may reveal a mass with invasion of tissue
planes, leading to misdiagnosis of malignancies, inflammatory bowel
disease with fistulae, or abdominal tuberculosis. Genitourinary actinomycosis is often associated with use of intrauterine contraceptive
devices (IUDs) in adults and can mimic gynecologic tumors, but
these infections are quite rare in adolescents. Because of delays in
diagnosis, more than one third of pediatric cases present with draining sinus fistulae.
Thoracic actinomycosis may present with cough, chest pain, hemoptysis, and fever. In a retrospective review of reported pediatric cases
of thoracic infection, almost half presented with a chest wall mass.
Additional symptoms such as cough, fever, chest pain, and weight loss
were reported in <40% of patients. Radiographic imaging may reveal
hilar lymphadenopathy, endobronchial infection, tumor-­like lesions,
diffuse pneumonia, pleural effusions, or abscesses with or without
cavitation and parenchymal lung destruction. These abscesses can
also form sinus tracts to the diaphragm or mediastinum, which are
often pathognomonic for actinomycosis. Other complications include
bony destruction of adjacent ribs, sternum, and vertebral bodies.
Multiple lobe involvement of the lungs is occasionally found. Importantly, evidence of thoracic actinomycosis can be found incidentally
on radiographs ordered for noninfectious concerns. The variation
in presentation and indolent nature of thoracic actinomycosis often
delay the diagnosis.

Other Forms of Actinomycosis

CNS actinomycosis is often the result of hematogenous spread to the
brain parenchyma from a distant site but can also ensue from contiguous spread from a cervicofacial lesion. The former often results
in multiple brain abscesses. Laryngeal actinomycosis rarely has been
reported in older teenagers. Oropharyngeal colonization with Actinomyces may be involved in the development of obstructive tonsillar hypertrophy. Severe forms of periodontitis, particularly localized
juvenile periodontitis, are associated with Actinomyces, especially in
adolescents. Actinomyces has a propensity for infecting heart valves, a
process that results in subacute endocarditis, with fever present in less
than half of cases.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Fig. 235.2 A 2-­yr-­old male with HIV infection who has cervicofacial
actinomycosis and a draining fistula.

Actinomycosis has been referred to as a “great imitator” with presentations that mimic appendicitis, pseudoappendicitis caused by Yersinia
enterocolitica, amebiasis, malignancy, and inflammatory bowel disease.
Actinomycosis must be differentiated from other chronic infections,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 236 u Nocardia 1735
including tuberculosis, nocardiosis, polymicrobial bacterial infections,
and fungal infections.

TREATMENT

Most cases of actinomycosis can be managed with antibiotics, although
surgery can be adjunctive and may shorten the duration of antibiotic
use. Routine susceptibility testing is not typically performed, as most
Actinomyces spp. are susceptible to penicillin. Accordingly, penicillin G
is the drug of choice for parenteral therapy, and penicillin V or amoxicillin is the preferred enteral antibiotic. Because actinomycosis is often
found to be polymicrobial in nature, use of combination β-­lactam/β-­
lactamase inhibitors (e.g., ampicillin-­
sulbactam or amoxicillin-­
clavulanate) may be warranted, especially if there is an initial poor
response. In particular, A. actinomycetemcomitans is a copathogen
in at least 30% of cases of actinomycosis. Failure to recognize this
organism and treat it adequately has resulted in clinical relapse and
deterioration.
Treating actinomycosis in a patient with a penicillin allergy can be
challenging, as there is variation in susceptibility by Actinomyces spp.
to other antibiotic classes; alternatives generally include cephalosporins, carbapenems, macrolides, and tetracyclines. Despite being
anaerobic, a large percentage of Actinomyces are not susceptible to
metronidazole, and isolates are variably susceptible to clindamycin. Fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides have little to no activity against Actinomyces spp. Infectious disease specialists should be
consulted to guide antibiotic usage in patients with penicillin allergy
or deep-­seated infections such as brain abscesses, endocarditis, or
osteomyelitis. Commercially available sensitivity testing methods are
available and can be employed in patients with severe disease or poor
response to initial therapy.
No definitive comparative effectiveness data exist to guide the optimal route and duration of therapy. For severe or extensive infections,
most experts recommend initial parenteral administration of antibiotics for 4-­6 weeks and then transitioning to enteral therapy upon
documentation of clinical improvement. The exceptions include
endocarditis and CNS disease, which generally require parenteral
administration for the entire course of therapy. In cases of mild or
limited disease, enteral antibiotics could be considered even at initiation. Given concern for relapses, antibiotics are often continued for
several months, with total durations ranging between 2-­6 months for
mild/limited disease and 6-­12 months for severe/extensive disease.
Shorter courses of antibiotic therapy can result in relapses, especially
in cases of thoracic actinomycosis without surgical debridement.
Longer courses up to 18 months have also been used in invasive disease and in immunocompromised patients. At the same time, courses
of antibiotic therapy <3 months have been used successfully in cases
of local disease, especially after surgical resection. Close follow-­up
and monitoring are indicated in patients treated with short courses
of antibiotics. The total duration of treatment is often ultimately dictated by the location of the infection and follow-­up clinical exams
and imaging.
Traditionally, an adjunctive surgical intervention was thought to
be necessary for a successful outcome. However, in some case series a
subset of patients have responded well to medical management alone.
In the setting of significant abscesses and/or sinus tracts, a surgical
approach to establish source control and, if possible, completely resect
involved issue can hasten clinical improvement. The morbidity of the
surgical procedure needs to be weighed against the potential benefits
for each patient.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis is excellent with early diagnosis, prompt initiation of
antibiotic therapy, adherence to a prolonged course of antibiotics, and
adequate surgical debridement, if necessary. Despite a good overall
prognosis, permanent scarring can still develop. Although actinomycosis can present in immunocompetent children, disseminated or recalcitrant actinomycosis should raise suspicion for immunodeficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 236

Nocardia
Coralee Del Valle Mojica
Various Nocardia species have been identified causing localized
and disseminated disease in children and adults. These organisms
are predominantly opportunistic pathogens infecting immunocompromised individuals, but cases in immunocompetent hosts are
increasingly reported. Infection caused by these bacteria is termed
nocardiosis, which consists of acute, subacute, or chronic suppurative
manifestations.

ETIOLOGY

Nocardia spp. are a complex group of environmental, gram-­positive
bacteria that belong to aerobic actinomycetes. They can grow on diverse
media (e.g., blood agar, brain-­heart infusion agar, Lowenstein-­Jensen
media, buffered charcoal-­yeast extract [BCYE], Sabouraud dextrose
agar) and have been referred to as bacteria that masquerade as fungi,
sometimes misdirected to the mycology or mycobacteriology section
of clinical laboratories for identification. Colonies can appear as early
as 48 hours, but typically growth of Nocardia is slower than in other
bacteria and may take 1-­2 weeks. Growth appears as waxy, folded, or
heaped colonies at the edges, and yield is best achieved in conditions
that include a temperature of 37°C (98.6°F) with 10% carbon dioxide.
However, many isolates of Nocardia are thermophilic and will grow at
temperatures up to 50°C (122°F). Microscopically, Nocardia spp. are
weakly gram-­positive, rod-­shaped, filamentous bacteria. For some
isolates, there may be alternating areas of gram-­positive and gram-­
negative staining, giving a beaded appearance often described with
Nocardia. These organisms are also weakly acid-­fast, and the modified Kinyoun acid-­fast staining technique can be helpful to identify
organisms from clinical specimens such as a tissue biopsy or bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL).
To date, more than 80 species of Nocardia have been described
and 50 species have been identified to be human pathogens. The
distribution of Nocardia spp. causing disease varies across studies,
partly because of revisions in taxonomic classification over time.
A retrospective study looking at isolates in the United States from
1995 to 2004 reported N. nova, N. brasiliensis, and N. farcinica as
the most common species. In contrast, a more recent study from
China reported N. otitidiscaviarum as the most common species, and
a systematic review from Iran from 1992 to 2021 reported N. asteroides and N. cyriacigeorgica as the two most common species. Species
identification can be critical for optimal clinical outcomes because
of variability in virulence strategies and antibiotic-­resistance profiles.
Traditional approaches to speciation require biochemical processing
that can be laborious and inefficient. Techniques such as 16S rDNA
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or matrix-­assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) time of flight (TOF) mass spectrometry are
now considered the gold standard.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Once thought to be a rare human disease, nocardiosis is being recognized more frequently and has been diagnosed in people of all ages.
Pediatric patients with compromised cellular immunity are at particular risk, including children receiving immune suppression after
solid organ or stem cell transplantation, chemotherapy for malignancy, prolonged corticosteroid therapy, children with poorly controlled HIV infection, or those with a primary immunodeficiency,
especially chronic granulomatous disease. Notably, nocardiosis has
been described in patients without an identified immune defect,
although in these clinical scenarios, other predisposing factors such
as bronchiectasis are often present.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1736 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Due to the lack of a national reporting system for Nocardia infections and the molecular advances impacting the classification of this
organism, measuring the incidence of the disease remains a challenge.
Current knowledge of nocardiosis incidence in the United States is
based on a historical survey of 171 infectious diseases physicians from
1974 and isolates received at the CDC reference laboratory, estimating
500-1000 cases annually. Prevalence estimates in high-risk populations
have been reported to be less than 1%, with conflicting reports about
the trends of infections in different geographic locations around the
world.

PATHOGENESIS

Nocardia organisms are environmental saprophytes that are ubiquitous
in soil and decaying vegetable matter and have been isolated from soil
worldwide. Infection can be acquired via inhalation or direct cutaneous inoculation, including after arthropod and cat bites. From 70% to
80% of Nocardia infections originate in the pulmonary parenchyma,
with 10–25% being primary cutaneous disease.
Nocardia can disseminate from the primary site of infection to any
organ or any musculoskeletal location. Dissemination after primary
lung infection is common, occurring in 15–50% of patients; those with
an underlying immunocompromised condition are more likely to have
disseminated disease. The central nervous system (CNS) is the most
concerning and most common secondary site of infection, complicating as much as 25% of pulmonary disease. Although rare, isolated
CNS disease has been described. Whereas most cases are the result
of environmental exposure, Nocardia species diversity in the hospital
environment has been reported as a reservoir for the development of
nosocomial infections.

CLINICAL AND RADIOGRAPHIC MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical presentation can be nonspecific, with fever reported in
approximately 60% of patients, cough in 30%, and dyspnea in 25%.
Extrapulmonary signs and symptoms can correspond to the site of
infection. In particular, neurologic deficit has been reported in up to
25% of all cases and in more than 50% of patients with CNS involvement. Neurologic complaints can include headache, confusion or
altered mental status, weakness, and speech impairment. Renal nocardiosis can cause dysuria, hematuria, or pyuria, and gastrointestinal
(GI) involvement may be associated with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal distention, or melena. Skin infection can manifest with
nodular lymphangitis (Fig. 236.1). Mycetoma is a chronic, progressive
infection developing days to months after inoculation, usually on a distal location on the limbs. Musculoskeletal, endovascular, and ocular
infections have also been reported.
Given the nonspecific symptoms and signs of nocardiosis (with the
exception of cutaneous lesions), radiographic imaging is often necessary to define the location and extent of disease. Pulmonary infection
can appear as a consolidation consistent with typical bacterial pneumonia or even as a necrotizing pneumonia with or without a pleural
effusion. Single or multiple nodules and cavitary lesions have also
been described. Cavitary lesions are more common in patients with
an underlying immunocompromising condition. CNS disease can take
the form of meningitis or focal lesions. Meningitis presents as neutrophil-­or lymphocyte-­predominant pleocytosis, elevated cerebrospinal
fluid protein, and hypoglycorrhachia. For focal lesions, CT or MRI of
the brain often reveals single-­or multiple-­ring enhancing lesions. Similar to the brain, when other organs or soft tissues are involved, CT or
MRI also typically reveals single-­or multiple-­ring enhancing lesions,
suggestive of an abscess or abscesses.

DIAGNOSIS

an invasive procedure such as bronchoscopy, tissue biopsy, or abscess
aspiration is necessary to procure specimens for diagnostic testing.
Histopathologic staining of such material can reveal beaded, weakly
gram-­positive or modified acid-­fast filamentous bacteria. Histopathology can also show delicately branching bacteria with a proclivity to
fragment.
Molecular methodologies, specifically gene sequencing, have
become the most accurate for definitively identifying Nocardia to the
species level. Speciation of Nocardia is becoming increasingly reliant
on 16S rDNA PCR or MALDI-­TOF technologies, with a specificity of
74% and a sensitivity of 88% in a multicenter study assessing the performance of 16S sequencing in 68 patients with proven or probable
nocardiosis. Given that Nocardia spp. can colonize the respiratory
airway, a sputum or BAL culture that yields a Nocardia species is not
itself confirmatory of nocardiosis. However, a positive microbiologic
test for a Nocardia species from one of these specimens in conjunction with the clinical and radiographic findings is strongly supportive
of nocardiosis.
When a diagnosis of nocardiosis is made, strong consideration
should be given to evaluation for disseminated disease, even in the
absence of signs or symptoms, especially in the immunocompromised
host. Although data are limited, most experts agree that, at a minimum,
MRI of the brain should be performed in the immunocompromised
host with nocardiosis.

TREATMENT

The choice, dose, and duration of antimicrobial treatment depend
on the site and extent of infection, immune status of the patient,
initial clinical response, and species and susceptibility testing of the
Nocardia isolate. Several therapeutic options exist for the treatment
of nocardiosis; however, there are no comparative effectiveness
studies to inform the optimal therapeutic regimen. Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) is the sulfonamide formulation
that is recommended, although sulfadiazine and sulfisoxazole have
been used. Increasing recognition of resistance to TMP-­SMX across
and within Nocardia spp. highlights the importance of speciation
of Nocardia isolates and of performing sensitivity testing in a certified microbiology laboratory. TMP-­SMX resistance rates as high as
42% have been reported. Administration of TMP-­SMX as prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia is not always protective against nocardiosis, and thus clinicians should not exclude
this diagnosis from the differential in patients receiving TMP-­SMX
prophylaxis.

A

B

Fig. 236.1 A 9-­yr-­old healthy child with infected knee laceration (A)

Microbiologic evidence is necessary to confirm the diagnosis of nocardiosis. In one systematic review, blood cultures were the only positive
microbiologic specimen in 38% of cases, thus serving as an important
noninvasive diagnostic test for nocardiosis. In the remaining patients,

10 days after falling onto concrete in his school playground, complicated by nodular lymphangitis (B). (From Williams PCM, Bartlett AW,
Palasanthiran P, McMullan B. A not so innocuous playground fall: lymphocutaneous nocardiosis in an immunocompetent boy. Arch Dis Child.
2022;107[3]:257–258, Figs. 1 and 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 237 u Neisseria meningitidis (Meningococcus)
Other antibacterial agents with in vitro activity against Nocardia
spp. include but are not limited to amikacin, amoxicillin-­clavulanate,
ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, clarithromycin, imipenem, linezolid,
and minocycline. A recent study profiling the antimicrobial susceptibility pattern of a diverse range of Nocardia revealed that among 146
isolates, the susceptibilities were 100% to linezolid, 96% to amikacin,
94% to TMP-­SMX, and 76% to imipenem. A similar retrospective
study conducted in the United States from 1995 to 2004 revealed that
42% of the isolates were resistant to TMP-­SMX. Therefore while awaiting sensitivity testing in patients with Nocardia isolated from a clinical specimen, it may be reasonable to administer linezolid empirically,
taking into account local susceptibility data. Subsequent therapeutic
decisions should be guided by final sensitivity results and consideration of the site of infection and pharmacokinetics of the available
agents. It is not clear whether parenteral administration is superior to
enteral formulations. However, most experts support the use of parenteral therapy for more severe disease, including endocarditis and
CNS disease.
In vitro and in vivo animal models have suggested the benefit of
combination regimens for the treatment of nocardiosis. There are no
clinical data to confirm the need for combination therapy; however,
based on the preclinical data, there is expert support for using combination therapy in CNS nocardiosis, in disseminated disease, and in
children with an underlying immunocompromising condition. A variety of combination therapies have been suggested, with many experts
favoring TMP-­SMX, amikacin, and a carbapenem or third-­generation
cephalosporin. Since data on combination therapy are limited, antibiotic choices should primarily be guided by sensitivity testing of the
clinical Nocardia isolate.
Surgical drainage of abscesses can be helpful in hastening resolution of nocardiosis. However, no comparative data have documented improvement in overall outcomes with adjunctive surgical
intervention, and success has been reported with medical management alone in resolving deep-­seated abscesses, even in the CNS.
A literature review showed that among patients with CNS nocardiosis, 1-­year overall mortality was approximately 20%, limited by
cases lost to follow-­up. Among patients who were treated with a
combination of antibiotics and neurosurgical procedures, mortality was lower (7%). Therefore the decision to intervene surgically
needs to be balanced with the potential consequences of a surgical procedure to drain an abscess. Intraventricular antibiotics have
been reported.
The necessary duration of therapy for nocardiosis varies depending on the clinical presentation and the status of the patient. The optimal duration is uncertain, but long-­term therapy is common because
of the propensity for relapse. Historically, superficial cutaneous infection has been treated for 3 months, pulmonary or systemic nocardiosis has been treated for 6-­12 months, and CNS infection has been
treated for at least 12 months. These intervals should only be considered as a guide for expected therapeutic durations. The ultimate
duration should be dictated by clinical and radiographic resolution
of disease.

PROGNOSIS

Historically, nocardiosis has been associated with significant mortality. Fortunately, more recent reports have documented an improved
rate of complete cure to approximately 80%. Predictably, attributable
case fatality rates vary by disease entity. There is no attributable case
fatality associated with cutaneous disease, but 10–20% attributable
case fatality has been assigned to disseminated and visceral disease.
CNS disease has the highest attributable case fatality rates, reaching
25%. Importantly, much of the data on case fatality rates are informed
by predominantly adult cohorts, and thus there may be fewer fatal
outcomes in children. Nonetheless, early diagnosis and intervention
are important to reduce the morbidity and mortality of nocardiosis,
especially in immunocompromised patients at increased risk for disseminated disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1737

Section 5

Gram-Negative
Bacterial Infections
Chapter 237

Neisseria meningitidis
(Meningococcus)
Manish Sadarangani
Neisseria meningitidis (the meningococcus) is a commensal of the
human nasopharynx in approximately 10% of the population and, on
rare occasions, enters the bloodstream to cause devastating invasive
disease such as meningitis and meningococcal septicemia (meningococcemia). Although a rare endemic disease in most countries, the epidemiology of meningococcal disease varies widely over time and in
different geographic regions, with both hyperendemic and epidemic
disease patterns occurring. Onset of disease in susceptible individuals may be very rapid, within hours, and the case fatality rate is high,
especially among those presenting with septic shock, despite access to
modern critical care. Individual susceptibility is known to involve a
complex relationship among environmental, host, and bacterial factors, and prevention of meningococcal disease through behavior modification (e.g., avoiding tobacco smoke) and vaccination offers the best
prospect for control.

ETIOLOGY

N. meningitidis is a gram-­negative, fastidious, encapsulated, oxidase-­
positive, aerobic diplococcus. Differences in the chemistry of the polysaccharide capsule allow definition of 12 (previously thought to be 13)
serologically distinct meningococcal capsular groups, of which 6, designated A, B, C, W (previously designated W135), X, and Y, are responsible for almost all cases of disease. Meningococcal strains may be
subclassified on the basis of antigenic variation in two porin proteins
found in the outer membrane, PorB (serotype) and PorA (serosubtype),
and lipopolysaccharide (immunotype), using serology. Serologic
typing is being replaced by molecular typing methods, which target
genes under immune selection to provide antigen sequence typing
(based on amino acid variation in various surface proteins, including
PorA and FetA). Sequencing of antigen genes (e.g., porA, fHbp, nadA,
nhba) is an important means of monitoring pressure on meningococcal populations by protein-­based vaccines containing these antigens.
Because meningococci readily exchange genetic material, typing based
on a few antigens cannot provide an accurate picture of relatedness
of strains, an important goal in monitoring epidemiology. Multilocus
sequence typing, which types meningococci using variation in seven
housekeeping genes, has been widely used to map the distribution of
genetic lineages of meningococci (http://pubmlst.org/neisseria/) and
provides a clearer picture of the genetic and epidemiologic relatedness
of strains. To provide still better definition of genetic variation, in some
countries, including the United Kingdom, whole genome sequencing
is used to type meningococci and appears set to replace both antigen
and multilocus sequence typing as costs continue to fall. The application of molecular approaches to epidemiology has established that (1)
endemic meningococcal disease is caused by genetically heterogeneous
strains, although only a small number of genetic lineages are associated
with the majority of cases of invasive disease, and (2) outbreaks are
usually clonal, caused by single strains.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1738 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
EPIDEMIOLOGY

Meningococci are transmitted during close contact through aerosol droplets or exposure to respiratory secretions, as by kissing. The organism
does not survive for long periods in the environment. Enhanced rates of
mucosal colonization and increased disease risk are associated with activities that increase the likelihood of exposure to a new strain or increase
proximity to a carrier, thus facilitating transmission, including kissing, bar
patronage, binge drinking, attendance at nightclubs, men having sex with
men, and living in freshman college dormitories. Factors that damage the
nasopharyngeal mucosa, such as smoking and respiratory viral infection
(notably influenza), are also associated with increased rates of carriage and
disease, perhaps by driving upregulation of host adhesion molecules that
are receptors for meningococci. Carriage is unusual in early childhood and
peaks during adolescence and young adulthood.
Meningococcal disease is a global problem, but disease rates vary
by a factor of 10-­to 100-­fold in different geographic locations at one
point in time and in the same location at different times. Most cases
of meningococcal disease are sporadic, but small outbreaks (usually
in schools or colleges, representing <3% of U.S. cases), hyperendemic
disease (increased rates of disease persisting for a decade or more as a
result of a single clone), and epidemic disease are all recognized patterns. However, over the past decade, rates of meningococcal disease
have declined in most industrialized countries, partly through introduction of immunization programs and possibly aided by widespread
legislation against smoking in public places. The arrival of hyperinvasive lineages and their eventual decline through development of natural immunity is recognized as a major driver of changes in disease rates
over time. The U.S. disease rate was 1.1 cases per 100,000 population in
1999 but had fallen to 0.11 per 100,000 by 2019 (Fig. 237.1). By contrast,
the rate of disease in Ireland in 1999 was >12 per 100,000, and rates of
1,000 per 100,000 have been described during epidemic disease in sub-­
Saharan Africa. Disease caused by dominant hyperendemic clones has
been recognized in the past 2 decades in Oregon, United States; Quebec, Canada; Normandy, France; and across New Zealand. Laboratory
data underreport meningococcal disease incidence rates because up to
50% of cases are not culture confirmed, particularly where prehospital
antibiotics are recommended for suspected cases. In the United Kingdom, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods are used routinely for
diagnosis of suspected cases, doubling the number of confirmed cases.
The highest rate of meningococcal disease occurs in infants <1 year
old, probably as a result of immunologic inexperience (antibody that
recognizes meningococcal antigens is naturally acquired during later
childhood), immaturity of the alternative and lectin complement pathways, and perhaps the poor responses made by infants to bacterial polysaccharides. In the absence of immunization, incidence rates decline
through childhood, except for a peak of disease among adolescents and

Rate per 100,000 population

1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

Fig. 237.1 Rate of meningococcal disease, by year—United States,

1970–2020. (Modified from Cohn AC, MacNeil JR, Clark TA, et al;
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention and control of
meningococcal disease: recommendations of the Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep 2013;62[RR-­2]:1–28,
updated with data from the CDC meningococcal surveillance data tables:
https://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/surveillance/surveillance-­
data.html#figure01.)

young adults, which may be related to increased opportunity for exposure from social activities. The incidence of meningococcal disease is
increased among persons with HIV infection.
In the United States, most cases of disease in the first 5 years of life are
caused by capsular group B strains. After age 5 years, disease cases are
mostly distributed among capsular groups C, W, and Y. In most other
industrialized countries, capsular group B strains predominate at all
ages, in part because of introduction of routine capsular group C meningococcal conjugate vaccine among infants and/or toddlers. For unclear
reasons, disease in children caused by group Y strains was uncommon
in the United States before the 1990s and then began to increase. Rates
of disease caused by this capsular group have also increased in several
other countries but are declining in the United States. Disease caused
by capsular group W strains has increased in the United Kingdom and
in other countries in Europe and Australia as a result of a hyperinvasive
clone, which appears to have originated in Latin America.
Large outbreaks of capsular group A meningococcal disease occurred
during and immediately after the First World War and Second World
War in both Europe and the United States, but since the 1990s, almost
all cases caused by capsular group A strains have occurred in Eastern
Europe, Russia, and developing countries. The highest incidence of capsular group A disease has occurred in a band across sub-­Saharan Africa,
the meningitis belt, with annual endemic rates of 10-­25 per 100,000
population. For more than a century, this region has experienced large
capsular group A epidemics every 7-­10 years, with annual rates as high
as 1,000 per 100,000 population. The onset of cases in the sub-­Saharan
region typically begins during the dry season, possibly related to drying and damage to the nasopharyngeal mucosa; subsides with the rainy
season; and may reemerge the following dry season. Rates of capsular
group A meningococcal disease are currently falling across this region as
a result of a mass vaccine implementation targeting strains bearing the
A polysaccharide. However, both endemic and epidemic meningococcal disease in this region is also caused by capsular groups C, W, and X
strains. Capsular group A and group X are infrequent causes of disease
in other areas of the world, although both A and W strains have been
associated with outbreaks among pilgrims returning from the Hajj.

PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Colonization of the nasopharynx by N. meningitidis is the first step in
either carriage or invasive disease. Disease usually occurs 1-­14 days
after acquisition of the pathogen. Initial contact of meningococci
with host epithelial cells is mediated by pili, which may interact with
the host CD46 molecule or an integrin. Close adhesion is then mediated by Opa and Opc binding to carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
cell adhesion molecule receptors and integrins, respectively. Subsequent internalization of meningococci by epithelial cells is followed
by transcytosis through to the basolateral tissues and dissemination
into the bloodstream. Immunoglobulin A1 protease secreted by invasive bacteria degrades secretory IgA on the mucosal surface, circumventing this first-­line host defense mechanism.
Once in the bloodstream, meningococci multiply rapidly to high
levels to cause septicemia (meningococcemia). Patients with a higher
bacterial load have a more rapid clinical deterioration and longer period
of hospitalization, as well as a higher risk of death and permanent
sequelae. Resistance to complement-­mediated lysis and phagocytosis
is largely mediated by the polysaccharide capsule and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Outer membrane vesicles released from the surface of the
organism contain LPS, outer membrane proteins, periplasmic proteins,
and phospholipid and play a major role in the inflammatory cascade
that leads to severe disease.
Much of the tissue damage is caused by host immune mechanisms
activated by meningococcal components, in particular LPS. During invasive disease LPS is bound to a circulating plasma protein known as LPS-­
binding protein. The host receptor complex for LPS consists of toll-­like
receptor (TLR)-­4, CD14, and myeloid differentiation protein 2. Binding
of LPS to TLR-­4, which is upregulated on circulating leukocytes during septicemia, results in activation of a number of different cell types.
An intense inflammatory reaction results from secretion of proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, interleukin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 237 u Neisseria meningitidis (Meningococcus)
(IL)-­1β, IL-­
6, IL-­
8, and granulocyte-­
macrophage colony-­
stimulating
factor, levels of which are closely associated with plasma levels of LPS.
The major antiinflammatory cytokines IL-­1Rα, IL-­2, IL-­4, and IL-­12 and
transforming growth factor-­β are present at very low levels. Both high
and low levels have been observed for IL-­10 and interferon-­γ.
The pathophysiologic events that occur during meningococcal septicemia are largely related to microvascular injury. This injury leads to
increased vascular permeability and capillary leak syndrome, pathologic
vasoconstriction and vasodilation, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), and profound myocardial dysfunction. Increased vascular
permeability can lead to dramatic fluid loss and severe hypovolemia.
Capillary leak syndrome with or without aggressive fluid resuscitation
(which is essential in severe cases) leads to pulmonary edema and respiratory failure. Initial vasoconstriction is a compensatory mechanism in
response to hypovolemia and results in the clinical features of pallor and
cold extremities. After resuscitation, some patients experience warm
shock, that is, intense vasodilation with bounding pulses and warm
extremities, despite persistent hypotension and metabolic acidosis. Virtually all antithrombotic mechanisms appear to be dysfunctional during
meningococcal sepsis, leading to a procoagulant state and DIC. All these
factors contribute to depressed myocardial function, but there is also a
direct negative cytokine effect on myocardial contractility, thought to be
largely mediated by IL-­6. Hypoxia, acidosis, hypoglycemia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, and hypophosphatemia are all common features in
severe septicemia and further depress cardiac function. Some patients
become unresponsive to the positive inotropic effects of catecholamines
and require high levels of inotropic support during intensive care management. These processes result in impairment of microvascular blood
flow throughout the body and ultimately lead to multiorgan failure,
which is responsible for much of the mortality.
After invasion of the circulation, meningococci may also penetrate
the blood-­brain barrier and enter the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), facilitated by pili and possibly Opc. Once there, bacteria continue to proliferate, and LPS and other outer membrane products can stimulate a
proinflammatory cascade similar to that observed in the blood. This
leads to upregulation of specific adhesion molecules and recruitment
of leukocytes into the CSF. Central nervous system damage occurs
directly by meningeal inflammation and indirectly by circulatory collapse and causes a high rate of neurologic sequelae in affected patients.
Death can occur from cerebral edema, which leads to increased intracranial pressure (ICP) and cerebral or cerebellar herniation.

Immunity

There is an inverse correlation between the incidence of disease and
the prevalence of complement-­dependent serum bactericidal antibody (SBA). The level of SBA is highest at birth and among adults and
lowest in children between 6 months and 2 years of age, when the highest incidence of disease occurs. Such antibodies are naturally elicited
by asymptomatic carriage of pathogenic and nonpathogenic Neisseria, such as Neisseria lactamica, and other antigenically related gram-­
negative bacteria. A similar relationship was described for capsular
groups A, B, and C. Vaccine trials support these earlier findings. For
the meningococcal capsular group C conjugate vaccine, an SBA titer
≥1:8 correlated strongly with postlicensure vaccine effectiveness. For
capsular group B disease, the data are less certain, but the proportions
of capsular group B vaccine recipients with more than fourfold rises in
SBA after vaccination or SBA titers ≥1:4 have been correlated with clinical effectiveness in studies of outer membrane vesicle vaccines. These
cutoffs are therefore currently used for regulatory approval of new
meningococcal vaccines. The strong association between disease risk
and genetic variation in human complement factor H further supports
the importance of complement-­mediated protection against disease.
There is evidence that mechanisms other than complement-­dependent
bactericidal antibodies may be important in determining protection
against meningococcal disease. Disease in individuals with complement
deficiency has a different age distribution, has less severe clinical features, and often involves unusual capsular groups. In particular, complement deficiency does not appear strongly related to an increased risk of
capsular group B disease. Alternative surrogate markers of protection
include the opsonophagocytic assay and antibody avidity, but no studies

1739

have attempted to link these laboratory tests with vaccine efficacy or even
population protection, as has been found with SBA.

Host Factors

Host susceptibility is strongly related to age, as previously described,
indicating that immunologic responsiveness and/or naïveté in infancy
and early childhood are key determinants of risk. Complement is a key
factor in protection against meningococcal disease. Individuals with
inherited deficiencies of properdin, factor D, or terminal complement
components have up to a 1,000-­fold higher risk for development of
meningococcal disease than complement-­sufficient people. The risk of
meningococcal disease is also increased in patients with acquired complement deficiencies associated with diseases such as nephrotic syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and hepatic failure and
in patients treated with eculizumab, a monoclonal antibody against
complement protein C5.
Among those with complement deficiencies, meningococcal disease
is more prevalent during late childhood and adolescence, when carriage
rates are higher than in children <10 years old; meningococcal infections in these patients may be recurrent. Although meningococcal disease can occasionally be overwhelming in patients with late complement
component deficiency, cases are more typically described as being less
severe than in complement-­sufficient persons (with properdin deficiency being the exception), perhaps reflecting that these cases are often
caused by unusual capsular groups. In one study, one third of individuals
with meningococcal disease caused by capsular groups X, Y, and W had
a complement deficiency. Although protective against early infection,
extensive complement activation and bacteriolysis may contribute to the
pathogenesis of severe disease once bacterial invasion has occurred.
The sibling risk ratio for meningococcal disease is similar to that for
other diseases where susceptibility shows polygenic inheritance, and
a number of host genetic factors have now been identified to affect
either susceptibility to meningococcal disease or severity of disease.
The molecules implicated include proteins on epithelial surfaces, the
complement cascade, pattern recognition receptors, clotting factors,
and inflammatory mediators. Deficiencies in the complement pathways
are consistently associated with an increased risk of meningococcal
disease, with specific polymorphisms in mannose-­binding lectin and
factor H found to be associated with disease susceptibility. A genome-­
wide association study of 7,522 individuals in Europe identified single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the CFH and CFHR3 genes
that were associated with host susceptibility to meningococcal disease.
Complement-­mediated bacteriolysis is known to be extremely important
in protection against meningococcal disease, giving these associations
biologic plausibility. In particular, factor H attaches to various binding
proteins expressed on the bacterial surface, downregulating complement
activation and allowing the organism to evade host responses.
In terms of disease severity, a meta-­analysis of data from smaller
studies found that SNPs in genes encoding plasminogen activator
inhibitor 1 (SERPINE1), IL-­1 receptor antagonist (IL1RN), and IL-­1β
(IL1B) are associated with increased mortality from meningococcal
disease, as reflected in pathophysiologic changes that occur during
invasive disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The most common form of meningococcal infection is asymptomatic
carriage of the organism in the nasopharynx. In the rare cases where
invasive disease occurs, the clinical spectrum of meningococcal disease varies widely, but the highest proportion of cases present with
meningococcal meningitis (30–50%). Other recognized presentations
include bacteremia without sepsis, meningococcal septicemia with
or without meningitis, pneumonia, chronic meningococcemia, and
occult bacteremia. Focal infections in various sites (e.g., myocardium,
joints, pericardium, bone, eye, peritoneum, sinuses, middle ear) are
well recognized, and all may progress to disseminated disease. Urethritis, cervicitis, vulvovaginitis, orchitis, and proctitis may also occur.
Acute meningococcal septicemia cannot be distinguished from
other viral or bacterial infections early after onset of symptoms (Table
237.1). Typical nonspecific early symptoms include fever, irritability,
lethargy, respiratory symptoms, refusal to drink, and vomiting. Less

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1740 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 237.1  Prevalence of Symptoms and Signs in Children and Young People with Meningococcal Septicemia,
Meningococcal Disease, and Meningococcal Meningitis
PREVALENCE RANGE (NUMBER OF STUDIES)
SYMPTOM OR SIGN

BACTERIAL MENINGITIS

MENINGOCOCCAL DISEASE

MENINGOCOCCAL
SEPTICEMIA

Fever

66–97% (10)

58–97% (7)

98% (1)

Vomiting or nausea

18–70% (10)

44–76% (6)

Rash

9–62% (6)

59–100% (9)

70% (1)

Headache

3–59% (7)

16–49% (5)

40% (1)

Lethargy

13–87% (6)

36–65% (3)

59% (1)

Coughing

N/A (0)

15–27% (2)

33% (1)

Irritable or unsettled

21–79% (8)

36–67% (3)

32% (1)

Runny nose

N/A (0)

24% (1)

31% (1)

Muscle ache or joint pain

23% (1)

7–65% (3)

30% (1)

Refusing food or drink

26–76% (4)

13–60% (3)

27% (1)

Altered mental state*

26–93% (6)

45–81% (3)

N/A (0)

Stiff neck

13–74% (13)

5–71% (6)

N/A (0)

Impaired consciousness

60–87% (4)

10–72% (2)

N/A (0)

Unconsciousness

4–18% (4)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Chills or shivering

N/A (0)

39% (1)

N/A (0)

Photophobia

5–16% (2)

2–31% (5)

N/A (0)

Respiratory symptoms

25–49% (4)

16–23% (2)

N/A (0)

Breathing difficulty

13–34% (4)

11% (1)

N/A (0)

Cold hands or feet

N/A (0)

43% (1)

N/A (0)

Shock

8–16% (2)

27–29% (2)

N/A (0)

Seizures

14–38% (12)

7–17% (3)

N/A (0)

Diarrhea

21–29% (2)

7–9% (2)

N/A (0)

Abdominal pain or distention

17% (1)

4% (1)

N/A (0)

Leg pain

N/A (0)

11–37% (2)

N/A (0)

Thirst

N/A (0)

8% (1)

N/A (0)

Sore throat, coryza, or throat
infection

18% (1)

24% (1)

N/A (0)

Ill appearance

N/A (0)

79% (1)

N/A (0)

Capillary refill time >2 sec

N/A (0)

83% (1)

N/A (0)

Hypotension

N/A (0)

28% (1)

N/A (0)

Abnormal skin color

N/A (0)

19% (1)

N/A (0)

Bulging fontanel†

13–45% (4)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Ear infection or ear, nose, and
throat infections‡

18–49% (5)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Chest infection

14% (1)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Brudzinski sign

11–66% (2)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Kernig sign

10–53% (3)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Abnormal pupils

10% (1)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Cranial nerve pair involvement

4% (1)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 237 u Neisseria meningitidis (Meningococcus)

1741

Table 237.1  Prevalence of Symptoms and Signs in Children and Young People with Meningococcal Septicemia,
Meningococcal Disease, and Meningococcal Meningitis—cont’d
PREVALENCE RANGE (NUMBER OF STUDIES)
SYMPTOM OR SIGN

BACTERIAL MENINGITIS

MENINGOCOCCAL DISEASE

MENINGOCOCCAL
SEPTICEMIA

Toxic or moribund state

3–49% (2)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Back rigidity

46% (1)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Paresis

6% (1)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

Focal neurologic deficit

6–47% (3)

N/A (0)

N/A (0)

*This includes confusion, delirium, and drowsiness.
†The age ranges in the four studies are 0-­14 yr, 0-­2 yr, 0-­12 mo, and 0-­13 wk.
‡One study reported the number of children and young people with ear, nose, and throat infections; the four other studies reported the number of ear infections only.
Classification of conditions presented in the table reflects the terminology used in the evidence.
N/A, Not applicable.
Data from National Collaborating Center for Women’s and Children’s Health (UK). Bacterial meningitis and meningococcal septicaemia: management of bacterial meningitis and
meningococcal septicaemia in children and young people younger than 16 years in primary and secondary care. NICE Clinical Guidelines, No 102. London: RCOG Press; 2010.

Fig. 237.4 Rash of chronic meningococcemia. (From Persa OD, Jazmati N, Robinson N, et al. A pregnant woman with chronic meningococcaemia from Neisseria meningitidis with lpxL1-­mutations. Lancet.
2014;384:1900.)

Fig. 237.2 Meningococcemia. A maculopapular, nonhemorrhagic
rash that subsequently became petechial. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical
Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2016: Fig 9-­59.)

A

B

Fig. 237.3 A, Purpuric rash in 3-­yr-­old child with meningococcemia.

B, Purpura fulminans in 11-­mo-­old child with meningococcemia. (From
Thompson ED, Herzog KD. Fever and rash. In: Zaoutis L, Chiang V,
eds. Comprehensive Pediatric Hospital Medicine. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2007: Figs. 62-­6 and 62-­7.)

frequently, diarrhea, sore throat, and chills/shivering are reported.
A maculopapular rash, which is indistinguishable from rashes seen
after viral infections, is evident in approximately 10% of cases early in
the course of infection (Fig. 237.2). Limb pain, myalgia, or refusal to

walk may occur as the primary complaint in 7% of otherwise clinically unsuspected cases. As the disease progresses, cold hands or feet
and abnormal skin color may be important signs, capillary refill time
becomes prolonged, and a nonblanching or petechial rash will develop
in >80% of cases. In fulminant meningococcal septicemia, the disease
progresses rapidly over several hours from fever with nonspecific signs
to septic shock characterized by prominent petechiae and purpura
(purpura fulminans) with poor peripheral perfusion, tachycardia (to
compensate for reduced blood volume resulting from capillary leak),
increased respiratory rate (to compensate for pulmonary edema),
hypotension (a late sign of shock in young children), confusion, and
coma (resulting from decreased cerebral perfusion). Coagulopathy,
electrolyte disturbance (especially hypokalemia), acidosis, adrenal
hemorrhage, renal failure, and myocardial failure may all develop (Fig.
237.3). Meningitis may be present.
Meningococcal meningitis is indistinguishable from meningitis
caused by other bacteria. Nonspecific symptoms and signs (see Table
237.1), including fever and headache, predominate, especially in the
young and early in the illness. Children <5 years old rarely report headache. More specific symptoms of photophobia, nuchal rigidity, bulging
of the fontanel, and clinical signs of meningeal irritation may develop
but are unusual in infants. Seizures and focal neurologic signs occur
less frequently than in patients with meningitis caused by Streptococcus
pneumoniae or Haemophilus influenzae. A meningoencephalitis-­like
picture can occur, associated with rapidly progressive cerebral edema
and death from increased ICP, which may be more common with capsular group A infection.
Occult meningococcal bacteremia manifests as fever with or
without associated symptoms that suggest a minor viral infection.
Resolution of bacteremia may occur without antibiotics, but sustained
bacteremia leads to meningitis in approximately 60% of cases and to
distant infection of other tissues.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1742 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Chronic meningococcemia, which occurs rarely, is characterized by
fever, nontoxic appearance, arthralgia, headache, splenomegaly, and a
maculopapular or petechial rash (Fig. 237.4). Symptoms are intermittent, with a mean duration of illness of 6-­8 weeks. Blood culture results
are usually positive, but cultures may initially be sterile. Chronic meningococcemia may spontaneously resolve, but meningitis may develop in
untreated cases. Some cases have been associated with complement deficiency and others with sulfonamide therapy. One report indicates that
up to 47% of isolates from patients with chronic meningococcemia (vs
<10% in acute cases) have a pathogenic variant in the lpxl1 gene, leading
to a reduced inflammatory response and a milder course of infection.

DIAGNOSIS

The initial diagnosis of meningococcal disease should be made on clinical assessment to avoid delay in implementation of appropriate therapy.
Laboratory findings are variable but may include leukocytopenia or
leukocytosis, often with increased percentages of neutrophils and band
forms, and anemia, thrombocytopenia, proteinuria, and hematuria.
Elevations of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-­reactive protein (CRP) may occur, but in patients with rapid onset of disease, these
values may be within normal limits at presentation. Increased CRP in
the presence of fever and petechiae makes the diagnosis likely. Hypoalbuminemia, hypocalcemia, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypophosphatemia, hypoglycemia, and metabolic acidosis, often with increased
lactate levels, are common in patients with meningococcal septicemia.
Patients with coagulopathy have decreased serum concentrations of prothrombin and fibrinogen and prolonged coagulation times.
A confirmed diagnosis of meningococcal disease is established by
isolation of N. meningitidis from a normally sterile body fluid such
as blood, CSF, or synovial fluid. Meningococci may be identified in a
Gram stain preparation and/or culture of petechial or purpuric skin
lesions, although this procedure is rarely undertaken, and occasionally
are seen on Gram stain of the buffy coat layer of a centrifuged blood
sample. Although blood culture may be positive in more than two
thirds of cases before antibiotic use, culture results often are negative
if the patient has been treated with antibiotics before collection of the
culture specimen; data suggest that <50% are culture positive. Isolation
of the organism from the nasopharynx is not diagnostic of invasive
disease because the organism is a common commensal.
PCR using primers specific for meningococcal genes (e.g., ctrA) has
high sensitivity and specificity for detection of meningococci using
whole blood samples and has increased confirmation of suspected
cases by >40% in the United Kingdom.
Lumbar puncture should be undertaken to establish a diagnosis of
meningococcal meningitis in patients without contraindications, including presence of septic shock, coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia, respiratory distress, seizures, increased ICP, or local infection. In patients with
meningococcal meningitis, the cellular and chemical characteristics of
the CSF are those of acute bacterial meningitis, showing gram-­negative
diplococci in up to 75% of cases. CSF culture results may be positive
in patients with meningococcemia in the absence of CSF pleocytosis
or clinical evidence of meningitis; conversely, positive CSF specimens
that are gram positive are sometimes culture negative. Overdecolorized
pneumococci in Gram stain preparations can be mistaken for meningococci, and therefore empirical therapy should not be narrowed to N.
meningitidis infection on the basis of Gram stain findings alone.
Detection of capsular polysaccharide antigens using rapid latex agglutination tests on CSF can support the diagnosis in cases clinically consistent with meningococcal disease, but the tests have not performed
adequately in clinical practice (poor sensitivity and cross-­reactivity of
capsular group B test with Escherichia coli K1 antigen) and have been
replaced by molecular diagnostic methods. Urine antigen testing is
insensitive and should not be used. PCR-­based assays for detection of
meningococci in blood and CSF have been developed, and multiplex
PCR assays that detect several bacterial species associated with meningitis, including the meningococcus, are used in some laboratories.

Differential Diagnosis

Meningococcal disease can appear similar to sepsis or meningitis caused by many other gram-­
negative bacteria, S. pneumoniae,

Staphylococcus aureus, or group A streptococcus; to Rocky Mountain
spotted fever, ehrlichiosis, or epidemic typhus; and to bacterial endocarditis. Viral and other infectious etiologies of meningoencephalitis
should be considered in some cases.
Petechial rashes are common in viral infections (enteroviruses, influenza and other respiratory viruses, measles virus, Epstein-­Barr virus,
cytomegalovirus, parvovirus) and may be confused with meningococcal disease. Petechial or purpuric rashes are also associated with protein C or protein S deficiency, platelet disorders (including idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura), Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, connective
tissue disorders, drug eruptions, and trauma, including nonaccidental
injury. The nonpetechial, blanching maculopapular rash observed in
some cases of meningococcal disease, especially early in the course,
may initially be confused with a viral exanthem.

TREATMENT
Antibiotics

Empirical antimicrobial therapy should be initiated immediately after
the diagnosis of invasive meningococcal infection is suspected and cultures are obtained, using a third-­generation cephalosporin to cover
the most likely bacterial pathogens until the diagnosis is confirmed. In
regions with a high rate of β-­lactam–resistant S. pneumoniae, empirical addition of intravenous (IV) vancomycin is recommended (see
Chapter 643.1) while awaiting the outcome of bacterial identification
and sensitivity, but this is unnecessary in other settings where cephalosporin resistance of pneumococci is very rare (in these settings a
risk assessment of each case should be made). Once the diagnosis of β-­
lactam–sensitive meningococcal disease is confirmed in the laboratory,
some authorities recommend a switch to penicillin. Even with no evidence that survival outcomes are different, however, limited evidence
from one study indicates that in meningococcal purpura, necrotic skin
lesions are less common among children treated with ceftriaxone than
with penicillin. Furthermore, it may be cost-­effective to use a once-­
daily dose of ceftriaxone for therapy in younger children, and this is
the recommended practice in the United Kingdom (Table 237.2). No
adequate studies have investigated the optimal duration of therapy for
children, but the course is generally continued for 5-­7 days.
Early treatment of meningococcal infections may prevent serious
sequelae, but timely early diagnosis is often difficult in the absence of
petechial or purpuric skin findings. Among children presenting with
petechial rashes, 1–10% may have underlying meningococcal disease,
and protocols have been established to ensure that these patients are
identified without exposing the >90% of cases without meningococcal
disease to unnecessary parenteral antibiotic therapy (Fig. 237.5).
Isolates of N. meningitidis with decreased susceptibility to penicillin
(minimal inhibitory concentration of penicillin of 0.1-­1.0 mg/mL) have
been reported from Europe, Africa, Canada, and the United States (4%
of isolates in 2006). Decreased susceptibility is caused at least in part by
altered penicillin-­binding protein 2 and does not appear to adversely
affect the response to therapy. Isolates with reduced susceptibility to
third-­generation cephalosporins have been described in France, but
the level of reduced susceptibility is not likely to affect therapeutic outcomes where these agents are used for treatment.

Supportive Care

Most children with meningococcal disease can be managed with antibiotics and simple supportive care and will improve rapidly. However,
with an overall 5–10% case fatality rate, the priority in initiating management of children presenting with meningococcal disease is identification of the life-­threatening features of the disease: shock and increased
ICP. Delayed initiation of supportive therapy is associated with poor
outcome, and protocols have therefore been established to aid clinicians
in a step-­by-­step approach (http://www.meningitis.org). In all children
presenting with meningococcal disease, assessment of the airway should
be performed, because the airway could be compromised as a result of
a depressed level of consciousness (elevated ICP in meningitis or poor
cerebral perfusion in shock). In patients with meningococcal septicemia, supplementary oxygen should be used to treat hypoxia, which is
caused by pulmonary edema (from capillary leak), and some patients
will require endotracheal intubation. Hypovolemia requires both volume

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 237 u Neisseria meningitidis (Meningococcus)

1743

Table 237.2  Treatment of Neisseria meningitidis Invasive Infections Beyond the Newborn Period
DRUG

ROUTE

DOSE

DOSING INTERVAL (hr)

MAXIMUM DAILY DOSE

NOTES

Penicillin G

IM or IV

300,000-­400,000
units/kg/day

4-­6
(4-­hourly for meningitis)

12-­24 million units

Does not clear carriage, and
“prophylaxis” is required at
the end of treatment

Ampicillin

IM or IV

200-­400 mg/kg/day

4-­6
(4-­hourly for meningitis)

8g

Does not clear carriage, and
“prophylaxis” is required at
the end of treatment

Cefotaxime‡

IM or IV

180-­225 mg/kg/day

6-­8
(6-­hourly for meningitis)

8-­12 g

Recommended in the
neonate

Ceftriaxone

IM or IV

75-­100 mg/kg/day

12-­24

2-­4 g

Preferred treatment as
only once or twice daily,
and may reduce skin
complications

ALTERNATIVE THERAPY IN THE FACE OF LIFE-­THREATENING β-­LACTAM ALLERGY
Chloramphenicol* IV
50-­100 mg/kg/day
6
2-­4 g
Meropenem†

IV

60-­120 mg/kg/day

8

Adjust based on target serum
concentrations (15-­25 mg/L)

3-­6 g

*Monitor blood levels to avoid toxicity.
†Rate of cross-­reactivity in penicillin-­allergic adults is 2–3%.
‡May not be available due to manufacturing issues.

IM, Intramuscular; IV, intravenous.

replacement and inotropic support to maintain cardiac output. Because
ongoing fluid resuscitation may lead to pulmonary edema, endotracheal
intubation and ventilation should be initiated in a patient who remains
in compensated shock after 40 mL/kg of fluid resuscitation to improve
oxygenation and reduce work of breathing. Aggressive fluid resuscitation with unbuffered electrolyte solutions in febrile African children
led to increased mortality; similar studies in industrialized settings are
required. Metabolic and hematologic abnormalities are common in
meningococcal septicemia, and protocols recommend anticipation,
assessment, and correction of glucose, potassium, calcium, magnesium,
phosphate, clotting factors, and anemia.
Children with meningococcal meningitis should be cautiously managed with maintenance fluids (fluid restriction is not recommended and
may be harmful), and those with increased ICP should be managed with
close attention to maneuvers to maintain normal cerebral perfusion. If
there is shock in the presence of elevated ICP, the shock should be carefully corrected to ensure that cerebral perfusion pressure is maintained.
Many adjunctive therapies have been attempted in patients with
severe meningococcal septicemia, but few have been subjected to
randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Data are insufficient to recommend the use of anticoagulant or fibrinolytic agents, extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation, plasmapheresis, or hyperbaric oxygen. In
well-­designed clinical trials, an antibody directed against endotoxin
(HA1A) did not confer any benefit in children with meningococcal
disease, and although initially promising in adult sepsis, activated
protein C was not useful in pediatric sepsis and was associated with
an increased risk of bleeding. Recombinant bactericidal permeability
increasing protein was studied in an underpowered (survival end-­
point) trial and showed some potentially beneficial effects against secondary end-­points (amputations, transfusions, functional outcome)
and requires further investigation.
Although the benefits of corticosteroids for adjunctive therapy in
pediatric bacterial meningitis caused by H. influenzae type b (Hib) are
accepted, no pediatric data specifically demonstrate benefit in meningococcal meningitis. However, some authorities extrapolate from animal data, from experience with Hib, and from compelling data from
adult meningitis and recommend corticosteroids as adjunctive therapy
in pediatric meningococcal meningitis, given with or soon after the
first dose of antibiotics. Therapeutic doses of corticosteroids should
not be used routinely in meningococcal septicemia. Some intensivists recommend replacement doses of corticosteroids in patients with
treatment-­refractory septic shock, because severe sepsis caused by
meningococcus is associated with adrenal insufficiency resulting from
adrenal necrosis or hemorrhage (Waterhouse-­Friderichsen syndrome).

COMPLICATIONS

Adrenal hemorrhage, endophthalmitis, arthritis, endocarditis, pericarditis, myocarditis, pneumonia, lung abscess, peritonitis, and renal
infarcts can occur during acute infection. Renal insufficiency requiring
dialysis may result from prerenal failure. Reactivation of latent herpes
simplex virus infections is common during meningococcal infection.
A self-­limiting immune complex vasculitis may occur, usually in the
first 10 days after onset of the disease, resulting in various manifestations, including fever, rash, arthritis, and rarely, iritis, pericarditis, or
carditis. The arthritis is monoarticular or oligoarticular, involves large
joints, and is associated with sterile effusions that respond to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. Because most patients with meningococcal meningitis become afebrile by the seventh hospital day, persistence
or recrudescence of fever after 5 days of antibiotics warrants evaluation
for immune complex–mediated complications.
The most common complication of acute severe meningococcal septicemia is focal skin infarction, which typically affects the lower limbs
and can lead to substantial scarring and require skin grafting. Distal
tissue necrosis in purpura fulminans may require amputation (which
should be delayed to allow demarcation) in approximately 2% of survivors. Avascular necrosis of epiphyses and epiphyseal-­metaphyseal
defects can result from the generalized DIC and may lead to growth
disturbance and late skeletal deformities.
Deafness is the most frequent neurologic sequela of meningitis, occurring in 5–10% of children. Cerebral arterial or venous thrombosis with
resultant cerebral infarction can occur in severe cases. Meningococcal meningitis is rarely complicated by subdural effusion or empyema
or by brain abscess. Other rare neurologic sequelae include ataxia, seizures, blindness, cranial nerve palsies, hemiparesis or quadriparesis, and
obstructive hydrocephalus (manifests 3-­4 weeks after the onset of illness).
Behavioral and psychosocial complications of the disease are frequently
reported.

PROGNOSIS

The case fatality rate for invasive meningococcal disease is 5–10%,
with clear differences related to age of the patient and meningococcal
genotype. Most deaths occur within 48 hours of hospitalization in children with meningococcemia. Poor prognostic factors on presentation
include hypothermia or extreme hyperpyrexia, hypotension or shock,
purpura fulminans, seizures, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia (including DIC), acidosis, and high circulating levels of endotoxin and TNF-­α.
The presence of petechiae for <12 hours before admission, absence of
meningitis, and low or normal ESR indicate rapid, fulminant progression and a poorer prognosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1744 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Child or young person
has a petechial rash

Examine for signs of underlying meningitis or
septicemia (including shock) (use the lists of
symptoms and signs in the pre-hospital
management pathway)
Manage for bacterial
meningitis or
meningococcal disease per
local/national guidelines

Clinical diagnosis of
meningitis or
septicemia?

Yes

No
If the child or young
person has an
unexplained petechial
rash, carry out the
following investigations:
• Full blood count
• CRP
• Coagulation screen
• Blood culture
• Whole-blood PCR for
N. meningitidis
• Blood glucose
• Blood gas

Give intravenous ceftriaxone if any of the following
occur at any point during assessment, and go to
bacterial meningitis or meningococcal disease
pathway:
• Petechiae start to spread
• A rash becomes purpuric
• There are signs of meningitis or septicemia
• The child or young person appears ill

Yes

Does the child or young
person have a fever or
history of fever?

Is CRP and/or white
blood cell count raised?

No

If petechiae are not
spreading and the child
or young person does not
appear ill, consider:

No

• Other possible
diagnoses
• Performing full blood
count and coagulation
screen

Meningococcal disease
less likely but not ruled out

Yes
Treat with intravenous ceftriaxone
immediately, or with cefotaxime if
administering calcium containing
infusions*

Yes

Doubt remains about
the child’s or young
person’s condition?
No

Admit to hospital and
monitor vital signs closely

If the child or young person is at low risk of
meningococcal disease and discharged after
initial observation, advise parents to return to
hospital if the child or young person appears ill

Because complement deficiency is rare in patients with capsular
group B infection, screening is unlikely to be useful in detecting cases
caused by this group, but some authorities recommend routine screening in these cases. However, with one third or more of cases of disease
caused by groups X, Y, and W apparently associated with complement
deficiency, it is clearly appropriate to screen after infection with non-­B
capsular groups.

PREVENTION
Secondary Prevention

Assess clinical progress
(vital signs) and carry out
observations at least
hourly over the next
4–6 hours

Close contacts of patients with meningococcal disease are at increased
risk of infection because such individuals are likely to be colonized
with the index case’s (hyperinvasive) strain. Antibiotic prophylaxis
should be offered as soon as possible to individuals who have been
exposed directly to a patient’s oral secretions, for whom the risk may
be 1,000 times the background rate in the population. This includes
household, kissing, and close family contacts of cases, as well as childcare and recent preschool contacts in the United States. Up to 30% of
cases occur in the first week, but the risk persists for up to 1 year after
presentation of the index case. Although prophylaxis is effective in preventing secondary cases, coprimary cases may occur in the days after
presentation of the index case, and contacts should be carefully evaluated if they develop symptoms. Advice on management of nonclose
contacts, such as those in daycare, nursery settings, or school and other

Fig. 237.5 Treatment algorithm
for petechial rash. *See Medicines and Healthcare Products
Regulatory Agency Drug Safety
Update, 2009;3(3). Available
from www.mhra.gov.uk. CRP, C-­
reactive protein; PCR, polymerase chain reaction. (Data from
National Collaborating Center
for Women’s and Children’s
Health (UK). Bacterial meningitis
and meningococcal septicaemia:
management of bacterial meningitis and meningococcal septicaemia in children and young
people younger than 16 years in
primary and secondary care. NICE
Clinical Guidelines, No 102. London: RCOG Press; 2010.)

institutions, varies in different countries because the risk of a secondary case in this situation is low and opinion on risk assessment varies. Ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, and rifampin are 90–95% effective in
reducing nasopharyngeal carriage of N. meningitidis and are acceptable
agents for prophylaxis, with ciprofloxacin the drug of choice in some
countries (Table 237.3). Azithromycin should not be used as the first-­
line choice for prophylaxis but is recommended in the rare instance of
ciprofloxacin resistance. Prophylaxis is not routinely recommended for
medical personnel except those with exposure to aerosols of respiratory secretions, such as through mouth-­to-­mouth resuscitation, intubation, or suctioning before or in the 24 hours after antibiotic therapy
is initiated in the index case.
Neither penicillin nor ampicillin treatment eradicates nasopharyngeal carriage and should not be routinely used for prophylaxis. Patients
with meningococcal infection treated solely with penicillin or ampicillin are therefore at risk of relapse or transmission to a close contact and
should receive antimicrobial prophylaxis with one of the agents listed
in Table 237.3 before hospital discharge. The preference is to use ceftriaxone for treatment of the index case, in which case further prophylaxis is not required. Droplet infection control precautions should be
observed for hospitalized patients for 24 hours after initiation of effective therapy. All confirmed or probable cases of meningococcal infection must be reported to the local public health department according
to national or regional regulations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 237 u Neisseria meningitidis (Meningococcus)

1745

Table 237.3  Antibiotic Prophylaxis to Prevent Neisseria meningitidis Infection*
AGE-­GROUP

DOSE

DURATION

EFFICACY

RIFAMPIN†
Infants <1 mo¶

5 mg/kg PO every 12 hr

2 days (4 doses)

Children ≥1 mo and adults

15-­20 mg/kg PO every 12 hr (max 600 mg)

2 days (4 doses)

90–95%

CEFTRIAXONE
Children <15 yr

125 mg IM

1 dose

90–95%

Children ≥15 yr and adults

250 mg IM

1 dose

90–95%

CIPROFLOXACIN
Children ≥1 mo and adults†,‡

20 mg/kg (max 500 mg) PO

1 dose

90–95%

1 dose

90%

AZITHROMYCIN (NOT RECOMMENDED ROUTINELY)
All ages
10 mg/kg (max 500 g) PO

*Recommended for household and kissing contacts. In the United States, chemoprophylaxis is recommended for:
• Household contact, especially children <2 yr old
• Childcare or preschool contact at any time during 7 days before onset of illness
• Direct exposure to index patient’s secretions through kissing, sharing toothbrushes, or eating utensils at any time during 7 days before onset of illness
• Mouth-­to-­mouth resuscitation, unprotected contact during endotracheal intubation during 7 days before onset of illness
• Frequently slept in same dwelling as index patient during 7 days before onset of illness
• Passengers seated directly next to the index case during airline flights lasting more than 8 hours (gate to gate), or passengers seated within one seat in any direction from an
index case on a flight of any duration if the index case was coughing or vomiting during the flight
• Always check with current local public health guidance for full recommendations
†Not recommended for pregnant women (ceftriaxone is agent of choice in this setting).
‡Use only if fluoroquinolone-­resistant strains of N. meningitidis have not been identified in the community.
¶Discussion with an expert is recommended for treatment in infants age <1 mo.
IM, Intramuscularly; PO, orally (by mouth).

Close contacts of cases could also be immunized to further reduce
the risk of secondary infection, as described later.

Vaccination

Meningococcal plain polysaccharide vaccines containing capsular polysaccharides from capsular groups A + C or capsular groups A, C, W, and Y
have been available since the 1960s and used in the control of outbreaks
and epidemics and for high-­risk groups. However, polysaccharide vaccines
are poorly immunogenic in infants, do not induce immunologic memory, and are associated with immunologic hyporesponsiveness (reduced
response to future doses of polysaccharide). Plain polysaccharide vaccines
have been superseded by meningococcal protein-­polysaccharide conjugate
vaccines, which are generally more immunogenic than plain polysaccharides, are immunogenic from early infancy, induce immunologic memory,
and are not associated with hyporesponsiveness. The conjugate vaccines
contain meningococcal polysaccharides that are chemically conjugated to
a carrier protein. Three carrier proteins are used in various meningococcal conjugate vaccines: tetanus toxoid, diphtheria toxoid, and the mutant
diphtheria toxin CRM197. However, although plain polysaccharide vaccines should be considered redundant in most industrialized countries
where the new-­generation conjugates are available, they may still have a
role in some regions where conjugates are not yet available.
The first meningococcal conjugate vaccine used was a monovalent
capsular group C meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MenC), introduced
in the United Kingdom in 1999 and administered to all children and
young people <19 years old in a mass catch-­up campaign before establishment in the routine infant immunization schedule. The MenC vaccine has
proved highly effective (>95%) in controlling disease through both direct
protection of the vaccinated population and induction of herd immunity,
protecting the wider population. Herd immunity is induced through the
impact of conjugate vaccines on colonization, reducing carriage and blocking transmission of meningococci among adolescents and young adults.
Monovalent MenC vaccines are used widely in the industrialized countries
of Western Europe, Canada, and Australia, where disease caused by capsular group C meningococci has virtually disappeared. However, serologic
surveys show that antibody levels wane, especially after infant immunization, and booster doses are now recommended during adolescence to
sustain individual and population immunity.
Quadrivalent meningococcal A, C, Y, and W conjugate vaccines
(MenACWY) have been available since 2005 and are routinely used for
U.S. adolescents and as a single adolescent booster dose in some countries that had established MenC infant programs more than a decade ago.

MenACWY was initially introduced as a single dose at 11 years of age in
the United States, but concerns about waning immunity led to the adoption of a second dose. The initial reports on the effectiveness (>80%) of
MenACWY in the U.S. program indicates that these vaccines are likely
to provide control of disease caused by capsular groups C, W, and Y
(capsular group A being unimportant currently), although the program
has taken some time to become fully established. As the population of
immunized adolescents and young adults in the United States grows, the
effects of these vaccines on carriage of meningococci likely will reduce
disease among other segments of the population through herd immunity, assuming the transmission dynamics of Y and W meningococci are
the same as for capsular group C. Although MenACWY vaccines are not
currently recommended in the United States for routine use in younger
age-­groups in view of the low rate of disease caused by these capsular
groups in infancy, they may provide broader protection in countries that
are already using MenC vaccines in infant programs. Other combination
vaccines containing various conjugates, including Hib-­MenC (used in
the United Kingdom as a 12-­month booster) and Hib-­MenCY, may have
a role in broadening protection beyond MenC in early life. Table 237.4
outlines the current U.S. programmatic recommendations.
Individuals of any age at high risk of meningococcal disease, such as
those with complement deficiency, and travelers to regions where there
is a risk of epidemic meningococcal disease caused by A or W should
receive MenACWY (see Table 237.4). The risk of disease among close
contacts of cases of disease caused by vaccine capsular groups may be
further reduced if they are offered MenACWY in addition to antimicrobial prophylaxis. A possible association between MenACWY-­diphtheria
toxoid and Guillain-­Barré syndrome, which caused concern early after
the vaccine was first used in the United States, has not been substantiated.
A capsular group A meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MenA) has
been developed for use in the sub-­Saharan African meningitis belt,
and implementation in 2010 through mass vaccination appears to have
interrupted disease caused by this capsular group.
The majority of disease in infants and in most industrialized countries is caused by capsular group B polysaccharide–bearing meningococci.
This polysaccharide capsule has chemical identity with glycosylated
protein antigens in the human fetus and, as a “self ” antigen, is therefore
not immunogenic in humans and leads to the theoretical risk of induction of autoimmunity. Vaccine development has therefore focused on
subcapsular protein antigens. Several countries (e.g., Cuba, Norway,
New Zealand) successfully controlled capsular group B epidemics
by immunizing with tailor-­made outer membrane vesicle vaccines

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1746 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 237.4  Recommendations for Meningococcal Vaccination (United States, 2021)
GENERAL POPULATION
2-­23 MO

2-­10 YR

11-­23 YR

≥24 YR

Not routinely recommended

Not routinely recommended

A single dose of MenACWY
conjugate vaccine at age 11-­
12 yr with a booster dose at age
16 yr

Not routinely recommended

MenB series may be offered at
age 16-­23 yr on basis of shared
clinical decision-­making (2 doses
of MenB-­FHbp or 4CMenB)
SPECIAL POPULATIONS AT INCREASED RISK OF MENINGOCOCCAL DISEASE
RISK FACTOR

2-­23 MO

2-­9 YR

≥10 YR

Persistent complement
deficiencies (including patients
using a complement inhibitor),
functional or anatomic asplenia

4 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at 2, 4, 6, and 12 mo*; if
commencing at age 7-­23 mo, 2
doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine, with second dose
administered at age ≥12 mo and
≥12 wk after first dose

2 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at least 8 wk apart*

2 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at least 8 wk apart*
and MenB vaccine (2 doses of
4CMenB or 3 doses of MenB-­
Hbp) †

At risk during a community
outbreak with a vaccine capsular
group covered by the relevant
vaccine

4 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at 2, 4, 6, and 12 mo*; if
commencing at age 7-­23 mo, 2
doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine, with second dose
administered at age ≥12 mo and
≥12 weeks after first dose

2 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at least 8 wk apart*

2 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at least 8 wk apart*
or MenB vaccine (2 doses of
4CMenB or 3 doses of MenB-­
FHbp) †
depending on the capsular group
of the outbreak

Travel to or resident of countries
where meningococcal disease is
hyperendemic or epidemic‡

4 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at 2, 4, 6, and 12 mo*; if
commencing at age 7-­23 mo, 2
doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine, with second dose
administered at age ≥12 mo and
≥12 weeks after first dose

2 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at least 8 wk apart*

2 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at least 8 wk apart*

Persons with HIV infection

4 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at 2, 4, 6, and 12 mo*; if
commencing at age 7-­23 mo, 2
doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine, with second dose
administered at age ≥12 mo and
≥12 weeks after first dose

2 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at least 8 wk apart*

2 doses of MenACWY conjugate
vaccine at least 8 wk apart*

*Booster every 5 yr if ongoing risk (after 3 yr if <7 yr old).
†Boosters 1 yr after primary series and every 2-­3 yr thereafter if remains at increased risk.
‡For example, visitors to the “meningitis belt” of sub-­Saharan Africa. Vaccination also is required by the government of Saudi Arabia for all travelers to Mecca during the annual Hajj.
Note that different MenACWY conjugate vaccines are interchangeable, but different MenB vaccines (4CMenB and MenB-­FHbp) are not interchangeable
Adapted from https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-­recs/vacc-­specific/mening.html

prepared from blebs of outer membrane harvested from the respective
epidemic strains. The principal limitation of outer membrane vesicle
vaccines is that the bactericidal antibody responses induced by immunization are limited to the vaccine strain, because the response is largely
directed against the homologous PorA (serosubtype) protein, and they
are therefore not considered for use in endemic settings, including the
United States or most other industrialized countries.
Promising approaches for prevention of capsular group B disease
have been developed over the past decade. One vaccine that was developed for adolescent immunization was licensed in the United States in
2014 and contains two variants of factor H–binding protein (2FHbp;
Pfizer vaccines); it appears highly immunogenic in the target population, inducing bactericidal antibodies directed against a panel of strains
bearing variants of fHbp. It is currently recommended for use in high-­
risk groups and during outbreaks (see Table 237.4). Factor H–binding
protein appears to be an important virulence determinant, aiding survival of meningococci in blood, and is expressed by virtually all strains.
A four-­
component meningococcal vaccine, 4CMenB (Bexsero,
GSK Vaccines), is licensed in Europe and North America and available in various other regions. This vaccine contains outer membrane
vesicles (derived from the New Zealand outbreak strain) and three

recombinant proteins: a single variant of factor H–binding protein
(FHbp), neisserial adhesin A (NadA), and neisserial heparin-­binding
antigen (NHBA). 4CMenB vaccine induced bactericidal antibodies
against strains containing the vaccine antigens in infants, toddlers, and
adolescents in clinical trials. The vaccine appears to have a generally
favorable safety profile, although induction of fever in infants and pain
at the injection site in other age-­groups are common. This vaccine has
been used to control university outbreaks of capsular group B meningococcal disease in the United States and Canada and hyperendemic
disease in Quebec, Canada. Current recommendations for use in the
United States are outlined in Table 237.4. It was recommended for routine use in the infant immunization program in the United Kingdom
in 2014 and deployed from September 2015. Early data reported a 75%
reduction in age-­groups that were fully eligible for vaccination, with
a high coverage rate of 95% (a nonsignificant vaccine effectiveness of
53% after two doses and 59% after a booster dose at 1 year of age). A
large cluster randomized trial in Australia found no effect of 4CMenB
on carriage of disease-­causing meningococci, highlighting that the
benefit of this vaccine is likely to be via direct protection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 238 u Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Gonococcus) 1747

Chapter 238

Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(Gonococcus)
Katherine Hsu, Sanjay Ram, and
Toni Darville
Neisseria gonorrhoeae is the causative agent of gonorrhea, an infection
of the genitourinary tract mucous membranes and of the mucosa of the
rectum, oropharynx, and conjunctiva. Among sexually transmissible
infections, gonorrhea transmitted by sexual contact or perinatally is
second only to chlamydial infections in the number of cases reported
to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). This
high prevalence and the development of antibiotic-­resistant strains
have led to significant morbidity.

ETIOLOGY

N. gonorrhoeae is a nonmotile, aerobic, non–spore-­forming, gram-­
negative diplococcus with flattened adjacent surfaces. Optimal growth
occurs at 35–37°C (95–98.6°F) and at pH 7.2-­7.6 in an atmosphere of
3–5% carbon dioxide. The specimen should be inoculated quickly onto
fresh, moist, modified Thayer-­Martin or specialized transport media,
because gonococci do not tolerate drying. Thayer-­Martin selective
medium contains antimicrobial agents that inhibit the normal flora
present in clinical specimens from mucosal sites that may otherwise
overgrow gonococci. Presumptive identification may be based on colony appearance, Gram stain, and production of cytochrome oxidase.
Gonococci are differentiated from other Neisseria spp. by the fermentation of glucose but not maltose, sucrose, or lactose. Gram-­negative diplococci are seen in infected material, often within polymorphonuclear
leukocytes (PMNs).
As with all gram-­negative bacteria, N. gonorrhoeae possesses a cell
envelope composed of an inner cytoplasmic membrane, a middle
layer of peptidoglycan, and an outer membrane. The outer membrane
contains lipooligosaccharide (LOS; also called endotoxin), phospholipid, and a variety of proteins that contribute to cell adherence, tissue invasion, and resistance to host defenses. Systems previously used
to characterize gonococcal strains included auxotyping and serotyping. Auxotyping is based on genetically stable requirements of strains
for specific nutrients or cofactors as defined by an isolate’s ability to
grow on chemically defined media. Serotyping systems were based on
specific monoclonal antibodies directed against a porin protein called
PorB (formerly Protein I or PorI), a trimeric outer membrane protein
that makes up a substantial part of the gonococcal envelope structure.
Changes in the PorB protein present in a community are believed to
result, at least in part, from selective immune pressure. DNA-­based
typing methods have now supplanted auxotyping and serotyping.
Older gel-­based DNA-­based typing methods that included restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis of genomic DNA or
rRNA (ribotyping) or typing of genes encoding opacity protein (opa)
were labor intensive and sometimes lacked the ability to accurately discriminate among strains. Methods currently used include the N. gonorrhoeae multiantigen sequence typing (NG-­MAST), which examines
the sequences of the variable internal fragments of two highly polymorphic N. gonorrhoeae genes (porB encoding PorB and tbpB encoding subunit B of transferrin-­binding protein), multilocus sequence
typing (MLST), which analyzes the sequences of seven chromosomal
housekeeping genes, and whole genome sequencing.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Since gonorrhea became a nationally notifiable disease in 1944, U.S.
rates have ranged between a historic high of 467.7 cases per 100,000
population in 1975 and a historic low of 98.1 per 100,000 in 2009.

However, rates of gonorrhea have increased almost every year since
2009 (with an overall increase of 118% between 2009 and 2021),
with a total of 710,151 cases and a rate of 214.0/100,000 reported
in 2021. Rates of reported gonorrhea are also highest in the South
(242.9/100,000); among young adults age 20-­24 (860.5 cases per
100,000); among males (249.7/100,000 vs 177.9/100,000 among
females); and among Blacks (652.9/100,000 vs 78.9/100,000 among
Whites). The higher case rate among men and the magnitude of
recent increases suggest either increased transmission, increased
case ascertainment (e.g., through increased extragenital screening
among men who have sex with men [MSM]), or both. The concurrent increase in cases reported among women suggests parallel
increases in heterosexual transmission, increased screening among
women, or both.
Molecular typing methods (e.g., NG-­MAST, MLST) are used to analyze the spread of individual strains of N. gonorrhoeae within a community. Maintenance and subsequent spread of gonococcal infections
in a community are sustained through continued transmission by
asymptomatically infected people and also by a hyperendemic, high-­
risk core group such as commercial sex workers, MSM, or adolescents
with multiple sexual partners. This latter observation reflects that most
persons who have symptomatic gonorrhea cease sexual activity and
seek care, unless economic need or other factors (e.g., drug addiction)
drive persistent sexual activity. Thus many core transmitters belong to
a subset of infected persons who lack or ignore symptoms and continue
to be sexually active, underscoring the importance of seeking out and
treating the sexual contacts of infected persons who present for treatment. Oral sex has a role in sustaining gonorrhea in MSM by providing a pool of untreated asymptomatic pharyngeal infections and may
account for as much as one third of symptomatic gonococcal urethritis
in MSM.
Gonococcal infection of neonates usually results from peripartum exposure to infected exudate from the cervix of the mother. An
acute infection begins 2-­5 days after birth. The incidence of neonatal
infection depends on the prevalence of gonococcal infection among
pregnant women, prenatal screening for gonorrhea, and neonatal ophthalmic prophylaxis.

PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY

N. gonorrhoeae infects primarily columnar epithelium because stratified squamous epithelium is relatively resistant to invasion. Mucosal
invasion by gonococci results in a local inflammatory response that
produces a purulent exudate consisting of PMNs, serum, and desquamated epithelium. The gonococcal LOS (endotoxin) exhibits direct
cytotoxicity, causing ciliostasis and sloughing of ciliated epithelial cells.
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and other cytokines are thought to mediate the cytotoxicity of gonococcal infections. Complement activation
also contributes to the acute inflammatory response.
Gonococci may ascend the urogenital tract, causing urethritis or
epididymitis in postpubertal males and acute endometritis, salpingitis, and peritonitis (collectively termed acute pelvic inflammatory
disease or PID) in postpubertal females. Dissemination from the fallopian tubes through the peritoneum to the liver capsule results in
perihepatitis (Fitz-­Hugh–Curtis syndrome). Gonococci that invade
the lymphatics and blood vessels may cause inguinal lymphadenopathy; perineal, perianal, ischiorectal, and periprostatic abscesses; and
disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI).
A number of gonococcal virulence and host immune factors are
involved in the penetration of the mucosal barrier and subsequent
manifestations of local and systemic infection. Selective pressure from
different mucosal environments probably leads to changes in the outer
membrane of the organism, including expression of variants of pili,
opacity (Opa) proteins (formerly called protein II), and LOS. These
changes may enhance gonococcal attachment, invasion, replication,
and evasion of the host’s immune response.
For infection to occur, the gonococcus must first attach to host
cells. Gonococci adhere to the microvilli of nonciliated epithelial
cells by hairlike protein structures (pili) that extend from the cell
wall. Pili undergo high-­frequency antigenic variation that may aid in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1748 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
the organism’s escape from the host immune response and may provide specific ligands for different cell receptors. Opa proteins, most of
which confer an opaque appearance to colonies, function as ligands
for members of the carcinoembryonic antigen–related cell adhesion
molecule (CEACAM) family of proteins or heparin sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) to facilitate binding to human cells. Interactions between
complement receptor 3 (CR3) on cervical epithelial cells and complement iC3b (deposited on bacteria), pili, and PorB on the gonococcal
surface facilitate cellular entry of gonococci in women. In contrast, the
interaction between LOS and asialoglycoprotein receptor (ASGP-­R)
permits gonococcal entry into male urethral epithelial cells. Gonococci
that express certain Opa proteins adhere to CEACAM3 and are phagocytosed by human neutrophils in the absence of serum. The interaction
of Opa with CEACAM1 on CD4+ T lymphocytes may suppress their
activation and proliferation and contribute to the immunosuppression
associated with gonorrhea. A gonococcal IgA protease inactivates IgA1
by cleaving the molecule in the hinge region and could contribute to
colonization or invasion of host mucosal surfaces.
Other phenotypic changes that occur in response to environmental
stresses allow gonococci to establish infection. Examples include iron-­
repressible proteins such as transferrin-­binding proteins (TbpA and
TbpB) and lactoferrin-­binding proteins (LbpA and LbpB) for binding to and extracting iron from transferrin or lactoferrin, respectively,
anaerobically expressed proteins, and proteins that are synthesized in
response to contact with epithelial cells. Gonococci may grow in vivo
under anaerobic conditions or in an environment with a relative lack
of iron.
Approximately 24 hours after attachment, the epithelial cell surface
invaginates and surrounds the gonococcus in a phagocytic vacuole.
This phenomenon is thought to be mediated by the insertion of the
gonococcal PorB protein into the host cell, causing alterations in membrane permeability. Subsequently, phagocytic vacuoles begin releasing
gonococci into the subepithelial space by means of exocytosis. Viable
organisms may then cause local disease (i.e., salpingitis) or disseminate
through the bloodstream or lymphatics.
Serum IgG and IgM directed against gonococcal proteins and LOS
activate complement on gonococci. Gonococci have evolved several
mechanisms to dampen complement activation. Scavenging cytidine
monophospho-­N-­acetyl neuraminic acid (CMP-­Neu5Ac, the donor
molecule for sialic acid) to sialylate its LOS is one such example,
which reduces binding of bactericidal antibodies and simultaneously
enhances binding of a complement inhibitor called factor H (FH). This
property is often lost on subculturing gonococci on medium that lacks
CMP-­Neu5Ac and is thus termed unstable serum resistance. In contrast, stable serum resistance (complement resistance independent of
LOS sialylation) is often seen in gonococci that express particular porin
proteins (most PorB.1As and select PorB.1Bs), which enables them to
bind to complement inhibitors such as FH and C4b-­binding protein
(C4BP). Such strains are often associated with disseminated disease.
N. gonorrhoeae differentially subverts the effectiveness of complement
and alters the inflammatory responses elicited in human infection.
Stably serum-­resistant DGI isolates show less C3b deposition on their
surface, inactivate C3b more rapidly, generate less C5a, and result in
less inflammation at local sites. PID isolates (grown in the absence of
the donor molecule for sialic acid) are serum sensitive, deposit more
C3b on their surface, generate more C5a, and result in more inflammation at local sites. IgG antibody directed against gonococcal reduction-­
modifiable protein (Rmp) blocks complement-­mediated killing of N.
gonorrhoeae. Anti-­Rmp blocking antibodies may harbor specificity for
outer membrane protein (e.g., OmpA) sequences shared with other
Neisseria spp. or Enterobacteriaceae, may be directed against a unique
Rmp sequence upstream of the OmpA-­shared region that includes a
cysteine loop, or both. Preexisting antibodies directed against Rmp
facilitate transmission of gonococcal infection to exposed women;
Rmp is highly conserved in N. gonorrhoeae, and the blocking of mucosal defenses may be one of its functions. Gonococcal adaptation also
appears to be important in the evasion of killing by neutrophils. Examples include sialylation of LOS, increases in catalase production, and
changes in the expression of surface proteins. Neutrophil phagosomes

bearing gonococci show delayed fusion with primary granules, promoting gonococcal survival within neutrophils. Other strategies gonococci employ to evade killing by neutrophils include blocking lysozyme
activity (mediated by the proteins SliC and adhesin complex protein
[ACP]) and degrading neutrophil extracellular traps.
Host factors may influence the incidence and manifestations of
gonococcal infection. Prepubertal girls are susceptible to vulvovaginitis
and rarely experience salpingitis. N. gonorrhoeae infects noncornified
epithelium, and the thin noncornified vaginal epithelium and alkaline
pH of the vaginal mucin predispose this age-­group to infection of the
lower genital tract. Estrogen-­induced cornification of the vaginal epithelium in neonates and mature females resists infection. Postpubertal
females are more susceptible to salpingitis, especially during menses,
when diminished bactericidal activity of the cervical mucus and reflux
of blood from the uterine cavity into the fallopian tubes facilitate passage of gonococci into the upper reproductive tract.
Populations at risk for DGI include asymptomatic carriers; neonates;
menstruating, pregnant, and postpartum women; MSM; and individuals with congenital or acquired (for example, via pharmacologic inhibition) defects in complement. The asymptomatic carrier state implies
failure of the host immune system to recognize the gonococcus as a
pathogen, the capacity of the gonococcus to avoid being killed, or both.
Pharyngeal colonization has been proposed as a risk factor for DGI.
The high rate of asymptomatic infection in pharyngeal gonorrhea may
account for this phenomenon. Women are at greater risk for development of DGI during menstruation, pregnancy, and the postpartum
period, presumably because of the maximal endocervical shedding and
decreased peroxidase bactericidal activity of the cervical mucus during
these periods. A lack of neonatal bactericidal IgM antibody is thought
to account for the increased susceptibility of neonates to DGI. Persons
with terminal complement component deficiencies (C5-­C9) are at considerable risk for development of recurrent episodes of DGI.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Gonorrhea is manifested by a spectrum of clinical presentations from
asymptomatic carriage, to the characteristic localized mucosal infections, to disseminated systemic infection (see Chapter 163).

Asymptomatic Gonorrhea

The incidence of asymptomatic gonorrhea in children has not been
ascertained. Gonococci have been isolated from the oropharynx of
young children who have been abused sexually by male contacts; oropharyngeal symptoms are usually absent. Most genital tract infections
produce symptoms in children. However, as many as 80% of sexually
mature females with urogenital gonorrhea infections are asymptomatic
in settings in which most infections are detected through screening or
other case-­finding efforts. This situation is in contrast to that in men,
who are asymptomatic only 10% of the time. Asymptomatic rectal carriage of N. gonorrhoeae has been documented in 26–68% of females
with urogenital infection. Most persons with positive rectal culture
results are asymptomatic. Most pharyngeal gonococcal infections are
asymptomatic, although rarely acute tonsillopharyngitis or cervical
lymphadenopathy can occur. Pharyngeal gonorrhea is easily acquired
through fellatio and may account for a significant proportion of urethral gonorrhea in MSM. Pharyngeal gonorrhea is increasingly prevalent, particularly among adolescents and young adults, associated with
overall increasing prevalence of oral sex behaviors.

Uncomplicated, Localized Gonorrhea

Genital gonorrhea has an incubation period of 2-­5 days in men and
5-­10 days in women. Primary infection develops in the urethra of
males, the vulva and vagina of prepubertal females, and the cervix of
postpubertal females. Neonatal ophthalmitis (ophthalmia neonatorum) occurs in both genders.
Urethritis is usually characterized by a purulent discharge and by
dysuria without urgency or frequency. Untreated urethritis in males
resolves spontaneously in several weeks or may be complicated by epididymitis, penile edema, lymphangitis, prostatitis, or seminal vesiculitis. Gram-­negative intracellular diplococci are found in the discharge.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 238 u Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Gonococcus)
In MSM, the rectal mucosa can become infected after receptive anal
intercourse. Symptoms range from painless mucopurulent discharge
and scant rectal bleeding to overt proctitis with associated rectal pain
and tenesmus.
In prepubertal females, vulvovaginitis is usually characterized by a
purulent vaginal discharge with a swollen, erythematous, tender, and
excoriated vulva. Dysuria may occur. Gonococcal infection should
be considered in any girl with vaginal discharge, even when sexual
abuse is not suspected; sexual abuse must be considered strongly when
gonococcal infection is diagnosed in prepubertal children beyond
the neonatal period. In postpubertal females, symptomatic gonococcal cervicitis and urethritis are characterized by purulent discharge,
suprapubic pain, dysuria, intermenstrual bleeding, and dyspareunia.
The cervix may be inflamed and tender. In urogenital gonorrhea limited to the lower genital tract, pain is not enhanced by moving the
cervix and the adnexa are not tender to palpation. Purulent material
may be expressed from the urethra or ducts of the Bartholin gland.
Rectal gonorrhea is often asymptomatic but may cause proctitis with
symptoms of anal discharge, pruritus, bleeding, pain, tenesmus, and
constipation. Asymptomatic rectal gonorrhea may not be from anal
intercourse but may represent translocation of infected secretions from
cervicovaginal infection.
Gonococcal ophthalmitis may be unilateral or bilateral and may
occur in any age-­group after inoculation of the eye with infected secretions. Ophthalmia neonatorum caused by N. gonorrhoeae usually
appears from 2-­5 days after birth (see Chapter 674). Ocular infection
in older patients results from inoculation or autoinoculation from a
genital site. The infection begins with mild inflammation and a serosanguineous discharge. Within 24 hours, the discharge becomes thick
and purulent and tense edema of the eyelids with marked chemosis
occurs. If the disease is not treated promptly, corneal ulceration, rupture, and blindness may follow.

Disseminated Gonococcal Infection

Hematogenous dissemination occurs in 1–3% of all gonococcal infections, more frequently after asymptomatic primary infections than
symptomatic infections. Women previously accounted for the majority
of cases, with symptoms beginning 7-­30 days after infection and within
7 days of menstruation in about one half of cases, but more recent case
series describe more male than female cases. The most common manifestations are asymmetric arthralgia, petechial or pustular acral skin
lesions, tenosynovitis, suppurative arthritis, and rarely, carditis, meningitis, and osteomyelitis. The most common initial symptom is acute
onset of polyarthralgia with fever. Only 25% of patients complain of
skin lesions. Most deny genitourinary symptoms; however, primary
mucosal infection is documented by genitourinary cultures. Results of
approximately 80–90% of cervical cultures are positive in women with
DGI. In males, urethral culture results are positive in 50–60%, pharyngeal culture results are positive in 10–20%, and rectal culture results are
positive in 15% of cases.
DGI is classified into two clinical syndromes that have some
overlapping features. The more common tenosynovitis-­dermatitis
syndrome is characterized by fever, chills, skin lesions, and polyarthralgia predominantly involving the wrists, hands, and fingers.
Blood culture results are positive in approximately 30–40% of cases,
and results of synovial fluid cultures are almost uniformly negative. In suppurative arthritis syndrome, systemic symptoms and
signs are less prominent and monoarticular arthritis is more common, often involving the knee. A polyarthralgia phase may precede
the monoarticular infection. In cases of monoarticular involvement,
synovial fluid culture results are positive in approximately 45–55%,
and synovial fluid findings are consistent with septic arthritis. Blood
culture results are usually negative. DGI in neonates usually occurs as
a polyarticular suppurative arthritis.
Dermatologic lesions usually begin as painful, discrete, 1-­to 20-­mm,
pink or red macules that progress to maculopapular, vesicular, bullous,
pustular, or petechial lesions. The typical necrotic pustule on an erythematous base is distributed unevenly over the extremities, including
the palmar and plantar surfaces, usually sparing the face and scalp. The

1749

lesions number between 5 and 40, and 20–30% may contain gonococci.
Although immune complexes may be present in DGI, complement levels are normal, and the role of the immune complexes in pathogenesis
is uncertain.
Acute endocarditis is an uncommon (1–3%) but often fatal manifestation of DGI that usually leads to rapid destruction of the aortic
valve. Acute pericarditis is a rarely described entity in patients with
disseminated gonorrhea. Meningitis with N. gonorrhoeae has been
documented, and signs and symptoms are similar to those of any acute
bacterial meningitis.

DIAGNOSIS

Laboratory confirmation of gonococcal infection is essential, given the
legal implications of potential sexual abuse in children and the need
to refer sex partners of adolescents and adults for treatment. Given
the advent of highly sensitive and specific nucleic acid amplification
tests (NAATs), the use of less sensitive, nonamplified test technologies
(nucleic acid hybridization/probe tests, nucleic acid genetic transformation tests, or enzyme immunoassays) is no longer justified. Culture and susceptibility testing capability still need to be maintained,
because culture is necessary to evaluate suspected cases of gonorrhea
treatment failure and to monitor developing resistance to current treatment regimens.

Gram Stain and Culture

Gram stains can be useful in the initial evaluation of patients with suspected gonococcal infection. In males with symptomatic urethritis, a
presumptive diagnosis of gonorrhea can be made by identification of
gram-­negative intracellular diplococci (within PMNs) in the urethral
discharge. A similar finding in females is not sufficient because Mima
polymorpha and Moraxella, which are normal vaginal flora, have a similar appearance. The sensitivity of the Gram stain for diagnosing gonococcal cervicitis and asymptomatic infections is also low. The presence
of commensal Neisseria spp. in the oropharynx prevents the use of the
Gram stain for diagnosis of pharyngeal gonorrhea.
Culture can be performed of any site, including nongenital sites.
Advantages of culture include the availability of an isolate for further
studies, including antibiotic susceptibility testing. Disadvantages of
culture include more stringent transport and growth requirements,
lower sensitivity than NAATs, and a delay in availability of results.
Material for cervical cultures is obtained as follows. After the exocervix
is wiped, a swab is placed in the cervical os and rotated gently for several seconds. Male urethral specimens are obtained by placement of a
small swab 2-­3 cm into the urethra. Rectal swabs are best obtained by
passing a swab 2-­4 cm into the anal canal; specimens that are heavily
contaminated by feces should be discarded. For optimal culture results,
specimens should be obtained with noncotton swabs, inoculated
directly onto culture plates containing selective media (see later), and
incubated immediately. The choice of anatomic sites to culture depends
on the sites exposed and the clinical manifestations. If symptoms are
present, samples from the urethra and rectum can be cultured for men,
and samples from the endocervix and rectum can be cultured for all
females, regardless of a history of anal intercourse. A pharyngeal culture specimen should be obtained from both men and women if symptoms of pharyngitis are present with a history of recent oral exposure
or oral exposure to a person known to have genital gonorrhea. In a
suspected case of child sexual abuse, culture or FDA approved NAAT
are recommended methods of detection for N. gonorrhoeae in genital
and extragenital specimens. Culture of the endocervix should not be
attempted until after puberty.
Specimens from sites that are normally colonized by other organisms
(e.g., cervix, rectum, pharynx) should be inoculated on a selective culture medium, such as modified Thayer-­Martin medium (fortified with
vancomycin, colistin, nystatin, and trimethoprim to inhibit growth
of indigenous flora). Specimens from sites that are normally sterile
or minimally contaminated (i.e., synovial fluid, blood, cerebrospinal
fluid) should be inoculated on a nonselective chocolate agar medium.
If DGI is suspected, blood, pharynx, rectum, urethra, cervix, and synovial fluid (if involved) should be cultured. Cultured specimens should

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1750 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
be incubated promptly at 35–37°C (95–98.6°F) in 3–5% carbon dioxide. When specimens must be transported to a central laboratory for
culture plating, a reduced, nonnutrient holding medium (i.e., Amies
[modified Stuart] transport medium) preserves specimens with minimal loss of viability for up to 6 hours. When transport may delay culture plating by >6 hours, it is preferable to inoculate the sample directly
onto a culture medium and transport it at an ambient temperature in a
CO2-­enriched atmosphere. The Transgrow and John E. Martin Biological Environmental Chamber (JEMBEC) systems of modified Thayer-­
Martin medium are alternative transport systems.

Nucleic Acid Amplification Tests

The U.S. FDA has approved NAATs for use with genital (endocervical, vaginal, male urethral, and female and male first-­catch urine) and
extragenital (pharyngeal and rectal) specimens. Advantages of using
NAATs include less stringent transport conditions, more rapid turnaround time, flexibility in sampling source (providing additional feasibility of testing in settings where a physical exam is not done), and
patient preference for less invasive sampling. However, NAATs cannot provide antimicrobial susceptibility results, so in cases of persistent gonococcal infection after treatment, clinicians should perform
both culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Although urine
specimens are acceptable for women, the sensitivity for screening
appears to be lower than with vaginal or endocervical swab samples.
In contrast, the sensitivity and specificity of urine and urethral swab
specimens from men are similar, so first-­catch urine is the recommended sample type for urethral screening in men. Product inserts
for each NAAT vendor must be carefully examined to assess current
indications and allowable specimens. Some NAAT platforms are now
FDA cleared for use with specimens from the rectum and pharynx,
facilitating their use for clinical management of extragenital infections (gonorrhea screening of rectal and pharyngeal sites with NAATs
is recommended quarterly for some sexually active MSM, e.g., those
taking HIV prophylaxis). NAATs have not yet been FDA cleared for
specimens from the conjunctiva, joint fluid, blood, or cerebrospinal
fluid. Rapid NAATs with shortened turnaround times of 30 minutes
and waivers allowing use in point-­of-­care settings such as physician
offices, community clinics, and other outpatient settings have now
also been FDA cleared.
Although data regarding NAAT for children are more limited and
performance is test-­dependent, there is no evidence that performance
of FDA-­approved NAAT for detection of N. gonorrhoeae among children differs from that among adults. In a multicenter study of NAATs
using strand displacement amplification or transcription-­
mediated
amplification in children being evaluated for sexual abuse, urine from
prepubertal girls was a reliable alternative to vaginal culture for detection for N. gonorrhoeae. Consultation with an expert is necessary before
using NAAT in this context, both to minimize the possibility of cross-­
reaction with nongonococcal Neisseria species and other commensals
(e.g., N. meningitidis, N. sicca, N. lactamica, N. cinerea, or Moraxella
catarrhalis) and to ensure correct interpretation of results. Because of
the implications of a diagnosis of N. gonorrhoeae infection in a child,
only CLIA-­validated, FDA-­cleared NAATs should be used, and all positive specimens should be retained for additional confirmatory testing.

TREATMENT

All patients who are presumed or proven to have gonorrhea should
be evaluated for concurrent syphilis, HIV, and Chlamydia trachomatis
infection. The incidence of Chlamydia co-­infection is 15–25% among
males and 35–50% among females. Patients beyond the neonatal
period should be treated presumptively for C. trachomatis infection
unless a negative chlamydial NAAT result is documented at the time
treatment is initiated for gonorrhea. However, if chlamydial test results
are not available or if a non-­NAAT result is negative for Chlamydia,
patients should be treated for both gonorrhea and Chlamydia infection (see Chapter 272.2). Persons who receive a diagnosis of gonorrhea
should be instructed to abstain from sexual activity for 7 days after
treatment and until all sex partners are adequately treated (7 days after
receiving treatment and resolution of symptoms, if present). Sexual

partners exposed in the preceding 60 days should be examined, specimens collected, and presumptive treatment started.
N. gonorrhoeae has progressively developed resistance to the antibiotics used to treat it. Antimicrobial resistance in N. gonorrhoeae
occurs as plasmid-­mediated resistance to penicillin and tetracycline
and chromosomally mediated resistance to penicillins, tetracyclines,
spectinomycin, fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, and azithromycin.
Emergence of cephalosporin resistance worldwide has prompted designation of N. gonorrhoeae as antibiotic-­resistance threat level “Urgent”
by the CDC. Surveillance data from the CDC Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance Project reveal concerning fluctuations in minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for the oral cephalosporin cefixime and the
injectable third-­
generation cephalosporin ceftriaxone, leading the
CDC to revise its U.S. gonorrhea treatment guidelines in 2012 to dual
therapy (usually a combination of ceftriaxone and azithromycin) in an
attempt to preserve the last commercially available effective treatment.
However, the CDC revised its recommendations in 2020; ceftriaxone
is now the only first-­line recommended treatment for gonorrhea at
all sites. The change from dual therapy to monotherapy was based on
(1) increasing concern for antimicrobial stewardship and the potential impact of dual therapy on commensal organisms and concurrent
pathogens, (2) new pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data
regarding optimal dosing for gonorrhea, and (3) increasing azithromycin resistance (and therefore no optimal second drug to pair with a
cephalosporin if dual therapy were the goal).
Table 238.1 summarizes first-­line treatment regimens for neonate,
child (weight ≤45 kg), adolescent, and adult gonococcal regimens.
Mucosal, localized infections are treatable with single doses; disseminated infections are treated for a minimum of 1 week.
Alternative regimens exist for adolescents and adults but are
extremely limited. For patients with cephalosporin allergy, the combination of gentamicin (240 mg intramuscularly [IM]) plus azithromycin
(2 g orally [PO]) cured 100% of uncomplicated urogenital cases in a
trial of U.S. patients age 15-­60 years; the combination of gemifloxacin
(320 mg PO) (not licensed for use in those <18 years old) plus azithromycin (2 g PO) cured >99% of uncomplicated urogenital cases in the
same trial but was limited by 8% of patients vomiting within 1 hour of
dual oral drug administration. For patients with azithromycin allergy,
doxycycline (100 mg PO twice daily for 7 days) can be used in place of
azithromycin as an alternative second antimicrobial. If ceftriaxone is
not available, alternative cephalosporins include oral cefixime (800 mg
PO), which has limited efficacy for pharyngeal gonorrhea, and other
single-­dose injectable cephalosporin regimens, such as ceftizoxime
(500 mg IM) or cefoxitin (2 g IM) with probenecid (1 g PO), neither
of which offers any advantage over ceftriaxone for urogenital infection,
and their efficacy against pharyngeal infection is less certain.
Pregnant women with gonococcal infection should be treated with
standard adult therapy. If allergy precludes standard treatment, consultation with an infectious disease specialist is recommended. HIV–
co-­infected patients with gonococcal infection are treated the same as
HIV-­negative patients.
Follow-­up test of cure is not recommended for persons diagnosed
with uncomplicated urogenital or rectal gonorrhea receiving recommended or alternative regimens. However, any person with pharyngeal
gonorrhea should return 7-­14 days after treatment for a test of cure
using culture, NAAT, or both, because pharyngeal gonorrhea is more
difficult to eradicate. Symptoms persisting after treatment should be
evaluated by culture for N. gonorrhoeae (with or without simultaneous
NAAT), and any gonococci isolated should be tested for antimicrobial
susceptibility. Treatment failure should be considered in (1) persons
whose symptoms do not resolve within 3-­5 days after appropriate treatment and who report no sexual contact during posttreatment follow­up and (2) persons with a positive test of cure (i.e., positive culture >72
hours or positive NAAT ≥7 days after receiving recommended treatment) who report no sexual contact during posttreatment follow-­up.

COMPLICATIONS

Prompt diagnosis and correct therapy ensure complete recovery from
uncomplicated gonococcal disease. Complications of gonorrhea result

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 238 u Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Gonococcus)

1751

Table 238.1  Recommended Treatment of Gonococcal Infections
AGE GROUP

INFECTION

TREATMENT REGIMEN

LENGTH OF THERAPY

Neonates

Ophthalmia neonatorum

Ceftriaxone* 25-­50 mg/kg IV or
IM OR cefotaxime 100 mg/kg IV or IM

Once

Disseminated infection
Scalp abscess
Septic arthritis

Ceftriaxone 25-­50 mg/kg IV or IM every day
OR cefotaxime 25-­50 mg/kg IV or IM
q8–12h†

7 days

Meningitis

Ceftriaxone 25-­50 mg/kg IV or IM every day
OR cefotaxime 25-­50 mg/kg IV or IM q8-­12h

10-­14 days

Endocarditis

Ceftriaxone 25-­50 mg/kg IV or IM every day
OR cefotaxime 25-­50 mg/kg IV or IM q8-­12h

Minimum 28 days

Pharyngeal infection
Anorectal infection
Urogenital infection

Ceftriaxone 25-­50 mg/kg IV or IM (max 500
mg)

Once

Conjunctivitis

Ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg IM (max 1 g) plus
consider lavage of infected eye with saline
solution

Once

Disseminated infection
Septic arthritis

Ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg IV or IM every day
(max 1 g daily)

7 days

Meningitis

Ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg IV or IM q12-­24h (max
4 g daily)

10-­14 days

Endocarditis

Ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg IV or IM q12-­24h (max
4 g daily)

Minimum 28 days

Pharyngeal infection
Anorectal infection
Urogenital infection

Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM (or 1 g IM for
persons ≥150 kg)

Once

Conjunctivitis

Ceftriaxone 1 g IM plus consider lavage of
infected eye with saline solution

Once

Disseminated infection
Septic arthritis

Ceftriaxone 1 g IV or IM every day

7 days

Meningitis

Ceftriaxone 1-­2 g IV q12-­24h

10-­14 days

Endocarditis

Ceftriaxone 1-­2 g IV q12-­24h

Minimum 28 days

Children ≤45 kg

Adults, adolescents, and
children >45 kg

*Ceftriaxone should be administered cautiously to neonates with hyperbilirubinemia, especially those born prematurely. Cefotaxime can be administered for those neonates unable
to receive ceftriaxone because of simultaneous administration of IV calcium. Consult neonatal dosing references.
†Dose or dosing frequency changes after postnatal age >7 days of life: consult neonatal dosing references.

IM, Intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; max, maximum; PO, orally.
From Wangu Z, Hsu KK. Neisseria gonorrhoeae. In Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, Kimberlin D, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2023: Table 126.1.

from the spread of gonococci from a local site of invasion. Complications and permanent sequelae may be associated with delayed treatment, recurrent infection, metastatic sites of infection (meninges,
aortic valve), and delayed or topical therapy of gonococcal ophthalmia.
The interval between primary infection and development of a complication is usually days to weeks. In postpubertal females, endometritis
may occur, especially during menses, and may progress to salpingitis,
tuboovarian abscess, and peritonitis (PID). Manifestations of PID
include signs of lower genital tract infection (e.g., vaginal discharge,
suprapubic pain, cervical tenderness) and upper genital tract infection (e.g., fever, leukocytosis, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
and adnexal tenderness or mass). The differential diagnosis includes
gynecologic diseases (ovarian cyst, ovarian tumor, ectopic pregnancy)
and intraabdominal disorders (appendicitis, urinary tract infection,
inflammatory bowel disease). Although N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis are implicated in many cases of PID, this syndrome encompasses
a spectrum of infectious diseases of the upper genital tract caused by
N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, and endogenous flora (streptococci,
anaerobes, gram-­negative bacilli). Treatment must therefore be broad.
For women with more severe symptoms (inability to exclude surgical
emergency, presence of tuboovarian abscess, severe illness, nausea,
vomiting, or high fever), pregnancy, or lack of response to outpatient
therapy within 72 hours, parenteral therapy should be initiated in the
hospital. The decision to hospitalize adolescents with acute PID should

be based on the same criteria used for older women, because the clinical response to outpatient treatment is similar among younger and
older women.
Recommended parenteral regimens are ceftriaxone (1 g intravenously [IV] every 24 hours [q24h]) and metronidazole (500 mg PO or
IV q12h); or cefotetan (2 g IV q12h); or cefoxitin (2 g IV q6h). Each of
these regimens (ceftriaxone and metronidazole; cefotetan; or cefoxitin) should be combined with doxycycline (100 mg PO or IV q12h).
An alternative parenteral regimen is ampicillin-­sulbactam (3 g IV
q6h) plus doxycycline (100 mg PO or IV q12h) or clindamycin (900
mg IV q8h) plus a loading dose of gentamicin (2 mg/kg IV or IM)
followed by maintenance gentamicin (1.5 mg/kg q8h). Clinical experience should guide the transition to oral therapy, which usually can be
initiated within 24 hours of improvement. Thereafter doxycycline (100
mg PO twice daily [bid]) to complete 14 days of total therapy, with oral
clindamycin (450 mg PO 4 times daily [qid]) or metronidazole (500
mg PO bid) added for more effective anaerobic coverage, is provided.
Parenteral therapy and IM/PO therapy appear to be similar in terms
of clinical efficacy for younger and older women with PID of mild to
moderate severity. Recommended IM/PO therapy regimens are as follows: a single dose of ceftriaxone (500 mg IM); single doses of cefoxitin
(2 g IM) and probenecid (1 g PO) plus doxycycline (100 mg PO bid); or
another parenteral third-­generation cephalosporin (e.g., ceftizoxime).
Each of these regimens (ceftriaxone; cefoxitin and probenecid; other

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1752 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
parenteral third-­generation cephalosporin) should be combined with
doxycycline (100 mg PO bid) and metronidazole (500 mg PO bid) for
14 days.
Once inside the peritoneum, gonococci may seed the liver capsule,
causing a perihepatitis with right upper quadrant pain (Fitz-­Hugh–
Curtis syndrome), with or without signs of salpingitis. Perihepatitis
may also be caused by C. trachomatis. Progression to PID occurs in
approximately 20% of cases of gonococcal cervicitis, and N. gonorrhoeae is isolated in approximately 40% of cases of PID in the United
States. Untreated cases may lead to hydrosalpinx, pyosalpinx, tuboovarian abscess, and eventual sterility. Even with adequate treatment of
PID, the risk for sterility from bilateral tubal occlusion approaches 20%
after one episode of salpingitis and exceeds 60% after three or more
episodes. The risk for ectopic pregnancy is increased approximately
sevenfold after one or more episodes of salpingitis. Additional sequelae
of PID include chronic pain, dyspareunia, and increased risk for recurrent PID.
Urogenital gonococcal infection acquired during the first trimester
of pregnancy carries a high risk for septic abortion. After 16 weeks of
pregnancy, infection leads to chorioamnionitis, a major cause of premature rupture of the membranes and premature delivery.
In males, without treatment, gonococcal urethritis usually resolves
spontaneously over several weeks to months. Epididymitis and acute
or chronic prostatitis are uncommon complications; most men with
gonococcal epididymitis also have overt urethritis. Even more unusual
complications include penile edema associated with penile dorsal lymphangitis or thrombophlebitis, periurethral abscess or fistulas, seminal
vesiculitis, and balanitis in uncircumcised men.

PREVENTION

Efforts to develop gonococcal vaccines that confer broad cross-­
protection have been unsuccessful thus far. A pilus vaccine elicited an
antibody response and conferred protection against challenge with the
homologous strain but did not protect against disease in a trial involving 3,250 volunteers. The high degree of interstrain and intrastrain
antigenic variability of pili poses a formidable barrier to the development of a single effective pilus vaccine. An outer membrane vaccine
that was enriched in PorB also elicited an antibody response but failed
to protect male volunteers against challenge with the homologous
strain, likely because small amounts of Rmp present in the vaccine
preparation elicited subversive antibodies. A formalin-­killed whole cell
vaccine trial in 62 volunteers in an Inuvik population in Canada also
failed to provide any protection. Gonococcal surface structures, such
as the porin protein (isolated without contaminating Rmp), proteins
expressed under various stress conditions that may be encountered
in vivo and have been identified by proteomic and transcriptomic
approaches, and lipooligosaccharides, may prove more promising as
vaccine candidates.
A retrospective epidemiologic analysis showed that a meningococcal outer membrane vesicle vaccine (MeNZB) that was used to curb an
epidemic of group B meningococcal disease in New Zealand was associated with a clinical efficacy of 31% against gonorrhea, which lends
optimism for development of a gonococcal vaccine. However, efficacy
was only 14% in persons co-­infected with gonorrhea and chlamydia.
Cross-­reactive antigens shared by N. gonorrhoeae and N. meningitidis
may have contributed to the efficacy of the group B outer membrane
vesicle vaccine against gonorrhea.
In the absence of a vaccine, prevention of gonorrhea in adolescents
and adults can be achieved through education, use of barrier protection (especially condoms), frequent screening of high-­risk populations as recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
(PSTF) and CDC (e.g., sexually active women ≤24 years old, MSM,
individuals previously infected with gonorrhea), and early identification and treatment of contacts—all sex partners within the 60 days
preceding symptom onset or gonorrhea diagnosis or, if none, the most
recent sex partner should be examined and treated presumptively. For
heterosexual patients, expedited partner therapy (EPT) with cefixime
(800 mg) can be delivered to partners by the patient, a public health
worker, or a collaborating pharmacy, as permitted by law (https://w

ww.cdc.gov/std/ept/legal/). EPT has been shown to be safe and effective in the prevention of reinfection with gonorrhea and is endorsed
by the American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Family Physicians, and Society of Adolescent Health and Medicine, along
with other clinical organizations, for use when in-­person evaluation
and treatment of the partner is impractical or unsuccessful. (Because of
limited data regarding the effectiveness of EPT in reducing persistent
or recurrent gonorrhea among MSM and the high risk for coexisting
undiagnosed sexually transmitted infections such as HIV, shared clinical decision-­making regarding EPT for MSM is recommended.)
An infant born to a woman with cervical gonococcal infection has an
approximately 30% risk of acquiring ophthalmic infection compared
with a <5% risk if ocular prophylaxis is given. Gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum can be prevented by instilling erythromycin (0.5%)
ophthalmic ointment into each eye in a single application at birth (see
Chapter 674). If erythromycin ointment is unavailable, infants at risk
for N. gonorrhoeae (especially those born to a mother with untreated
gonococcal infection or with no prenatal care) can be administered ceftriaxone 25-­50 mg/kg IV or IM, not to exceed 500 mg, in a single dose.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 239

Kingella kingae
Pablo Yagupsky
Kingella kingae is being increasingly recognized as the most common
etiology of skeletal system infections in young children.

ETIOLOGY

K. kingae is a fastidious, facultative anaerobic, β-­hemolytic member of
the Neisseriaceae family that appears as pairs or short chains of gram-­
negative coccobacilli with tapered ends (Fig. 239.1).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

K. kingae is asymptomatically carried in the posterior pharynx, and the
colonized mucosa is the source of bloodstream invasion of the bacterium
and its dissemination to the skeletal system or the endocardium, sites
for which the organism has a particular tropism. Colonization usually
starts after 6 months of age, suggesting that maternally derived immunity, coupled with limited socialization, prevents the early acquisition of
the bacterium. Colonization reaches a prevalence of 10% between 12 and
24 months and decreases in older children. Carried strains are replaced
after weeks or months, suggesting that carriage induces a strain-­specific
immune response that eradicates the colonizing strain but does not
prevent the acquisition of an antigenically different organism. The vast
majority of colonized children remain healthy, and the annual risk of a
carrier to develop an invasive infection is <1%.
Pharyngeal colonization plays a crucial role in the transmission
of the organism through intimate contact between siblings and playmates. Daycare attendance increases the risk for colonization and
transmission, and clusters of invasive infection have been reported in
childcare facilities.
The species elaborates four different polysaccharide capsules (a-­d),
which appear to represent important virulence factors. Whereas capsules a and b characterize 95% of all invasive strains, capsules c and
d are especially found in mere pharyngeal colonizers. Colonizing K.
kingae strains differ in their invasive potential. Whereas certain clones
are commonly found as respiratory colonizers but are seldom isolated
from disease sites, other clones are responsible for most of the morbidity burden worldwide.
Invasive K. kingae disease is most frequently diagnosed in otherwise
healthy children between the ages 6 months and 4 years, coinciding

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 239 u Kingella kingae
with the peak prevalence of pharyngeal carriage (Fig. 239.2). In contrast, older children and adults with K. kingae infections often have
underlying chronic diseases, immunosuppressing conditions, malignancy, or cardiac valve pathology. Because of the highly fastidious
nature of the organism, K. kingae is rarely recovered using traditional
culture methods. An annual incidence of 9.4 per 100,000 culture-­
proven invasive infections among Israeli children <5 years old has
been calculated, but this figure can be considered only a minimal
estimate because of the suboptimal culture detection of the organism. When sensitive species-­specific nucleic acid amplification test
(NAAT) methods are consistently used, K. kingae appears as the most
frequent etiology of skeletal system infections in children 6 months to
4 years old. In a Swiss study in which sensitive NAATs were routinely
employed, the organisms caused 88% of all joint and bone infections
in this age-­group.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of K. kingae disease begins with adherence of the
organism to the pharyngeal epithelium, mediated by pili and a nonpilus adhesin. K. kingae secretes a potent repeats-­in-­toxin (RTX) toxin
that is cytotoxic to respiratory epithelial cells, macrophages, and synoviocytes, suggesting that it may play a role in disrupting the respiratory mucosa, promoting survival of the bacterium in the bloodstream,
and facilitating invasion of skeletal system tissues. Children with K.
kingae disease frequently present with symptoms of an upper respiratory infection, hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease, herpangina, herpetic
stomatitis, or buccal aphthous ulcers, suggesting that viral-­induced
damage to the colonized mucosal surface facilitates invasion of the
bloodstream.

CLINICAL DISEASE

Septic arthritis is the most common invasive K. kingae infection in
children, followed by bacteremia, osteomyelitis, and endocarditis
(Table 239.1). Except for patients with endocarditis, the presentation
of invasive K. kingae infections is frequently mild, and a normal body
temperature <38°C (100.4°F), a normal C-­reactive protein (CRP) level,
and a normal white blood cell (WBC) count are common, requiring a
high index of clinical suspicion. Mild to moderate thrombocytosis has
been described in more than one third of patients.

Septic Arthritis

K. kingae septic arthritis primarily affects the large, weight-­bearing
joints and the upper extremity joints. However, K. kingae infections
of the small metacarpophalangeal, sternoclavicular, sacroiliac, and
tarsal joints and the vertebral facets are also relatively common, in
contrast to traditional bacterial pathogens associated with septic
arthritis (see Chapter 726). The disease has an acute presentation, and

1753

children are brought to medical attention after a median of 3 days.
The leukocyte count in the synovial fluid shows <50,000 WBCs/μL
in almost 25% of the patients, and the Gram stain of synovial fluid is
positive in only a small percentage of cases. Involvement of the hip
joint resembles toxic synovitis, and the possibility of a K. kingae infection should always be suspected in children <4 years old presenting
with hip pain or a limp.

Osteomyelitis

K. kingae osteomyelitis usually involves the long bones of the extremities (see Chapter 725). The calcaneus, talus, sternum, and clavicle are
also frequently affected (and are rarely infected by other bacterial
pathogens). In contrast to K. kingae arthritis, the onset of K. kingae
bone infections is insidious, and the disease follows a subacute and
indolent clinical course (Fig. 239.3). In >70% of patients K. kingae
osteomyelitis is diagnosed after ≥1 week. MRI may show a distinct
involvement of cartilages that are not yet ossified, which is only accompanied by a minor soft tissue reaction. Dissemination to the apophysis
or epiphysis and contiguous joints is frequent. Despite the frequent
diagnostic delay, chronic osteomyelitis and functional orthopedic disabilities are unusual.

SPONDYLODISCITIS

In industrialized countries, K. kingae is the most common bacterium
detected in children <4 years old with spondylodiscitis. The organism
presumably penetrates the rich network of blood vessels that traverse
the cartilaginous vertebral end plates and enters the annulus in young
children during a bacteremic episode. K. kingae spondylodiscitis usually involves the lumbar intervertebral spaces and, with decreasing
frequency, thoracolumbar, thoracic, lumbosacral, and cervical disks.
Involvement of multiple disks is uncommon. Patients present with
limping, lumbar pain, back stiffness, refusal to sit or walk, neurologic
symptoms, or abdominal complaints. Radiography or MRI studies
demonstrate narrowing of the intervertebral space. Patients respond
well to appropriate antibiotic treatment and recover without complications, although residual thinning of the intervertebral space may occur.
Drainage of paraspinal abscesses is necessary when signs of cord compression appear.

Tenosynovitis

K. kingae is the etiology of most cases of hematogenous invasion of the
tendon sheaths in children <4 years of age. The disease usually affects
the extensor tendons of the hands and wrists and, more rarely, the
ankles and the feet.

90

%
Cumulative %

100

98.6

96.9

100
90
77

80

RBCs

Percent

70
60
50
37.8 39.2

40

37.8

30
20

Kingella kingae organisms

0

Fig. 239.1 Typical Gram stain of a positive blood culture vial from

a child with K. kingae bacteremia showing pairs and short chains of
plump gram-­negative coccobacilli. RBCs, Red blood cells.

13

10
1.4

6.9

1.4

1.7

1.4

6
6–11
12–17 18–23 24–29 30–35
36
months months months months months months months
Age interval

Fig. 239.2 Age distribution of 291 previously healthy children with
invasive K. kingae infection. (Data from Dubnov-­Raz G, Ephros M, Garty
BZ, et al. Invasive pediatric Kingella kingae infections: a nationwide collaborative study. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2010;29:639–643.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1754 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 239.1  Clinical Spectrum and Relative Frequency of
K. kingae Infections
CLINICAL DISEASE

FREQUENCY

Septic arthritis

+++

Osteomyelitis

++

Spondylodiscitis

+

Tenosynovitis

±

Bursitis

±

Bacteremia with no focus

+++

Endocarditis

+

Pericarditis

+

Laryngotracheobronchitis

±

Pneumonia

±

Pleural empyema

±

Keratitis

±

Corneal abscess

±

Endophthalmitis

±

Eyelid abscess

±

+++, Very common; ++, common; +, infrequent; ±, exceptional.

Occult Bacteremia

Patients with K. kingae bacteremia and no focal infection (occult bacteremia) usually present with mild to moderate fever, symptoms suggestive of a viral upper respiratory infection, a mean CRP level of 2.2
mg/dL, and a mean WBC count of 12,700/μL. Children with K. kingae
bacteremia respond favorably to a short course of antibiotics.

Endocarditis

In contrast to other K. kingae infections, K. kingae endocarditis is also
diagnosed in school-­age children, adolescents, and adult patients. The
disease may affect native and prosthetic valves. Predisposing factors
include congenital cardiac malformations or rheumatic valvular disease, but some patients have previously normal hearts. Typically, the
left side of the heart is involved, usually the mitral valve. Fever and
acute-­phase reactants are elevated more in patients with endocarditis than in those with uncomplicated bacteremia; no particular cutoff
value accurately distinguishes between the two conditions. Despite the
exquisite susceptibility of K. kingae to antibiotics, cardiac failure, septic shock, cerebrovascular accident (stroke), and other life-­threatening
complications are common; the mortality rate is high (>10%); and
many surviving patients later require valvular repair or replacement.
Because of the potential severity of K. kingae endocarditis, routine
echocardiographic evaluation of bacteremic children is recommended
by some experts.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of K. kingae disease can be established by isolation of the
bacterium from a normally sterile site such as blood, synovial fluid,
or bone tissue. Although K. kingae grows on routine bacteriologic
media, its recovery from exudates is frequently unsuccessful. Detection is enhanced by inoculating synovial fluid specimens into blood
culture vials, suggesting that diluting samples in a large volume of
nutrient broth reduces the concentration of detrimental factors. The
bacteriologic diagnosis is significantly improved by the use of NAATs
(polymerase chain reaction). The initial approach consisted of amplifying the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene, which is present in all
bacteria followed by sequencing the species-­specific amplicon to identify the pathogen. The original molecular assays are being replaced by

Fig. 239.3 K. kingae transphyseal osteomyelitis of the femur (arrow).

This 3-­yr-­old child limped for 3 weeks and was diagnosed with toxic
synovitis. He was afebrile and had a leukocyte count of 9.8 × 109 cells/L,
a C-­reactive protein level of 12 mg/L, and an erythrocyte sedimentation
rate of 42 mm/hr. (Courtesy Prof. Dimitri Ceroni, Hôpitaux Universitaires
de Genève.)

real-­time polymerase chain reaction tests that target K. kingae–specific
genes that can be completed in a few hours. Routine use of these assays
results in a fourfold improvement in the detection of the organism
compared with the blood culture vial method and reduces the fraction of culture-­negative septic arthritis in young children. The three K.
kingae–specific genes that are targeted by the current tests are the rtx
operon that encodes the RtxA toxin; the cpn60 (chaperonin 60 gene),
also known as groEL; and the malate dehydrogenase (mdh) gene that
combines excellent sensitivity and specificity and should be the preferred method.
Because the bacterium frequently invades joints and bones that are
small or difficult to reach or intervertebral disks, exudate samples or
tissues are often unavailable for analysis. An alternative noninvasive
diagnostic approach has been proposed consisting of obtaining an oropharyngeal specimen and subjecting it to a sensitive K. kingae–specific
NAAT. A compatible clinical picture, coupled with a positive test result,
supports K. kingae as the probable cause of the disease. This strategy has
the obvious limitation that the background carriage rate of the organism is around 10% in children of the relevant age and twice as high in
those attending daycare centers, reducing the predictive value of a positive result. On the other hand, because the colonized oropharynx is the
source of the bloodborne dissemination of the bacterium, the negative
predictive value of the assay is high. For practical purposes, failure to
detect K. kingae DNA sequences when using a sensitive molecular test
virtually rules out the organism as the etiology of the infection.
Novel commercially available plasma metagenomic next-­generation
sequencing assays appear to be a promising tool for detecting the
organism, especially in patients with endocarditis receiving antibiotics.

TREATMENT

K. kingae is usually highly susceptible to penicillin and cephalosporins
but exhibits decreased susceptibility to oxacillin, precluding the use of
isoxazolyl penicillins for confirmed K. kingae infections. Although β-­
lactamase production is frequently detected in colonizing K. kingae
strains, its prevalence among invasive organisms is low and shows wide
geographic variation. Testing for β-­lactamase production should be routinely performed in all isolates derived from normally sterile body sites.
Because of the lack of specific guidelines for treating K. kingae disease, patients have been administered a variety of antibiotic regimens
according to protocols developed for infections caused by traditional
bacterial pathogens. The first-­line therapy for skeletal infections in
young children usually consists of intravenous (IV) administration
of a second-­or third-­generation cephalosporin, pending culture or
NAAT results. K. kingae is always resistant to glycopeptide antibiotics
and clindamycin, a serious concern in areas where skeletal infections
caused by community-­
associated methicillin-­
resistant Staphylococcus aureus are common, and vancomycin or clindamycin are initially

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 240 u Haemophilus influenzae
administered to children with presumptive septic arthritis or osteomyelitis. The initial antibiotic regimen is frequently changed to a cephalosporin (e.g., ceftriaxone) once K. kingae is identified or to ampicillin
after β-­lactamase production is excluded. A favorable clinical response
and decreasing CRP levels to ≤20 μg/mL are used to guide switching to
oral antibiotics and defining the duration of therapy. Antibiotic treatment has ranged from 2 to 3 weeks for K. kingae arthritis, from 3 to 6
weeks for K. kingae osteomyelitis, and from 3 to 12 weeks for K. kingae
spondylodiscitis. Although some children with septic arthritis have
been managed with repeat joint aspirations and lavage, most patients
respond promptly to conservative treatment with appropriate antibiotics and do not require invasive surgical procedures.
Children with K. kingae bacteremia without focal infection are
initially treated with an IV β-­lactam antibiotic and are subsequently
switched to an oral drug once the clinical condition has improved. In
most cases, therapy is administered for 1-­2 weeks.
Patients with K. kingae endocarditis are usually treated with an IV β-­
lactam antibiotic alone or in combination with an aminoglycoside for
4-­7 weeks. Early surgical intervention is necessary for life-­threatening
complications unresponsive to medical therapy.

PREVENTION

Because the risk of asymptomatic pharyngeal carriers for developing an
invasive K. kingae infection is low, in the absence of clinical disease, there
is no indication to eradicate the organism from the colonized mucosal
surfaces. Nonetheless, in 25 reported outbreaks of K. kingae infections
in child daycare centers, 68 of 402 (17%) classmates developed a proven
or presumptive infection, including fatal endocarditis, within 1 month,
indicating that the causative strains combined unusual transmissibility and virulence. Under these circumstances, prophylactic antibiotic
therapy to eradicate colonization in contacts and prevent further cases
of the disease has been employed, consisting of either rifampin alone 10
mg/kg or 20 mg/kg twice daily for 2 days or rifampin in combination
with amoxicillin (80 mg/kg/day) for 2 days or 4 days. The effectiveness
of these regimens has ranged between 47% and 80%, indicating that
eradication of K. kingae from colonized mucosae is difficult to achieve.
However, after antibiotic prophylaxis administration, no further cases of
the disease have been detected, suggesting that reduction of the bacterial
density by antibiotics, extinction of the precipitating viral infection, and/
or induction of an effective immune response by prolonged carriage is
enough to decrease transmissibility and prevent additional cases.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 240

Haemophilus influenzae
Nadia A. Kadry and Joseph W. St. Geme III
Effective vaccines to prevent Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)
disease, introduced in the United States and most other countries, have
resulted in a dramatic decrease in the incidence of infections caused by
this organism. However, mortality and morbidity from Hib infection
remain a problem worldwide, primarily in resource poor countries.
Occasional cases of invasive disease caused by non–type b strains continue to occur but are infrequent. Nontypeable isolates of H. influenzae
are an important cause of otitis media, sinusitis, and chronic bronchitis.

ETIOLOGY

H. influenzae is a fastidious, gram-­negative, pleomorphic coccobacillus that requires factor X (hematin) and factor V (phosphopyridine
nucleotide) for growth. Some H. influenzae isolates are surrounded by
a polysaccharide capsule and can be segregated into one of six antigenically and biochemically distinct serotypes designated types a, b,
c, d, e, and f. Isolates without a polysaccharide capsule are considered

1755

nontypeable. Isolates can also be categorized based on the production
of indole and the presence of ornithine decarboxylase and urease and
are sorted into biotypes I-­VIII.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Before the advent of an effective Hib conjugate vaccine in 1988, Hib was
a major cause of serious disease among children. There was a striking age
distribution of cases, with >90% in children <5 years old and the majority
in children <2 years old. The annual attack rate of invasive disease was
64-­129 cases per 100,000 children <5 years old. Invasive disease caused
by strains producing a non–type b capsule has been much less frequent
but continues to occur. The incidence of invasive disease caused by type
b and non–type b serotypes has been estimated at approximately 0.08
and 1.02 cases, respectively, per 100,000 children <5 years old per year in
the United States. Nontypeable (nonencapsulated) H. influenzae strains
also occasionally cause invasive disease, especially in neonates, immunocompromised children, and children in resource poor countries. The
estimated rate of invasive disease caused by nontypeable H. influenzae in
the United States is 1.88 per 100,000 children <5 years old per year. Nontypeable isolates are common etiologic agents in otitis media, sinusitis,
and chronic bronchitis. More recent evidence also implicates nasopharyngeal colonization with nontypeable H. influenzae in the development
of asthma and allergic airway disease.
Humans are the only natural hosts for H. influenzae, which is part
of the normal respiratory flora in 60–90% of healthy children. Most
isolates are nontypeable. Before the advent of Hib conjugate vaccines,
H. influenzae type b could be isolated from the pharynx of 2–5% of
healthy preschool and school-­age children, with lower rates among
infants and adults. Asymptomatic colonization with Hib occurs at a
much lower rate in immunized populations.
The continued circulation of type b strains despite current vaccine
coverage levels suggests that elimination of Hib disease may be a formidable task. The few cases of Hib invasive disease in the United States
now occur in both unvaccinated and fully vaccinated children. Approximately 50% of cases occur in infants who are too young to have received
a complete primary vaccine series. Among the cases in patients who
are old enough to have received a complete vaccine series, the majority are underimmunized. To highlight this point, during a shortage of
Hib vaccine, invasive disease developed in five children in Minnesota,
all of whom were incompletely immunized. Continued efforts are necessary to provide currently available Hib conjugate vaccines to children in
resource poor countries, where affordability remains an important issue.
In the prevaccine era, certain groups and individuals had an
increased incidence of invasive Hib disease, including Alaskan Natives,
American Indians (Apache, Navajo), and African Americans. Persons with certain chronic medical conditions were also known to be
at increased risk for invasive disease, including individuals with sickle
cell disease, asplenia, congenital and acquired immunodeficiencies,
and malignancies. Unvaccinated infants with invasive Hib infection
are also at increased risk for recurrence, reflecting that they typically
do not develop a protective immune response to H. influenzae.
Socioeconomic risk factors for invasive Hib disease include childcare
outside the home, the presence of siblings of elementary school age or
younger, short duration of breastfeeding, and parental smoking. A history of otitis media is associated with an increased risk for invasive disease. Much less is known about the epidemiology of invasive disease
caused by non–type b strains, and it is not clear whether the epidemiologic features of Hib disease apply to disease caused by non-­Hib strains.
Among age-­susceptible household contacts who have been exposed
to a case of invasive Hib disease, there is increased risk for secondary
cases of invasive disease in the first 30 days after exposure, especially in
susceptible children <24 months old. Whether a similar increased risk
exists for contacts of individuals with non-­Hib disease is unknown.
The mode of transmission is usually direct contact or inhalation
of respiratory tract droplets containing H. influenzae. The incubation
period for invasive disease is variable, and the exact period of communicability is unknown. Most children with invasive Hib disease are colonized in the nasopharynx before initiation of antimicrobial therapy;
25–40% may remain colonized during the first 24 hours of therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1756 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
With the decline of disease caused by type b organisms, disease
caused by other serotypes (a, c-­f ) and by nontypeable strains has been
recognized more clearly. There is no evidence that non–type b infections have increased in frequency. However, clusters of type a and, less
often, type e and type f infections have occurred. Data from Israel suggest that nontypeable H. influenzae is the most common cause of invasive H. influenzae disease in that country.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of Hib disease begins with adherence to respiratory
epithelium and colonization of the nasopharynx, which is mediated
by pilus and nonpilus adherence factors. The mechanism of entry into
the intravascular compartment is unclear but appears to be influenced
by cytotoxic factors. Once in the bloodstream, Hib, and perhaps other
encapsulated strains, resist intravascular clearance mechanisms at least
in part because of the polysaccharide capsule. In the case of Hib, the
magnitude and duration of bacteremia influence the likelihood of dissemination of bacteria to sites such as the meninges and joints.
Noninvasive H. influenzae infections such as otitis media, sinusitis, and bronchitis are usually caused by nontypeable strains. These
organisms gain access to sites such as the middle ear and sinus cavities
by direct extension from the nasopharynx. Factors facilitating spread
from the nasopharynx include eustachian tube dysfunction and antecedent viral infections of the upper respiratory tract.

Antibiotic Resistance

Ampicillin resistance is increasingly common among H. influenzae isolates. Resistance is typically driven by plasmid-­mediated production of a
β-­lactamase. β-­lactamase–negative ampicillin-­resistant isolates have been
identified and manifest resistance by production of a β-­lactam–insensitive
cell wall synthesis enzyme called penicillin binding protein 3 (PBP 3).
Amoxicillin-­clavulanate is uniformly active against H. influenzae
clinical isolates except for the rare β-­lactamase–negative ampicillin-­
resistant isolates. Among macrolides, azithromycin has in vitro activity against a high percentage of H. influenzae isolates; in contrast, the
activity of erythromycin and clarithromycin against H. influenzae
clinical isolates is poor. H. influenzae resistance to third-­generation
cephalosporins has not been documented. Resistance to quinolones is
rare, and resistance to trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) is
present in approximately 10% of isolates.

Immunity

In the prevaccine era, the most important known element of host
defense was antibody directed against the type b capsular polysaccharide polyribosylribitol phosphate (PRP). Anti-­
PRP antibody is
acquired in an age-­related fashion and facilitates clearance of Hib from
blood, in part related to opsonic activity. Antibodies directed against
antigens such as outer membrane proteins or lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
may also have a role in opsonization. Both the classical and alternative
complement pathways are important in defense against Hib.
Before the introduction of vaccination, protection from Hib infection was presumed to correlate with the concentration of circulating
anti-­PRP antibody at the time of exposure. A serum antibody concentration of >0.15 μg/mL was considered protective against invasive

Table 240.1

infection. Unimmunized infants >6 months old and young children
usually lacked an anti-­PRP antibody concentration of this magnitude
and were susceptible to disease after encountering Hib. This lack of
antibody in infants and young children may have reflected a maturational delay in the immunologic response to thymus-­independent type
2 antigens such as unconjugated PRP, presumably explaining the high
incidence of type b infections in infants and young children in the prevaccine era.
The conjugate vaccines act as thymus-­dependent antigens and elicit
serum antibody responses in infants and young children (Table 240.1).
These vaccines are believed to prime memory antibody responses on
subsequent encounters with PRP. The concentration of circulating
anti-­PRP antibody in a child primed by a conjugate vaccine may not
correlate precisely with protection, presumably because a memory
response may occur rapidly on exposure to PRP and provide protection. Conjugate vaccines have been shown to be highly effective
against Hib disease and have been shown to reduce nasopharyngeal
carriage rates.
Much less is known about immunity to other H. influenzae serotypes
or to nontypeable isolates. For nontypeable isolates, evidence suggests
that antibodies directed against one or more outer membrane proteins
are bactericidal and protect against experimental challenge. A variety of antigens have been evaluated in an attempt to identify vaccine
candidates for nontypeable H. influenzae, including outer membrane
proteins (P1, P2, P4, P5, P6, D15, and Tbp A/B), LPS, various adhesins
(e.g., Hap, HMW1, and HMW2), and lipoprotein D.

DIAGNOSIS

Presumptive identification of H. influenzae is established by direct
examination of a clinical specimen after staining with Gram reagents.
Because of its small size, pleomorphism, and occasional poor uptake
of stain, as well as the tendency for proteinaceous fluids to have a red
background, H. influenzae is sometimes difficult to visualize. Furthermore, given that identification of H. influenzae by microscopy requires
at least 105 bacteria/mL in a clinical specimen (e.g., cerebrospinal fluid
[CSF]), failure to visualize organisms does not preclude their presence.
Culture of H. influenzae requires prompt transport and processing
of specimens because the organism is fastidious. Specimens should not
be exposed to drying or temperature extremes. Primary isolation of H.
influenzae can be accomplished on chocolate agar.
Serotyping of H. influenzae is accomplished by slide agglutination
with type-­
specific antisera or through polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) amplification of the capsule locus (cap). Importantly, antigen-­
based detection methods are prone to false positives because of antigen
cross-­reactivity with other encapsulated organisms and are therefore
not recommended as the primary diagnostic approach. Real-­time PCR
and nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) can be used to specifically
detect H. influenzae. Accurate serotyping is essential to monitor progress toward elimination of type b invasive disease. Timely reporting of
cases to public health authorities should be ensured.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND TREATMENT

The initial antibiotic therapy for invasive infections possibly caused by
H. influenzae should be a parenterally administered antibiotic effective

Haemophilus influenzae Type b (Hib) Conjugate Vaccines Available in the United States

 

VACCINE

TRADE NAME

COMPONENTS

MANUFACTURER

PRP-­T

ActHib

PRP conjugated to tetanus toxoid

Sanofi

PRP-­T

Hibrix

PRP conjugated to tetanus toxoid

GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals

PRP-­OMP

PedvaxHIB

PRP conjugated to OMP

Merck

PRP-­T/DTaP-­IPV

Pentacel

PRP-­T + DTaP-­IPV vaccines

Sanofi Pasteur

PRP-­OMP/DTaP-­IPV-­HepB

Vaxelis

PRP-­OMP + DTaP-­IPV + HepB vaccines

Merck

DTaP, Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis vaccine; HepB, hepatitis B vaccine; IPV, trivalent inactivated polio vaccine; OMP, outer membrane protein complex from
Neisseria meningitidis; PRP, polyribosylribitol phosphate.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 240 u Haemophilus influenzae
in sterilizing all foci of infection and effective against ampicillin-­
resistant strains, usually an extended-­spectrum cephalosporin such
as ceftriaxone. After the antimicrobial susceptibility of the isolate has
been determined, an appropriate agent can be selected to complete the
therapy. Ampicillin remains the drug of choice for the therapy of infections caused by susceptible isolates. If the isolate is resistant to ampicillin, in selected circumstances ceftriaxone can be administered once
daily for outpatient therapy.
Oral antimicrobial agents are sometimes used to complete a course
of therapy initiated by the parenteral route and are typically initial
therapy for noninvasive infections such as otitis media and sinusitis. If
the organism is susceptible, amoxicillin is the drug of choice. An oral
second-­or third-­generation cephalosporin or amoxicillin-­clavulanate
may be used when the isolate is resistant to ampicillin.

Meningitis

In the prevaccine era, meningitis accounted for more than half of all
cases of invasive H. influenzae disease. Clinically, meningitis caused by
Hib cannot be differentiated from meningitis caused by Neisseria meningitidis or Streptococcus pneumoniae (see Chapter 643.1). It may be
complicated by other foci of infection such as the lungs, joints, bones,
and pericardium.
Antimicrobial therapy should be administered intravenously for
7-­14 days for uncomplicated cases. Ceftriaxone and ampicillin cross the
blood-­brain barrier during acute inflammation in concentrations adequate to treat H. influenzae meningitis. Intramuscular therapy with ceftriaxone may be an alternative in patients with normal organ perfusion.
The prognosis of Hib meningitis depends on the age at presentation, duration of illness before appropriate antimicrobial therapy,
CSF capsular polysaccharide concentration, and rapidity with which
organisms are cleared from CSF, blood, and urine. Clinically manifested inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone and evidence of
focal neurologic deficits at presentation are poor prognostic features.
Approximately 6% of patients with Hib meningitis are left with some
hearing impairment, probably because of inflammation of the cochlea
and the labyrinth. Dexamethasone (0.6 mg/kg/day divided every 6
hours for 2 days), particularly when given shortly before or concurrent
with the initiation of antimicrobial therapy, decreases the incidence
of hearing loss. Major neurologic sequelae of Hib meningitis include
behavior problems, language disorders, impaired vision, mental retardation, motor abnormalities, ataxia, seizures, and hydrocephalus.

Cellulitis

Children with Hib cellulitis often have an antecedent upper respiratory
tract infection. They usually have no prior history of trauma, and the
infection is thought to represent seeding of the organism to the involved
soft tissues during bacteremia. The head and neck, particularly the cheek
and preseptal region of the eye, are the most common sites of involvement. The involved region generally has indistinct margins and is tender
and indurated. Buccal cellulitis is classically erythematous with a violaceous hue, although this sign may be absent. H. influenzae may often
be recovered directly from an aspirate of the leading edge, although this
procedure is seldom performed. A blood culture may also reveal the
causative organism. Other foci of infection may be present concomitantly, particularly in children <18 months old. A diagnostic lumbar
puncture should be considered at diagnosis in these children.
Parenteral antimicrobial therapy is indicated until patients
become afebrile, after which an appropriate oral antimicrobial agent
may be substituted. A 7-­to 10-­day course is customary.

Preseptal Cellulitis

Infection involving the superficial tissue layers anterior to the orbital
septum is termed preseptal cellulitis, which may be caused by H. influenzae. Uncomplicated preseptal cellulitis does not imply a risk for visual
impairment or direct central nervous system (CNS) extension. However, concurrent bacteremia may be associated with the development
of meningitis. H. influenzae preseptal cellulitis is characterized by fever,
edema, tenderness, warmth of the lid, and, occasionally, purple discoloration. Evidence of interruption of the integument is usually absent.

1757

Conjunctival drainage may be associated. S. pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, and group A Streptococcus cause clinically indistinguishable
preseptal cellulitis. The latter two pathogens are more likely when fever
is absent and the integument is interrupted (e.g., because of an insect
bite or trauma).
Children with preseptal cellulitis in whom H. influenzae and S. pneumoniae are etiologic considerations (young age, high fever, intact integument) should have a blood culture obtained. In addition, a diagnostic
lumbar puncture should be considered.
Parenteral antibiotics are indicated for preseptal cellulitis. Because
methicillin-­susceptible and methicillin-­resistant S. aureus, S. pneumoniae,
and group A β-­hemolytic streptococci are other causes, empirical therapy
should include agents active against these pathogens. Patients with preseptal cellulitis without concurrent meningitis should receive parenteral
therapy for about 5 days, until fever and erythema have abated. In
uncomplicated cases, antimicrobial therapy should be given for 10 days.

Orbital Cellulitis

Infections of the orbit are infrequent and usually develop as complications of acute ethmoid or sphenoid sinusitis. Orbital cellulitis may
manifest as lid edema but is distinguished by the presence of proptosis,
chemosis, impaired vision, limitation of the extraocular movements,
decreased mobility of the globe, or pain on movement of the globe. The
distinction between preseptal and orbital cellulitis may be difficult and
is best determined by CT scan.
Orbital infections are treated with parenteral therapy for at least
14 days. Underlying sinusitis or orbital abscess may require surgical
drainage and more prolonged antimicrobial therapy.

Supraglottitis or Acute Epiglottitis

Supraglottitis is a cellulitis of the tissues of the laryngeal inlet (see
Chapter 433). It has become exceedingly rare since the introduction
of conjugate Hib vaccines. Direct bacterial invasion of the involved tissues is probably the initiating pathophysiologic event. This dramatic,
potentially lethal condition can occur at any age. Because of the risk of
sudden, unpredictable airway obstruction, supraglottitis is a medical
emergency. Other foci of infection, such as meningitis, are rare. Antimicrobial therapy directed against H. influenzae and other etiologic agents
should be administered parenterally, but only after the airway is secured,
and therapy should be continued until patients are able to take fluids by
mouth. The duration of antimicrobial therapy is typically 7 days.

Pneumonia

The true incidence of H. influenzae pneumonia in children is unknown
because invasive procedures required to obtain culture specimens are
seldom performed (see Chapter 449). In the prevaccine era, type b
strains were believed to be the usual cause. The signs and symptoms
of pneumonia caused by H. influenzae cannot be differentiated from
those of pneumonia caused by many other microorganisms. Other foci
of infection may be present concomitantly.
Children <12 months old in whom H. influenzae pneumonia is
suspected should receive parenteral antimicrobial therapy initially
because of their increased risk for bacteremia and its complications.
Older children who do not appear severely ill may be managed with an
oral antimicrobial. Therapy is continued for 7-­10 days. Uncomplicated
pleural effusion associated with H. influenzae pneumonia requires no
special intervention. However, if empyema develops, chest tube or surgical drainage is generally indicated.

Suppurative Arthritis

Large joints, such as the knee, hip, ankle, and elbow, are affected most
often (see Chapter 726). Other foci of infection may be present concomitantly. Although single-­joint involvement is the rule, multijoint
involvement occurs in approximately 6% of cases. The signs and symptoms of septic arthritis caused by H. influenzae are indistinguishable
from those in arthritis caused by other bacteria.
Uncomplicated septic arthritis should generally be treated with
an appropriate parenteral antimicrobial for at least a few days. If
the clinical response is satisfactory, the remainder of the course of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1758 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
antimicrobial treatment may be given orally. Therapy is typically given
for 3 weeks for uncomplicated septic arthritis, but may be continued
beyond 3 weeks, until the C-­reactive protein concentration is normal
and clinical symptoms are resolved.

Pericarditis

H. influenzae is a rare cause of pericarditis (see Chapter 489). Affected
children often have had an antecedent upper respiratory tract infection. Fever, respiratory distress, and tachycardia are consistent findings. Other foci of infection may be present concomitantly.
The diagnosis may be established by recovery of the organism
from blood or pericardial fluid. Gram stain or detection of PRP in
pericardial fluid, blood, or urine (when type b organisms are the
cause) may aid the diagnosis. Antimicrobials should be provided
parenterally in a regimen similar to that used for meningitis (see
Chapter 643.1). Pericardiectomy is useful for draining the purulent
material effectively and preventing tamponade and constrictive
pericarditis.

Bacteremia Without an Associated Focus

Bacteremia caused by H. influenzae may be associated with fever
without any apparent focus of infection (see Chapter 220). In this
situation, risk factors for occult bacteremia include the magnitude
of fever (≥39°C [102.2°F]) and the presence of leukocytosis (≥15,000
cells/μL). In the prevaccine era, meningitis developed in approximately 25% of children with occult Hib bacteremia if left untreated.
In the vaccine era, this H. influenzae infection has become exceedingly rare. When it does occur, the child should be reevaluated for a
focus of infection and a second blood culture should be performed.
The child should be hospitalized and given parenteral antimicrobial
therapy after a diagnostic lumbar puncture and chest radiograph are
obtained.

Miscellaneous Infections

Rarely, H. influenzae causes urinary tract infection, epididymoorchitis,
cervical adenitis, acute glossitis, infected thyroglossal duct cysts, uvulitis, endocarditis, endophthalmitis, primary peritonitis, osteomyelitis,
and periappendiceal abscess.

Invasive Disease in Neonates

Neonates occasionally have invasive H. influenzae infection. In the
infant with illness within the first 24 hours of life, especially in association with maternal chorioamnionitis or prolonged rupture of membranes, transmission of the organism to the infant is likely to have
occurred through the maternal genital tract (which is colonized with
nontypeable H. influenzae in <1% of pregnant women). Manifestations
of neonatal invasive infection include bacteremia with sepsis, pneumonia, respiratory distress syndrome with shock, conjunctivitis, scalp
abscess or cellulitis, and meningitis. Less frequently, mastoiditis, septic
arthritis, and congenital vesicular eruption may occur.

Otitis Media

Acute otitis media is one of the most common infectious diseases of
childhood (see Chapter 680). It results from the spread of bacteria from
the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube into the middle ear cavity. Usually, because of a preceding viral upper respiratory tract infection, the mucosa in the area becomes hyperemic and swollen, resulting
in obstruction and an opportunity for bacterial multiplication in the
middle ear.
The most common bacterial pathogens are H. influenzae, S. pneumoniae, and Moraxella catarrhalis. Most H. influenzae isolates causing otitis media are nontypeable. Ipsilateral conjunctivitis may also
be present. Amoxicillin (80-­90 mg/kg/day) is a suitable first-­line
oral antimicrobial agent, because the probability that the causative
isolate is resistant to amoxicillin and the risk for invasive potential
are sufficiently low to justify this approach. Alternatively, in certain
cases, a single dose of ceftriaxone constitutes adequate therapy.
In the case of treatment failure or if a β-­lactamase–producing isolate
is obtained by tympanocentesis or from drainage fluid, amoxicillin-­
clavulanate (Augmentin) is a suitable alternative.

Conjunctivitis

Acute infection of the conjunctivae is common in childhood (see
Chapter 666). In neonates, H. influenzae is an infrequent cause. However, it is an important pathogen in older children. Most H. influenzae
isolates associated with conjunctivitis are nontypeable, although type
b isolates and other serotypes are occasionally found. Empirical treatment of conjunctivitis beyond the neonatal period usually consists of
topical antimicrobial therapy with sulfacetamide. Topical fluoroquinolone therapy is to be avoided because of its broad spectrum, high
cost, and high rate of emerging resistance among many bacterial species. Ipsilateral otitis media caused by the same organism may be present and requires oral antibiotic therapy.

Sinusitis

H. influenzae is an important cause of acute sinusitis in children, likely
the most common etiology since implementation of routine vaccination against S. pneumoniae (see Chapter 429). Chronic sinusitis lasting
>1 year or severe sinusitis requiring hospitalization is often caused by S.
aureus or anaerobes such as Peptococcus, Peptostreptococcus, and Bacteroides. Nontypeable H. influenzae and viridans group streptococci are
also frequently recovered.
For uncomplicated sinusitis, amoxicillin is acceptable initial therapy.
However, if clinical improvement does not occur, a broader-­spectrum
agent, such as amoxicillin-­clavulanate, may be appropriate. A 10-­day
course is sufficient for uncomplicated sinusitis. Hospitalization for
parenteral therapy is rarely required; the usual reason is suspicion of
progression to orbital cellulitis.

PREVENTION

Immunization with a Hib conjugate vaccine is recommended for all
infants. Prophylaxis is indicated if close contacts of an index patient
with type b disease are unvaccinated. The contagiousness of non-­Hib
infections is not known, and prophylaxis is not recommended.

Vaccine

Several Hib conjugate vaccines are currently marketed in the United
States, containing either PRP–outer membrane protein (PRP-­OMP) or
PRP–tetanus toxoid (PRP-­T), which differ in the carrier protein used and
the method of conjugating the polysaccharide to the protein (see Table
240.1 and Chapter 215). Available combination vaccines include Pentacel
(Sanofi Pasteur), which consists of PRP-­T combined with DTaP vaccine
(diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis) and IPV vaccine
(trivalent, inactivated polio vaccine), and Vaxelis (Merck), which consists
of PRP-­OMP combined with DTaP, IPV, and hepatitis B vaccine.
The Hib conjugate vaccines stimulate circulating anticapsular antibody and provide long-­term immunity through B-­cell memory.

Prophylaxis

Unvaccinated children <48 months old who are in close contact with an
index case of invasive Hib infection are at increased risk for invasive infection. The risk for secondary disease for children >3 months old is inversely
related to age. About half the secondary cases among susceptible household contacts occur in the first week after hospitalization of the index case.
Because many children are now protected against Hib by prior immunization, the need for prophylaxis has greatly decreased. When prophylaxis
is used, rifampin is indicated for all members of the household or close-­
contact group, including the index patient, if the group includes one or
more children <48 months old who are not fully immunized.
Parents of children hospitalized for invasive Hib disease should be
informed of the increased risk for secondary infection in other young
children in the same household if they are not fully immunized. Parents
of children exposed to a single case of invasive Hib disease in a childcare
center or nursery school should be similarly informed, although there is
disagreement about the need for rifampin prophylaxis for these children.
For prophylaxis, children should be given rifampin orally (0-­1 months
old, 10 mg/kg/dose; >1 month old, 20 mg/kg/dose, not to exceed 600 mg/
dose) once daily for 4 consecutive days. The adult dose is 600 mg once
daily. Rifampin prophylaxis is not recommended for pregnant women.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 242 u Moraxella catarrhalis

Chapter 241

Chancroid (Haemophilus
ducreyi)
H. Dele Davies and Shirley Delair
Chancroid is a sexually transmitted disease characterized by painful
genital ulceration and inguinal lymphadenopathy.

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Chancroid is caused by Haemophilus ducreyi, a fastidious gram-­
negative bacillus. It is most common in many low-­and middle-­income
countries but also occurs sporadically in high-­income countries. Most
cases in high-­income countries occur in returning travelers (90% are
male) from endemic areas or occasionally in localized urban outbreaks
associated with commercial sex workers. Chancroid is a risk factor for
transmission of HIV. Diagnosis of chancroid in infants and children is
strong evidence of sexual abuse. Male circumcision lowers the risk for
chancroid. The incidence of chancroid has declined significantly since
1981 and remains low in the United States.

1759

Patients with chancroid should be evaluated for other sexually transmitted infections, including syphilis, genital herpes, hepatitis B virus, HIV,
chlamydia, and gonorrhea; an estimated 10% have concomitant syphilis or
genital herpes. If initial HIV or syphilis testing is negative, patients should
be tested again in 3 months because of the high rates of co-­infections. In
low-­and middle-­income countries, patients with a compatible genital
ulcer are treated for both chancroid and syphilis. All sexual contacts of
patients with chancroid should be evaluated and treated.

COMPLICATIONS

Complications include phimosis in men and secondary bacterial infection. Bubo formation may occur in untreated cases. Genital ulceration
as a syndrome increases the risk for transmission of HIV.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 242

Moraxella catarrhalis
Timothy F. Murphy and
Oscar G. Gómez-­Duarte

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period is 4-­7 days, with a small, inflammatory papule
on the preputial orifice or frenulum in men and on the labia, fourchette, or perineal region in women. The lesion becomes pustular,
eroded, and ulcerative within 2-­3 days. The ulcer edge is classically
ragged and undermined. Without treatment, the ulcers may persist
for weeks to months. Painful, tender inguinal lymphadenitis occurs
in >50% of cases, more often among men. The lymphadenopathy can
become fluctuant to form buboes, which can spontaneously rupture.

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis is usually established by the clinical presentation and the
exclusion of both syphilis (Treponema pallidum) and herpes simplex
virus infections. The ulcer of chancroid is accompanied by concurrent
lymphadenopathy that is usually unilateral, unlike lymphogranuloma venereum (see Chapter 272.4). Genital herpes is characterized
by vesicular lesions with a history of recurrence (see Chapter 299).
Gram stain of ulcer secretions may show gram-­negative coccobacilli in
parallel clusters (“school of fish”). Culture requires expensive, special
media and has a sensitivity of only 80%. There are currently no U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) tests for H. ducreyi. PCR and indirect immunofluorescence using monoclonal antibodies are available as research tools and
are performed by some clinical laboratories using their own in-­house
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)–verified kits.

TREATMENT

Most H. ducreyi organisms are resistant to penicillin and ampicillin because of plasmid-­mediated β-­lactamase production. Spread of
plasmid-­mediated resistance among H. ducreyi has resulted in lack
of efficacy of previously useful drugs such as sulfonamides and tetracyclines. Chancroid is easy to treat if recognized early. The current
treatment recommendation is for azithromycin (1 g as a single dose
orally [PO]) or ceftriaxone (250 mg as a single dose intramuscularly)
or ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily PO for 3 days) or erythromycin
(500 mg 3 times daily PO for 7 days), the latter most often used in low-­
and middle-­income countries, Fluctuant nodes may require drainage.
Symptoms usually resolve within 3-­7 days. Relapses can usually be
treated successfully with the original treatment regimen. Patients with
HIV infection may require a longer duration of treatment. Persistence
of the ulcer and the organism after therapy should raise suspicion of
resistance to the prescribed antibiotic.

Moraxella catarrhalis is an unencapsulated, gram-­negative diplococcus
and is a human-­specific pathogen that colonizes the respiratory tract
beginning in infancy. Patterns of colonization and infection with M.
catarrhalis are changing in countries where pneumococcal conjugate
vaccines are used widely. The most important clinical manifestation of
M. catarrhalis infection in children is otitis media.

ETIOLOGY

M. catarrhalis has long been considered to be an upper respiratory tract
commensal. Substantial genetic heterogeneity exists among strains of
M. catarrhalis. Several outer membrane proteins demonstrate sequence
differences among strains, particularly in regions of the proteins that
are exposed on the bacterial surface. M. catarrhalis endotoxin lacks
repeating polysaccharide side chains and is thus a lipooligosaccharide
(LOS). In contrast to other gram-­negative respiratory pathogens, such
as Haemophilus influenzae and Neisseria meningitidis, the LOS of M.
catarrhalis is relatively conserved among strains; only three serotypes
(A, B, and C), based on oligosaccharide structure, have been identified. Genetic and antigenic differences among strains account for the
observation that resolving an infection by one strain does not induce
protective immunity to other strains. M. catarrhalis causes recurrent
infections, which generally represent reinfection by new strains.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The ecologic niche of M. catarrhalis is the human respiratory tract.
The bacterium has not been recovered from animals or environmental sources. Age is the most important determinant of the prevalence
of upper respiratory tract colonization. Common throughout infancy,
nasopharyngeal colonization is a dynamic process with active turnover as a result of acquisition and clearance of strains of M. catarrhalis.
Some geographic variation in rates of colonization is observed. On the
basis of monthly or bimonthly cultures, colonization during the first
year of life may range from 33% to 100%. Several factors likely account
for this variability among studies, including living conditions, daycare
attendance, hygiene, environmental factors (e.g., household smoking),
and genetics of the population. The prevalence of colonization steadily
decreases with age. Understanding nasopharyngeal colonization patterns is important, because the pathogenesis of otitis media involves
migration of the bacterium from the nasopharynx to the middle ear
via the eustachian tube.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1760 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
The widespread use of pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccines
in many countries has resulted in alteration of patterns of nasopharyngeal colonization in the population. A relative decrease in
colonization by vaccine pneumococcal serotypes and M. catarrhalis
has resulted in a decreased number of new upper respiratory infection episodes associated with Streptococcus pneumoniae and M.
catarrhalis.

PATHOGENESIS OF INFECTION

Strains of M. catarrhalis differ in their virulence properties. The species is composed of complement-­resistant and complement-­sensitive
genetic lineages, with the complement-­resistant strains being more
strongly associated with virulence. Strains that cause infection in children differ in several phenotypic characteristics from strains that cause
infection in adults, in whom the most common clinical manifestation
is lower respiratory tract infection in the setting of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.
The presence of several adhesin molecules with differing specificities for various host cell receptors reflects the importance of adherence
to the human respiratory epithelial surface in the pathogenesis of infection. M. catarrhalis has long been viewed as an exclusively extracellular
pathogen. However, the bacterium is now known to invade multiple
cell types, including bronchial epithelial cells, small airway cells, and
type 2 alveolar cells. In addition, M. catarrhalis resides intracellularly
in lymphoid tissue, providing a reservoir for persistence in the human
respiratory tract. As with many gram-­negative bacteria, M. catarrhalis
sheds vesicles from its surface during growth. These vesicles are internalized by respiratory epithelial cells and mediate several virulence
mechanisms, including B-­cell activation, induction of inflammation,
and delivery of β-­lactamases. Analysis of genomes reveals modest
genetic heterogeneity among strains.
M. catarrhalis forms biofilms in vitro and in the middle ears of children with chronic and recurrent otitis media. It also promotes stable
polymicrobial biofilms by enhancing the survival of other bacterial colonizing otopathogens. Biofilms are communities of bacteria encased
in a matrix attached to a surface. Bacteria in biofilms are more resistant
to antibiotics and to host immune responses than bacteria growing
individually in planktonic form.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

M. catarrhalis causes predominantly mucosal infections in children.
The mechanism of infection is migration of the infecting strains from
the nasopharynx to the middle ear in the case of otitis media or to the
sinuses in the case of sinusitis. The inciting event for both otitis media
and sinusitis is often a preceding viral infection.

Acute Otitis Media

Approximately 80% of children have one or more episodes of otitis
media by age 3 years. Otitis media is the most common reason that
children receive antibiotics. On the basis of culture of middle ear
fluid obtained by tympanocentesis, the predominant causes of acute
otitis media are S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and M. catarrhalis. M.
catarrhalis is cultured from the middle ear fluid in 15–20% of patients
with acute otitis media. When more sensitive methods (e.g., polymerase chain reaction [PCR]) are used, the number of middle ear
fluid samples from children with otitis media in which M. catarrhalis
is detected is substantially greater than by culture alone. The distribution of the causative agents of otitis media is changing as a result of
widespread administration of pneumococcal conjugate vaccines, with
M. catarrhalis and H. influenzae proportionally more common than S.
pneumoniae.
Acute otitis media caused by M. catarrhalis is clinically milder than
otitis media caused by H. influenzae or S. pneumoniae, with less fever
and lower prevalence of a red, bulging tympanic membrane. However,
substantial overlap in symptoms is seen, making it impossible to predict etiology in an individual child on the basis of clinical features.
Tympanocentesis is required to make an etiologic diagnosis but is not
performed routinely, and thus treatment of otitis media is generally
empirical.

Recurrent Otitis Media and Otitis Media with
Effusion

Otitis media with effusion refers to the presence of fluid in the middle
ear in the absence of signs and symptoms of acute infection. Children
who experience four or more episodes of acute otitis media in a year or
who have at least 8 months of middle ear effusion in a year are defined
as otitis prone. These children have conductive hearing loss, which
places them at risk for speech delays and altered language development. Analysis of middle ear fluid from children with otitis media with
effusion using sensitive molecular techniques (e.g., PCR) indicates that
bacterial DNA is present in up to 80% of samples from such children.
Indeed, M. catarrhalis DNA is present, both alone and as a copathogen, in a larger proportion of cases of otitis media with effusion than
of acute otitis media. Biofilms may account for these observations,
although definitive evidence is lacking.

Sinusitis

A small proportion of viral upper respiratory tract infections are complicated by bacterial sinusitis. According to findings of studies that
use sinus puncture, M. catarrhalis accounts for approximately 20% of
cases of acute bacterial sinusitis in children and a smaller proportion in
adults. Sinusitis caused by M. catarrhalis is clinically indistinguishable
from that caused by S. pneumoniae or H. influenzae.

Bacteremia

M. catarrhalis rarely causes bacteremia or invasive infections in children. When bacteremia occurs, the usual source is the respiratory tract.
Some children have underlying immunocompromising conditions, but
no particular immunodeficiency is associated with invasive M. catarrhalis infections.

Pneumonia

M. catarrhalis is an uncommon cause of community-­acquired pneumonia in children. Among older patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, M. catarrhalis is associated with acute exacerbations.

DIAGNOSIS

The clinical diagnosis of otitis media is made by demonstration of
erythema and bulging of the tympanic membrane and/or fluid in the
middle ear by pneumatic otoscopy. A tympanocentesis is required to
establish an etiologic diagnosis, but this procedure is not performed
routinely. Thus the choice of antibiotic for otitis media is empirical
and generally based on guidelines. Management of bacterial sinusitis is
also empirical, because determining the etiology of sinusitis requires a
sinus puncture, also a procedure that is not performed routinely.
The key to making a microbiologic diagnosis is distinguishing M.
catarrhalis from commensal Neisseria organisms that are part of the
normal upper respiratory tract flora. Indeed, the difficulty in distinguishing colonies of M. catarrhalis from Neisseria spp. explains in part
why M. catarrhalis has been overlooked in the past as a respiratory
tract pathogen. M. catarrhalis produces round, opaque colonies that
can be slid across the agar surface without disruption—the “hockey
puck sign.” In addition, after 48 hours, M. catarrhalis colonies tend to
be larger than Neisseria and take on a pink color. A variety of biochemical tests distinguish M. catarrhalis from Neisseria spp., and commercially available kits based on these tests are available.
Sensitive tests that employ PCR to detect respiratory tract bacterial
pathogens in human respiratory tract secretions are in development. In
addition, metagenomics next-­generation sequencing is a noninvasive
option to make a diagnosis of upper or lower respiratory infections associated with M. catarrhalis through evaluation of bacterial-­derived DNA
in blood samples. Their application will likely contribute new information about the epidemiology and disease patterns of M. catarrhalis.

TREATMENT

A high proportion of cases of M. catarrhalis otitis media resolve spontaneously. Treatment of otitis media is empirical, and clinicians are
advised to follow guidelines of the American Academy of Pediatrics
(see Chapter 680).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 243 u Pertussis (Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella parapertussis) 1761
Strains of M. catarrhalis rapidly acquired β-­lactamase worldwide in
the 1970s and 1980s, rendering essentially all strains resistant to amoxicillin. When M. catarrhalis is present as a copathogen in otitis media, its
β-­lactamase reduces the susceptibility of nontypeable H. influenzae and
S. pneumoniae to amoxicillin. Antimicrobial susceptibility patterns have
remained relatively stable for decades. However, strains of M. catarrhalis
that are resistant to macrolides and fluoroquinolones have been isolated
in several centers in Asia. Careful surveillance will be important to track
the potential emergence of resistant strains more widely. Most strains of
M. catarrhalis are susceptible to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, extended-­
spectrum cephalosporins, macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin),
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, and fluoroquinolones.

PREVENTION

Vaccines to prevent otitis media and other infections caused by M.
catarrhalis are under development, but none is yet available.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 243

Pertussis (Bordetella
pertussis and Bordetella
parapertussis)
Emily E. Souder and Sarah S. Long
Pertussis is an acute respiratory tract infection; the term pertussis
means “intense cough” and is preferable to whooping cough, because
most infected individuals do not “whoop.”

ETIOLOGY

Bordetella pertussis is the cause of epidemic pertussis and the usual
cause of sporadic pertussis. Bordetella parapertussis is an occasional
cause of sporadic pertussis that contributes significantly to total cases
of pertussis in Eastern and Western Europe and has been detected during occasional regional pertussis outbreaks in the United States. B. pertussis and B. parapertussis are exclusive pathogens of humans and some
primates. Bordetella holmesii, first identified as a cause of bacteremia
in immunocompromised hosts without cough illness, is increasingly
reported to cause pertussis-­like cough illness in small outbreaks in
healthy persons. Bordetella bronchiseptica is a common animal pathogen. Occasional reports in humans describe a variety of body sites
involved, and cases typically occur in immunocompromised persons
or young children with intense exposure to animals. Bordetella petrii,
frequently found in soil, has been reported in cases of osteomyelitis,
mastoiditis, and chronic respiratory infection in patients with cystic
fibrosis. Bordetella hinzii has been isolated from the respiratory tract
of poultry and rodents and has rarely been associated with human
disease, including endocarditis, bacteremia, and urinary tract infection. Protracted coughing (which in some cases can be paroxysmal)
is attributable sporadically to Mycoplasma, parainfluenza viruses,
influenza viruses, enteroviruses, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), or
adenoviruses.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

A recent modeling study estimated that in 2014, 24.1 million cases
of pertussis and 160,700 deaths caused by pertussis occurred worldwide in children <5 years, reflecting significantly higher numbers than
actual case counts. Before vaccination was available, pertussis was the
leading cause of death from communicable disease among U.S. children <14 years, with 10,000 deaths annually. Widespread use of whole
cell pertussis vaccine (DTP) led to a >99% decline in cases. After the

low U.S. number of 1,010 cases reported in 1976, there was an increase
in annual pertussis incidence to 1.2 cases per 100,000 population from
1980 through 1989, with epidemic pertussis in many states in 1989–
1990, 1993, and 1996. Since then, pertussis has become increasingly
endemic, with shifting burden of disease to young infants, adolescents,
and adults. By 2004, the incidence of reported pertussis in the United
States was 8.9 cases per 100,000 in the general population and approximately 150 per 100,000 in infants <2 months, with 25,827 total cases
reported, the highest since 1959. A total of 40 pertussis-­related deaths
were reported in 2005, and 16 pertussis-­related deaths were reported in
2006; >90% of these cases occurred in infants.
Prospective and serologic studies show that pertussis is underrecognized, especially among adolescents and adults, in whom the actual
number of U.S. cases is estimated to be 600,000 annually. A number
of studies have documented pertussis in 13–32% of adolescents and
adults with cough illness for >7 days. Responding to these changes in
epidemiology, vaccination containing tetanus toxoid, reduced-­content
diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis antigens (Tdap) was recommended in 2006 for 11-­to 12-­year-­olds and was aimed to enhance control. With >70% uptake of Tdap in adolescents, the burden of disease in
young adolescents fell commensurately, but without evidence of protection of the community (herd) of young infants, older adolescents, and
adults. An epidemiologic shift has occurred as a result of substantial
and rapid waning of protection after both DTaP and Tdap in the aging
cohort of children and adolescents who were not primed with DTP
(whole cell) vaccine, which was no longer used in the United States
after 1997. The >42,000 cases of pertussis and 20 deaths reported in
2012 were the highest numbers in >50 years. A shift in disease burden
was observed among 7-­to 10-­year-­olds in 2010, 13-­to 14-­year-­olds in
2012, and 14-­to 16-­year-­olds in 2014 as the cohort of solely DTaP-­
vaccinated persons aged.
Neither natural disease nor vaccination provides complete or lifelong
immunity against pertussis reinfection or disease. Subclinical reinfection undoubtedly contributed significantly to immunity against disease
ascribed previously to both vaccine and prior infection. The resurgence of
pertussis can be attributed to a variety of factors, including partial control
of pertussis leading to less continuous exposure and increased awareness
and improved diagnostics. Rapidly waning vaccine-­induced immunity and
pathogen adaptation are the most important factors currently. Although
the DTaP series is protective short-­term, vaccine effectiveness wanes rapidly, with estimates of only 10% protection 8.5 years after the fifth dose.
Tdap protection also is short-­lived, with efficacy falling from >70% initially
to 34% within 2-­4 years. A retrospective cohort study of children born
between 1999 and 2016 found that the risk of pertussis among immunized
children was 5 times higher ≥3 years after vaccination compared with
<1 year after vaccination. Divergence of circulating strains from vaccine
strains began with the introduction of DTP, but with the exclusive use of
acellular pertussis vaccines, pertactin-­deficient strains emerged and have
become dominant in countries where these vaccines are used. Pertactin-­
deficient B. pertussis was first reported in the United States from a Philadelphia infant case collection from 2008 to 2011. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) subsequently reported the earliest U.S.
isolate from 1994 and rapid dominance of pertactin-­deficient strains in the
United States since 2010. Despite the role of pertactin as a bacterial virulence factor, illness severity in infants with pertactin-­deficient B. pertussis
is similar to that of pertactin-­producing strains. Pending introduction of
novel pertussis vaccine(s) that reduce colonization and transmission, pertussis will continue to be endemic, with cycling epidemics.

PATHOGENESIS

Bordetella organisms are small, fastidious, gram-­negative coccobacilli that colonize only ciliated epithelium. The exact mechanism of
disease symptomatology remains unknown. Bordetella species share
a high degree of DNA homology among virulence genes. Only B. pertussis expresses pertussis toxin (PT), the major virulence protein.
PT has numerous proven biologic activities (e.g., histamine sensitivity, insulin secretion, leukocyte dysfunction). Although injection of
PT in experimental animals causes lymphocytosis immediately by
rerouting lymphocytes to remain in the circulating blood pool, PT

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1762 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
does not cause cough. PT appears to have a central, but not a singular, role in pathogenesis. B. pertussis produces an array of other
biologically active substances, many of which are postulated to have
a role in disease and immunity. After aerosol acquisition, filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA), some agglutinogens (especially fimbriae [Fim] types 2 and 3), and the 69-­kDa pertactin (Prn) protein
are important for attachment to ciliated respiratory epithelial cells.
Tracheal cytotoxin, adenylate cyclase, and PT appear to inhibit
clearance of organisms. Tracheal cytotoxin, dermonecrotic factor,
and adenylate cyclase are postulated to be predominantly responsible
for the local epithelial damage that produces respiratory symptoms
and facilitates absorption of PT. Both antibody and cellular immune
responses follow infection and immunization. Antibody to PT neutralizes toxin, and antibody to Prn enhances opsonophagocytosis.
Both disease and DTP appear to drive a mixed cellular and antibody
(Th1) immunologic response, whereas both DTaP and Tdap drive a
narrow, antibody-­dominant (Th2) response.
Pertussis is extremely contagious, with attack rates as high as 100%
in susceptible individuals exposed to aerosol droplets at close range.
High airborne transmission rates were shown in a baboon model of
pertussis despite vaccination with the acellular vaccine. B. pertussis
does not survive for prolonged periods in the environment. Chronic
carriage by humans is not documented. After intense exposure, as in
households, the rate of subclinical infection is as high as 80% in fully
immunized or previously infected individuals. When carefully sought,
a symptomatic source case can be found for most patients—usually a
sibling or related adult.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Classically, pertussis is a prolonged disease, divided into catarrhal,
paroxysmal, and convalescent stages. The catarrhal stage (1-­2 weeks)
begins insidiously after an incubation period ranging from 3 to 12 days
with nondistinctive symptoms of congestion and rhinorrhea variably
accompanied by low-­grade fever, sneezing, lacrimation, and conjunctival suffusion. As initial symptoms wane, coughing marks the onset
of the paroxysmal stage (2-­6 weeks). The cough begins as a dry, intermittent, irritative hack and evolves into the inexorable paroxysms that
are the hallmark of pertussis. A well-­appearing, playful toddler with
insignificant provocation suddenly expresses an anxious aura and may
clutch a parent or comforting adult before beginning a machine-­gun
burst of uninterrupted cough on a single exhalation, chin and chest
held forward, tongue protruding maximally, eyes bulging and watering, face purple, until coughing ceases and a loud whoop follows as
inspired air traverses the still partially closed airway. Posttussive emesis is common, and exhaustion is universal. The number and severity
of paroxysms escalate over days to a week and remain at that plateau
for days to weeks. At the peak of the paroxysmal stage, patients may
have one or more episodes hourly. As the paroxysmal stage fades into
the convalescent stage (≥2 weeks), the number, severity, and duration
of episodes diminish.
Infants <3 months old do not display the classic stages. The catarrhal
phase lasts only a few days or is unnoticed, and then, after the most
insignificant startle from a draft, light, sound, sucking, or stretching,
a well-­appearing young infant begins to choke, gasp, gag, and flail the
extremities, with face reddened. Cough may not be prominent, especially in the early phase, and whoop is infrequent. Apnea and cyanosis
can follow a coughing paroxysm, or apnea can occur as the only symptom (without cough). Both are more common with pertussis than with
neonatal viral infections. The paroxysmal and convalescent stages in
young infants are lengthy. Paradoxically, in infants, cough and whooping may become louder and more classic in convalescence. “Exacerbations” of paroxysmal coughing can occur throughout the first year of
life with subsequent respiratory illnesses; these are not a result of recurrent infection or reactivation of B. pertussis.
Adolescents and previously immunized children have foreshortening of all stages of pertussis. Adults have no distinct stages. Classically,
adolescents and adults describe a sudden feeling of strangulation followed by uninterrupted coughs, feeling of suffocation, bursting headache, diminished awareness, and then a gasping breath, usually without

a whoop. Posttussive emesis and intermittency of paroxysms separated
by hours of well-­being are specific clues to the diagnosis. At least 30%
of adolescents and adults with pertussis have nonspecific cough illness,
distinguished only by duration, which usually is >21 days.
Findings on physical examination generally are uninformative. Signs
of lower respiratory tract disease are not expected unless complicating
secondary bacterial pneumonia is present. Conjunctival hemorrhages
and petechiae on the upper body are common.

DIAGNOSIS

Pertussis should be suspected in any individual who has a pure or predominant complaint of cough, especially if the following features are
absent: fever, malaise or myalgia, exanthem or enanthem, sore throat,
hoarseness, tachypnea, wheezes, and rales. For sporadic cases, a clinical
case definition of cough of ≥14 days’ duration with at least one associated symptom of paroxysms, whoop, or posttussive vomiting has a
sensitivity of 81% and specificity of 58% for confirmation of pertussis. Pertussis should be suspected in older children whose cough illness is escalating at 7-­10 days and whose coughing is not continuous,
but rather comes in bursts. Pertussis should be suspected in infants <3
months old with gagging, gasping, apnea, cyanosis, or a brief resolved
unexplained event (BRUE). Sudden infant death occasionally is caused
by B. pertussis.
Adenoviral infections usually are distinguishable by associated features, such as fever, sore throat, and conjunctivitis. Mycoplasma causes
protracted episodic coughing, but patients usually have a history of
fever, headache, and systemic symptoms at the onset of disease as well
as more continuous cough and the frequent finding of rales on auscultation of the chest. Epidemics of Mycoplasma and B. pertussis in young
adults can be difficult to distinguish on clinical grounds. Although pertussis often is included in the differential diagnosis of young infants
with afebrile pneumonia, B. pertussis is not associated with staccato
cough (breath with every cough), purulent conjunctivitis, tachypnea,
rales, or wheezes that typify infection by Chlamydia trachomatis or
predominant lower respiratory tract signs that typify infection by RSV.
Unless an infant with pertussis has secondary pneumonia and then
appears ill, the findings on examination between paroxysms, including
respiratory rate, are entirely normal. Foreign body aspiration should be
considered in the differential diagnosis.
Leukocytosis (15,000-­
100,000 cells/μL) caused by absolute lymphocytosis is characteristic in the catarrhal stage. Lymphocytes are
normal small cells, rather than the large, atypical lymphocytes seen
with viral infections. Adults, partially immune children, and occasionally infants may have less impressive lymphocytosis. Absolute
increase in neutrophils suggests a different diagnosis or secondary
bacterial infection. Eosinophilia is not a manifestation of pertussis.
A severe course and death are correlated with rapid-­rise and extreme
leukocytosis (median peak white blood cell count in fatal vs nonfatal
cases: 94,000 vs 18,000/μL, respectively) and thrombocytosis (median
peak platelet count in fatal vs nonfatal cases: 782,000 vs 556,000/μL,
respectively). Chest radiographic findings are only mildly abnormal
in the majority of hospitalized infants, showing perihilar infiltrate or
edema (sometimes with a butterfly appearance) and variable atelectasis. Parenchymal consolidation suggests secondary bacterial infection.
Pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and subcutaneous emphysema
can be seen occasionally.
Methods for confirmation of infection by B. pertussis (culture,
polymerase chain reaction [PCR], serology) have limitations in sensitivity, specificity, or practicality, and the relative value of tests depends
on the setting, phase of disease, and purpose of use (e.g., as clinical diagnostic vs epidemiologic tools). PCR testing on nasopharyngeal wash specimens is the laboratory test of choice for B. pertussis
identification. Both stand-­alone and multiplex assays are U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) cleared and available commercially.
PCR assays using only single primers (IS481) cannot differentiate
between some Bordetella spp. and do not detect B. parapertussis. Multiplex assays using multiple targets can distinguish species. All assays
detect pertactin-­deficient strains. For culture, a specimen is obtained
by deep nasopharyngeal aspiration or with the use of a flexible swab

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 243 u Pertussis (Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella parapertussis) 1763
(Dacron or calcium alginate–tipped) held in the posterior nasopharynx
for 15-­30 seconds (or until the cough occurs). A 1% casamino acid liquid
is acceptable for holding a specimen up to 2 hours; Stainer-­Scholte broth
or Regan-­Lowe semisolid transport medium is used for longer transport
periods, up to 4 days. The preferred isolation media are Regan-­Lowe
charcoal agar with 10% horse blood and 5-­40 μg/mL cephalexin and
Stainer-­Scholte media with cyclodextrin resins. Cultures are incubated
at 35–37°C in a humid environment and examined daily for 7 days for
slow-­growing, tiny, glistening colonies. Results of culture and PCR are
expected to be positive in unimmunized, untreated children during the
catarrhal and early paroxysmal stages of disease. However, less than 20%
of culture or PCR tests have positive results in partially or remotely immunized individuals tested in the paroxysmal stage.
Serologic tests for detection of change in antibodies to B. pertussis
antigens between acute and convalescent samples are the most sensitive diagnostic tests in immunized individuals and are useful epidemiologically. A single serum sample showing IgG antibody to PT >90
IU/mL (>2 standard deviations [SD] above the mean of the immunized
population) indicates recent symptomatic infection and usually is positive in the mid-­paroxysmal phase. Tests for IgA and IgM pertussis antibody, or antibody to antigens other than PT, are not reliable methods
for serologic diagnosis of pertussis.

TREATMENT

Infants <3 months old with suspected pertussis usually are hospitalized, as are many 3-­to 6-­month-­old patients (i.e., unless witnessed
paroxysms are not severe) and patients of any age if significant complications occur. Prematurely born young infants have a high risk for
severe, potentially fatal disease, and children with underlying cardiac,
pulmonary, muscular, or neurologic disorders have increased risk of
poor outcome beyond infancy. Table 243.1 lists caveats in the assessment and care of infants with pertussis. The specific, limited goals of
hospitalization are to (1) assess progression of disease and likelihood
of life-­threatening events at peak of disease, (2) maximize nutrition,
(3) prevent or treat complications, and (4) educate parents in the natural history of the disease and in care that will be given at home. Heart
rate, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry are monitored continuously
with alarm settings so that paroxysms can be witnessed and recorded
by healthcare personnel. Detailed cough records and documentation
of feeding, vomiting, and weight change provide data to assess severity.
Features of typical paroxysms that are not life threatening are duration
<45 seconds; red, but not blue, color change; tachycardia or bradycardia
(but not <60 beats/min in infants); oxygen desaturation that spontaneously resolves rapidly at the end of the paroxysm; whooping or strength
for brisk self-­rescue at the end of the paroxysm; self-­expectorated mucus
plug; and posttussive exhaustion but not unresponsiveness. Assessing
the need to provide oxygen, stimulation, or suctioning requires skilled
personnel who can watchfully observe an infant’s ability for self-­rescue
but who will intervene rapidly and expertly when necessary. The benefit
Table 243.1  Considerations in the Assessment and Care
of Infants with Pertussis
• Infants with potentially fatal pertussis may appear well between
episodes.
• A paroxysm must be witnessed before a decision is made
between hospital and home care.
• Only analysis of carefully compiled cough record permits
assessment of severity and progression of illness.
• Suctioning of the nose, oropharynx, or trachea should not be
performed on a “preventive” schedule.
• Feeding in the period after a paroxysm may be more successful
than after napping.
• Family support begins at the time of hospitalization with empathy
for the child’s and family’s experience to date, transfer of the
burden of responsibility for the child’s safety to the healthcare
team, and delineation of assessments and treatments to be
performed.
• Family education, recruitment as part of the team, and continued
support after discharge are essential.

of a quiet, dimly lighted, undisturbed, comforting environment cannot be overestimated or forfeited in a desire to monitor and intervene.
Feeding children with pertussis is challenging. The risk of precipitating
cough by nipple feeding does not warrant nasogastric, nasojejunal, or
parenteral alimentation in most infants. The composition or thickness
of formula does not affect the quality of secretions, cough, or retention.
Large-­volume feedings are avoided.
Within 48-­72 hours, the direction and severity of disease are obvious from an analysis of the recorded information. Hospital discharge is
appropriate if, over 48 hours, disease severity is unchanged or diminished, intervention is not required during paroxysms, nutrition is
adequate, no complication has occurred, and parents are adequately
prepared for care at home. Apnea and seizures occur in the incremental
phase of illness and in patients with complicated disease. Portable oxygen, monitoring, or a suction apparatus should not be needed at home.
Infants who have apnea, paroxysms that lead to life-­threatening
events, or respiratory failure require escalating respiratory support
and frequently require intubation and pharmaceutically induced
paralysis.

Antibiotics

An antimicrobial agent always is given when pertussis is suspected
or confirmed to decrease contagiousness and to afford possible clinical
benefit. Azithromycin is the drug of choice in all age-­groups, either for
treatment or postexposure prophylaxis (Table 243.2). Macrolide resistance
has been reported rarely in the United States, and recent isolates have
retained susceptibility despite genetic strain adaptations. Infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (IHPS) is associated with macrolide use in young
infants, especially in those <14 days old, with higher risk in those receiving erythromycin vs azithromycin. The benefits of postexposure prophylaxis or treatment of infants far outweigh the risk of IHPS. Young infants
should be managed expectantly if projectile vomiting occurs. The FDA
also warns of the risk of fatal heart rhythms with the use of azithromycin in patients already at risk for cardiovascular events, especially those
with prolongation of the QT interval. Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-­SMX) is an alternative to azithromycin for infants >2 months old
and children unable to receive azithromycin. Because of its limited effectiveness, treatment of B. parapertussis is based on clinical judgment and
is considered in high-­risk populations. Agents are the same as for B. pertussis. Treatment of infections caused by other Bordetella spp. should be
undertaken with consultation of a subspecialist.

Adjunct Therapies

No rigorous clinical trial has demonstrated a beneficial effect of β2-­
adrenergic stimulants such as salbutamol and albuterol. Fussing associated with aerosol treatment triggers paroxysms. No randomized,
blinded clinical trial of sufficient size has been performed to evaluate
the usefulness of corticosteroids in the management of pertussis; their
clinical use is not warranted. A randomized, double-­blind, placebo-­
controlled trial of pertussis immunoglobulin (IGIV) was halted prematurely because of expiration/lack of additional supply of the study
product; there was no indication of clinical benefit. Standard immunoglobulin has not been studied and should not be used for treatment
or prophylaxis.

Isolation

Patients with suspected pertussis are placed in isolation with droplet
precautions to reduce close respiratory or mucous membrane contact
with respiratory secretions. All healthcare personnel should wear a
mask on entering the room. Screening for cough should be performed
on entrance of patients to emergency departments, offices, and clinics to begin isolation immediately and until 5 days after initiation of
azithromycin therapy. Children and staff with pertussis in childcare
facilities or schools should be excluded until therapy has been taken
for 5 days.

Care of Household and Other Close Contacts

Azithromycin should be given promptly to all household contacts and
other close contacts, such as those in daycare, regardless of age, history

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1764 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 243.2  Recommended Antimicrobial Treatment and Postexposure Prophylaxis for Pertussis
PRIMARY AGENTS
AGE GROUP

ALTERNATIVE AGENT*

AZITHROMYCIN

ERYTHROMYCIN

CLARITHROMYCIN

TMP-­SMX

<1 mo

Recommended agent
10 mg/kg/day in a single
dose for 5 days

Not preferred
Erythromycin is substantially
associated with infantile
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
Use if azithromycin is
unavailable; 40-­50 mg/kg/day
in 4 divided doses for 14 days

Not recommended (safety
data unavailable)

Contraindicated for infants
<2 mo of age (risk for
kernicterus)

1-­5 mo

10 mg/kg/day in a single
dose for 5 days

40-­50 mg/kg/day in 4 divided
doses for 14 days

15 mg/kg/day in 2 divided
doses for 7 days

Contraindicated at age <2 mo
For infants age ≥2 mo: TMP 8
mg/kg/day plus SMX 40 mg/
kg/day in 2 divided doses for
14 days

Infants age ≥6 mo
and children

10 mg/kg in a single
dose on day 1 (max
500 mg), then 5 mg/kg/
day (max 250 mg) on
days 2-­5

40-­50 mg/kg/day (max 2 g/day)
in 4 divided doses for 14 days

15 mg/kg/day in 2 divided
doses (max 1 g/day) for 7
days

TMP 8 mg/kg/day plus SMX
40 mg/kg/day in 2 divided
doses (max TMP: 320 mg/
day) for 14 days

Adults

500 mg in a single dose
on day 1, then 250 mg/
day on days 2-­5

2 g/day in 4 divided doses for
14 days

1 g/day in 2 divided doses for
7 days

TMP 320 mg/day to SMX
1600 mg/day in 2 divided
doses for 14 days

*Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) can be used as an alternative agent to macrolides in patients ≥2 mo old who are allergic to macrolides, who cannot tolerate macrolides,
or who are infected with a rare macrolide-­resistant strain of Bordetella pertussis.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Recommended antimicrobial agents for treatment and postexposure prophylaxis of pertussis: 2005 CDC
guidelines. MMWR. 2005;54:1–16.

of immunization, or symptoms (see Table 243.2). The same drugs and
age-­related doses used for treatment are used for prophylaxis. Visitation and movement of coughing family members in the hospital must
be assiduously controlled until therapy has been taken for 5 days. In
close contacts <7 years old who have received fewer than four doses
of DTaP, DTaP should be given to complete the recommended series.
Children <7 years old who received a third DTaP dose >6 months
before exposure, or a fourth dose ≥3 years before exposure, should be
given a booster dose. Individuals ≥9 years old should be given Tdap.
Unmasked healthcare personnel exposed to untreated cases should
be evaluated for postexposure prophylaxis and follow-­up. Coughing
healthcare personnel with or without known exposure to pertussis
should be evaluated promptly for pertussis.

COMPLICATIONS

Infants <2 months old have the highest reported rates of pertussis-­
associated hospitalization (82%), pneumonia (25%), seizures (4%),
encephalopathy (1%), and death (1%). Infants <4 months old account
for 90% of cases of fatal pertussis. Preterm birth and young maternal age
are significantly associated with fatal pertussis. Neonates with pertussis
have substantially longer hospitalizations, greater need for oxygen, and
greater need for mechanical ventilation than neonates with viral respiratory tract infection. The strategy of preventing pertussis in newborns
through the vaccination of women with Tdap during pregnancy from
27 through 36 weeks of gestation is 80–91% effective. One study found
that among infants with pertussis, disease severity was reduced in those
whose mothers were vaccinated during pregnancy, with maternal vaccination being 58% effective in preventing hospitalization.
The principal complications of pertussis are apnea, secondary infections (e.g., otitis media, pneumonia), and physical sequelae of forceful
coughing. Fever, tachypnea or respiratory distress between paroxysms,
and absolute neutrophilia are clues to pneumonia. Expected pathogens
include Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and bacteria of oropharyngeal flora. Increased intrathoracic and intraabdominal
pressure during coughing can result in conjunctival and scleral hemorrhage, petechiae on the upper body, epistaxis, pneumothorax and
subcutaneous emphysema, umbilical or inguinal hernia, and rarely,
hemorrhage in the central nervous system or retina. Laceration of the
lingual frenulum occurs occasionally.

The need for intensive care and mechanical ventilation usually is
limited to infants <3 months old and children with underlying conditions. Respiratory failure from apnea may mandate intubation and
ventilation through the days when disease peaks; the prognosis is
good. Progressive pulmonary hypertension in very young infants
and secondary bacterial pneumonia are severe complications of
pertussis and are the usual causes of death. Pulmonary hypertension and cardiogenic shock with fatal outcome are associated with
extreme elevation of lymphocyte and platelet counts. Autopsies in
fatal cases show luminal aggregates of leukocytes in the pulmonary
vasculature. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation of infants with
pertussis in whom mechanical ventilation failed has been associated
with >80% fatality (questioning the advisability of this procedure).
Exchange transfusion or leukapheresis is associated with marked
reduction in lymphocyte and platelet counts. Although recovery
has been reported in several cases, the benefit is unproven. Echocardiography should be performed in critically ill infants with pertussis
to detect the presence of pulmonary hypertension and to intervene
expeditiously.
Acute neurologic events during pertussis almost always are the
result of hypoxemia or hemorrhage associated with coughing or
apnea in young infants. Apnea or bradycardia or both may result from
apparent laryngospasm or vagal stimulation just before a coughing episode, from obstruction during an episode, or from hypoxemia after an
episode. Seizures usually are a result of hypoxemia, but hyponatremia
from excessive secretion of antidiuretic hormone during pneumonia
can occur. The only neuropathology documented in pertussis is parenchymal hemorrhage and ischemic necrosis.
Bronchiectasis has been reported rarely after pertussis. Children
who have pertussis before age 2 years may have abnormal pulmonary
function into adulthood.

PREVENTION

Universal immunization of children with pertussis vaccine, beginning
in infancy with reinforcing dose(s) through adolescence and adulthood, is central to the control of pertussis. Prevention of pertussis mortality in young infants depends on universal maternal immunization
during each pregnancy and focused full immunization of contacts,
both children and adults of all ages.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 244 u Salmonella
DTaP Vaccines

Several diphtheria and tetanus toxoids combined with acellular
pertussis vaccines (DTaP) or combination products currently are
licensed in the United States for children <7 years old. Acellular
pertussis vaccines all contain inactivated PT and two or more additional antigens (FHA, Prn, and Fim 2 and 3). Clinical effectiveness
immediately at completion of the five-­dose series is approximately
80% for illness defined as “paroxysmal cough” for >21 days. Mild
local and systemic adverse events are not uncommon, but more
serious events (i.e., persistent crying for ≥3 hours or a hypotonic
hyporesponsive episode) are rare after DTaP, are not specific to pertussis vaccine or associated with serious sequelae, and are not contraindications to subsequent doses.
Four doses of DTaP should be administered during the first 2 years
of life, generally at ages 2, 4, 6, and 15-­18 months. In high-­risk settings,
infants may be given DTaP as early as 6 weeks of age, with monthly doses
through the third dose. The fourth dose may be administered as early as
12 months of age, provided that 6 months have elapsed since the third
dose. When feasible, the same DTaP product is recommended for all
doses of the primary vaccination series. The fifth dose of DTaP is recommended for children at 4-­6 years of age; a fifth dose is not necessary if the
fourth dose in the series is administered on or after the fourth birthday.
Local reactions increase modestly in rate and severity with successive doses of DTaP. Swelling of the entire thigh or upper arm, sometimes accompanied by pain, erythema, and fever, has been reported
in 2–3% of vaccinees after the fourth or fifth dose of a variety of DTaP
products. Limitation of activity is less than might be expected. Swelling subsides spontaneously without sequelae. The pathogenesis is
unknown. Extensive limb swelling after the fourth dose of DTaP usually is not associated with a similar reaction to the fifth dose and is not
a contraindication to subsequent dose(s) of pertussis vaccines.
Exempting children from pertussis immunization should be considered only within the narrow limits as recommended. Exemptors have
significantly increased the risk for pertussis and play a role in outbreaks
of pertussis among immunized populations. Although well-­documented
pertussis confers short-­term protection, the duration of protection is
unknown; immunization should be completed on schedule in children
diagnosed with pertussis. Pertussis vaccine (DTaP or Tdap) can be administered concurrently with any vaccine on the immunization schedule.

Tdap Vaccines

Two tetanus toxoid, reduced-­diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis antigen vaccine (Tdap) products were licensed in 2005 and recommended universally in 2006 for adolescents. The preferred age for
Tdap vaccination is 11-­12 years. All adolescents and adults of any age
(including ≥65 years) who have not received Tdap should receive a
single dose of Tdap promptly, regardless of interval since Td, or at least
in place of one Td booster at the 10-­year interval, or when indicated
during wound management.
Pregnant women should be given Tdap during every pregnancy to
provide passive antibody protection to the infant until administration
of DTaP. Although Tdap can be given at any time during pregnancy,
optimal administration is early in the period between 27 through 36
weeks of gestation to maximize antibody concentration at birth. The
safety of Tdap during pregnancy and effectiveness in reducing fatal
pertussis in infants are proven. Special effort should be made to ensure
that contacts of infants have received DTaP or Tdap as recommended.
Clinical trials support the safety and immunogenicity of a second
dose of Tdap; however, antipertussis antibodies decline rapidly after the
first year. The CDC performed a decision analysis model of repeating
Tdap at either a 5-­or 10-­year interval for the general population and
concluded that “booster(s)” would have limited impact on pertussis
disease burden. There is not a recommendation for a routine second
dose of Tdap in the general population. A single dose of Tdap should
be given to children 7-­10 years of age who lack DTaP dose(s). Since
2019, the updated CDC recommendations allow use of either Tdap or
Td when Td alone is indicated for catch-­up dose(s), or for decennial
immunization, or for wound management in individuals who have
received Tdap.

1765

Vaccines Under Development

Several strategies are being tested to create pertussis vaccines that elicit
a Th1 response, dampen the density of mucosal infection and transmission, provide sustained protection against disease, and have tolerable reactogenicity. These include use of live attenuated B. pertussis, a
genetically (rather than a chemically) inactivated PT component, novel
antigens, and adjuvants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 244

Salmonella
Jeffrey S. McKinney
Salmonellosis is one of the most widely distributed and common
food-­borne and fecal-­oral diseases in humans, and Salmonellae live
in the intestinal tracts of multiple species. Salmonella infections are
a major public health problem, with disproportionate morbidity and
mortality among infants and children and in certain immunocompromised individuals.
Clinically, Salmonellae have been most broadly classified as being
either nontyphoidal or typhoidal, with the latter causing typhoid
(also known as enteric) fever. The differences in the disease manifestations from these two groups of pathogens, one predominantly
causing intestinal inflammation and the other leading to systemic disease, are increasingly understood to be related to specific
genes and pathogenicity islands in the genomes of the respective
organisms.
Most nontyphoidal serovars of Salmonella (widely distributed across
multiple host species) are rarely able to overcome defense mechanisms
in humans that limit bacterial dissemination from the intestine. Thus
in immunocompetent humans, nontyphoidal serovars usually produce
a self-­limiting gastroenteritis. By contrast, S. Typhi and S. Paratyphi
(i.e., the typhoidal strains of Salmonella, notably host-­restricted to only
humans) possess virulence traits that more readily allow them to overcome mucosal barrier functions and then cause severe systemic illness,
even in immunocompetent patients.
However, a purely binary classification of Salmonellae as nontyphoidal vs typhoidal can be a problematic oversimplification. For example,
reports from Africa have identified strains of nontyphoidal Salmonellae that are highly invasive and increasingly common. Like many
gram-­
negative bacteria, mobile or differentially expressed genetic
elements can radically alter phenotypes in Salmonellae, sometimes
in direct response to selective pressures like antimicrobial exposures
given to individual patients and/or in broader settings like agricultural
antimicrobial use.
Although DNA hybridization studies result in enough similarities
for all Salmonellae to currently be classified in the single species Salmonella enterica, serologic studies can resolve more than 2,000 serotypes. Serotype and DNA sequencing identification has helped clinical
laboratories better trace disease outbreaks, and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) has published recent guidelines for a
more consistent terminology to help both laboratory and clinical teams
confront complex classification nomenclature.
Host differences are also profoundly relevant to the outcomes of
Salmonella exposures, infections, and disease. Infants and children,
patients with certain immunologic vulnerabilities, and the extent to
which a given Salmonella infection can evade host defenses and/or
antibacterial drugs can help predict, or at least better understand,
the ultimate impact of Salmonella on both individual and public
health.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1766 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

244.1 Nontyphoidal Salmonellosis
Jeffrey S. McKinney

ETIOLOGY

Salmonellae are motile, nonsporulating, gram-­negative rods that grow
in aerobic and facultative anaerobic conditions. They remain viable at
ambient or reduced temperatures for days and may survive for weeks
in sewage, foods, pharmaceutical agents, and fecal material. They are
resistant to many physical agents but can be killed by heat to 54.4°C
(130°F) for 1 hour or 60°C (140°F) for 15 minutes.
Most serotypes of nontyphoidal Salmonella have a broad host spectrum, including both warm-­blooded and cold-­blooded vertebrates,
and even insects like flies and cockroaches. Some serotypes have more
limited host ranges, such as S. dublin in cattle (recovered in human
infections associated with unpasteurized milk) and S. choleraesuis in
pigs. In human infections, these two serotypes also have a notable
propensity to cause more bacteremia and fewer gastrointestinal symptoms as compared with many other nontyphoidal Salmonellae. In sub-­
Saharan Africa, nontyphoidal Salmonella has become a leading cause
of bacteremia. Up to 95% of the serovars associated with invasive Salmonella disease among children in this geographic region are Salmonella serovar Typhimurium (mostly of an unusual variant designated
multilocus sequence type 313), a variant of sequence type 313 that
does not express phase 2 flagella, or Salmonella serovar Enteritidis. This
information represents a deviation from the historical assumption that
nontyphoidal Salmonella is, by definition, relatively noninvasive.
In the United States, nontyphoidal Salmonella infections still generally cause gastroenteritis that is localized and self-­limiting. In these
uncomplicated cases, nontyphoidal Salmonella infection does not justify treatment with antibiotics. However, nontyphoidal infections can
be severe in the young, the elderly, and patients with vulnerabilities in
their immunity.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Salmonellosis has a significant cost to society. Globally, estimates suggest there are more than 90 million cases of Salmonella gastroenteritis
annually, causing more than 150,000 deaths. In the United States, CDC
estimates suggest an annual burden of more than 1.3 million Salmonella infections, causing more than 26,000 hospitalizations, 420 deaths,
and $400 million in direct medical costs, with approximately 30 people
with unreported Salmonella illness for every one case confirmed by a
laboratory test. Nearly half of culture-­proven nontyphoidal Salmonella
infections occur in children, with the highest incidence among infants.
With the burden of HIV infections and malnutrition in Africa, nontyphoidal Salmonella bacteremia has emerged as a major cause of morbidity and mortality among both children and adults in Africa.
Nontyphoidal Salmonella has a worldwide distribution, with the
incidence influenced by local standards of hygiene, sanitation, and
availability of safe water and food. Modern practices of mass food production and distribution increase the potential for epidemics, which
may be scattered so broadly as to only be fully appreciated via robust
national monitoring systems, such as the CDC’s FoodNet (https://
www.cdc.gov/foodnet/foodnet-­fast.html). FoodNet also helps build
capacity for food-­borne disease surveillance through close collaborations with PulseNet, EHS-­Net, Global SalmSurv, and other partners.
Poultry meat and eggs are traditionally known to be a common
source of salmonellosis, and even riding in a shopping cart next to
poultry meat is a risk factor for infection of infants. However, consumption of a wide variety of foods has now been associated with
outbreaks, including fruits, vegetables, and multiple factory-­processed
foods such as peanut butter, cookies, and infant formula.
Salmonella infections in many parts of the world may be related
to animal husbandry practices, including drug-­resistant strains that
emerge in response to the widespread use of agricultural antimicrobials. Subtherapeutic antimicrobials are often added to animal feeds to
promote animal growth. There is now strong evidence linking resistance to quinolones to the use of this group of antimicrobials in animal

feeds. Resistance to ciprofloxacin approached 10% of all nontyphoidal
Salmonella isolates assessed by the CDC in 2017.
In addition to the effect of antibiotic use in animal feeds, the relationship of Salmonella infections to prior antibiotic use in children in
the month before the infection is well recognized. This association may
be related to alterations in gut microbial ecology, which predisposes to
colonization and infection with antibiotic-­resistant Salmonella isolates.
The CDC reports that nontyphoidal Salmonella isolates during the
period 2015–2017 continue to manifest increasing rates of resistance,
with 16% of isolates being resistant to at least one essential antibiotic
(including ciprofloxacin, azithromycin, ceftriaxone, ampicillin, and
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole). Variation in resistance among different strains makes Salmonella culture and antibiotic susceptibility testing
very important.
It appears that some multidrug-­resistant (MDR) strains of Salmonella are also more virulent than susceptible strains. Poor clinical outcomes with these infections do not relate solely to the initial
empiric choice of ineffective antibiotics. Over the past 3 decades, S.
Typhimurium phage type DT104 has emerged as a globally disseminated MDR strain. Typically resistant to ampicillin, chloramphenicol,
streptomycin, sulfonamides, and tetracycline, DT104 also has the
capacity to acquire resistance to other antibiotics. Many of the resistance genes in DT104 are harbored on genomic islands. Integrons can
also encode and disseminate virulence genes.
Several risk factors are associated with outbreaks of Salmonella
infection. Animals constitute the principal source of human disease from nontyphoidal Salmonella. High-­risk pets include reptiles,
amphibians, poultry and other birds, rodents, and other small mammals. The risk of Salmonella from turtles was so high that the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) banned the interstate sale and distribution of turtles with shell length of less than 4 inches. Exposures can
also occur from contact with cages or tanks with pets, from touching
some pet foods and treats, and even at zoos without direct contact with
an infected animal.
Animals that carry Salmonella still appear healthy and clean and
can readily transmit nontyphoidal Salmonella, including in childcare
centers and schools. When nontyphoidal serovars are identified in a
childcare attendee or staff member, adherence to hygiene practices is
used to control infection. Return to school is allowed as long as stools
are contained in a young child’s diaper, toilet-­trained children do not
have accidents using the toilet, and stool frequency becomes no more
than two stools above the child’s normal stooling frequency per day.
In notable contrast to infections with typhoidal strains, demonstration
of clearance of nontyphoidal Salmonella from stool cultures is neither
sought nor required.
Given the ubiquitous nature of the organism, nosocomial infections with nontyphoidal Salmonella strains can also occur via contaminated equipment and diagnostic or pharmacologic preparations.
Patient-­to-­patient spread can also occur in hospital settings, particularly among vulnerable hosts like neonates. Nursery nosocomial
infections from Salmonella can be very difficult to control, sometimes
taking months to stop and/or serving as a source for further spread
through a hospital.

PATHOGENESIS

The estimated number of bacteria that must be ingested to cause symptomatic disease in healthy adults is 106-­108 Salmonella organisms.
Normal gastric acidity inhibits Salmonella multiplication, with most
organisms rapidly killed at gastric pH <2.0. Achlorhydria, buffering
medications, and rapid gastric emptying after gastroenterostomy allow
more viable organisms to reach the small intestine and thus lower the
infectious dose. Neonates and infants have hypochlorhydria and rapid
gastric emptying, which contribute to their increased vulnerability to
infection, even at lower inoculum exposures.
The typical intestinal response to nontyphoidal Salmonella infection is enterocolitis, with diffuse mucosal inflammation and edema,
sometimes with erosions and microabscesses. Intestinal inflammation with neutrophils and macrophages usually involves the lamina
propria. Underlying intestinal lymphoid tissue and mesenteric lymph

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 244 u Salmonella
nodes enlarge and may demonstrate small areas of necrosis. Lymphoid
hypertrophy may interfere with blood supply to the gut mucosa and/or
serve as a leading edge for intussusception. Hyperplasia of the reticuloendothelial system can also be found in the liver and spleen. If bacteremia develops, it may lead to localized infection and suppuration in
almost any organ.
Central to S. Typhimurium pathogenesis are two type III secretion systems. These systems secrete and translocate bacterial proteins
termed effectors into host cells. These effectors manipulate the host
cell to allow bacterial invasion and assembly of an intracellular niche
conducive to bacterial survival and replication. Two genomic pathogenicity islands encode these type III systems.
The Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 (SPI-­1) is involved with epithelial cell adherence and invasion (Fig. 244.1), which involves host
cell membrane ruffling caused by organized actin rearrangement (Fig.
244.2). This adherent and invasive phenotype of Salmonella is activated
under conditions like those found in the human small intestine (high
osmolarity, low oxygen).
The Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-­2) is involved with formation of the Salmonella-­containing vacuole (Fig. 244.3), creating a
replication-­permissive intracellular space (Fig. 244.4). Intracellular S.
Typhimurium is found within special vacuoles that have diverged from
the normal endocytic pathway. An ability to survive within monocytes/
macrophages is a key process for S. Typhimurium to establish a systemic infection. Survival within host cells also shields Salmonella from
antimicrobials. For example, gentamicin is not considered effective
in vivo against Salmonella, even for strains found susceptible to this
drug in vitro, because gentamicin does not effectively reach intracellular bacteria.
Bacteremia and systemic disease are possible with any Salmonella serotype, especially in individuals with reduced host defenses. Inflammatory
bowel disease or gut ischemia can cause intestinal mucosal barrier defects.
Malnutrition, corticosteroid therapy, interleukin (IL)-­
12/interferon
gamma axis defects, and posttransplant immunosuppressant agents can
significantly compromise cell-­mediated immunity. The reticuloendothelial system can be overloaded with hemoglobin or iron or have impaired
function from lymphoma or leukemia. In addition, other underlying systemic conditions can predispose to serious Salmonella infections, including sickle cell disease, collagen vascular diseases, HIV/AIDS, defects in
TH1 or TH17 immunity, and chronic granulomatous disease.
As stated earlier, neonates and infants less than 3 months of
age are also at higher risk of bacteremia from nontyphoidal Salmonella. This risk influences empiric treatment with appropriate antibiotics, even in otherwise healthy patients in this young
age-­g roup.
Patients with sickle cell disease are at very high risk for Salmonella
septicemia and osteomyelitis. This risk may be related to the presence
of numerous infarcted areas in the gastrointestinal tract, bones, and
reticuloendothelial organs, along with reduced phagocytic and opsonizing capacity of patients with sickle cell disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Acute Enteritis

The most common clinical presentation of salmonellosis is acute
enteritis. After an incubation period of 6-­72 hours (mean 24 hours),
there is often abrupt-­onset nausea, vomiting, and crampy abdominal
pain, located predominantly in the periumbilical area and the lower
abdominal quadrants. These symptoms are usually followed by mild
to severe watery diarrhea, sometimes containing blood, neutrophils,
and mucus. Although fever is a classic feature, younger infants may
exhibit a normal or subnormal temperature. Symptoms usually subside within 2-­7 days in otherwise healthy children. However, some
children experience a septicemia-­like picture, with symptoms including high fever, drowsiness, confusion, abdominal distention, meningismus, and/or seizures.

Bacteremia

After Salmonella gastroenteritis, it is estimated that 1–5% of otherwise healthy children are thought to experience transient

1767

bacteremia after nontyphoidal Salmonella in U.S. settings. Bacteremia is usually accompanied by fever in older children but is often
not associated with fever in infants. As described earlier, specific
vulnerable hosts are far more likely to have systemic infection. Children with HIV can have recurrent nontyphoidal Salmonella septicemia, despite antibiotic therapy, even without positive stool cultures
or any clear nidus of infection. Some nontyphoidal strains are more
likely to result in bacteremia, even without obvious gastrointestinal
symptoms, including S. dublin and S. choleraesuis. In Africa, nontyphoidal Salmonella is a much more common cause of pediatric
bacteremia (see next).

Nontyphoidal Salmonella Bacteremia as Emerging
Disease in Africa

In Africa, particularly sub-­Saharan Africa, nontyphoidal Salmonella
has been increasingly recognized among the most common causes
of all bacteremia in febrile children. Children age 6-­36 months are at
greatest risk, and case fatality rates can reach 25%.
Clinical features among children with invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella infections can be confusing, as diarrhea is often not a prominent feature. Furthermore, 60% of these children have an apparent
lower respiratory tract infection (perhaps from co-infection or
comorbidity). Fever is present in 95% but may have no apparent
focus. Figure 244.5 summarizes other clinical features. The lack of
specificity of these features severely compromises the ability of current clinical algorithms to identify invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella
infections. Accordingly, blood culture and clinical microbiology
systems for bacterial growth, isolation, speciation, and antibiotic
susceptibility testing are required for diagnosis and well-­informed
treatment decision-­making.
It remains unclear exactly why invasive infections by nontyphoidal
Salmonella seem so much more frequent in Africa compared with the
dominance of typhoid Salmonellae in Asia. HIV is one identified host
risk factor for nontyphoidal Salmonella infection. Indeed, recurrent
nontyphoidal Salmonella infection was part of early CDC case definitions for AIDS. However, only 20% of African children with invasive
nontyphoidal Salmonella disease are HIV positive. Other risks for
invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella may include recent or severe malaria
infections, anemia, and malnutrition.
The epidemic patterns thus far appreciated for invasive infections by
nontyphoidal Salmonella in Africa suggest that epidemics may occur
over several years, peaking in the rainy season. However, it remains
unclear how relevant human diarrheal disease or gastrointestinal carriage, or even food or zoonotic sources are, for invasive nontyphoidal
Salmonella infection in this setting. Thus optimal strategies for interrupting transmission are also not known. This is particularly problematic, given the emergence of extensive antibiotic resistance among
nontyphoidal Salmonella isolates, including the lineage referred to as
sequence type 313 (ST313).
Recent studies have attempted to better understand the geographic
spread and genetic features of ST313 lineage variants isolated internationally over time. Intriguingly, the antibiotic-­resistance patterns
of these lineages seem to correlate with some large-­scale or sequential
changes in empiric (e.g., chloramphenicol, third-­generation cephalosporins, ciprofloxacin, and azithromycin) antibiotic use. ST313 lineage genomic analysis also reveals the accumulation of pseudogenes,
in what may be crucial loss-­of-­function genetic events involved in
ST313 stepwise evolution, perhaps as part of adaptation to a more
restricted (human) host range and from an intestinal to a systemic
lifestyle.
For invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella infections in Africa, evolving resistance patterns seem likely to force increasing reliance on
more expensive treatment options. Local resistance patterns may
help empirically, but given the rapid spread of various ST313 lineages, susceptibility testing of individual patient isolates will be
needed to ensure appropriate antibiotic choices. Targeted resistance
gene sequencing, especially for gyrase mutations related to quinolone resistance, may also be warranted as that drug class becomes
more widely used.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1768 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Fig. 244.1 On contact with the epi-

Membrane
ruffle

Tight
junction
Salmonella
spp.
Actin

Epithelial
cell

SopE
SopE2
SopB

SopA

SipA
SipC

SptP
SopB

Rho GTPases

Rho GTPases
Cl–

MAPK

Cl–
NF-B
AP-1

IL-8

SspH1
AvrA

MAPK
NF-B

IL-1
IL-18
Macrophage

PMN

Nontyphoidal Salmonella Bacteremia in Other
Geographic Regions

The emergence of invasive, high-­mortality nontyphoidal Salmonella
infections in Africa underscores that the traditional binary division of
Salmonella infections into typhoidal vs nontyphoidal may be a problematic oversimplification. However, in settings outside of Africa,
nontyphoidal Salmonella infections still tend to be self-­limiting and
noninvasive and are low-­mortality events for most children who are
immunocompetent.
Risk factors for systemic spread of nontyphoidal Salmonella include
underlying sickle cell disease, HIV/AIDS, intestinal mucosal barrier
defects, malnutrition, IL-­12/interferon gamma axis defects, defects
in TH1 or TH17 immunity, corticosteroid therapy or posttransplant
immunosuppressants, reticuloendothelial system dysfunction (e.g.,
from overload with hemoglobin or iron), lymphoma or leukemia, collagen vascular diseases, and chronic granulomatous disease. Neonates
and infants less than 3 months of age are also at higher risk of bacteremia from nontyphoidal Salmonella.

Extraintestinal Focal Infection

After bacteremia, Salmonellae have the propensity to cause focal suppurative infection of many organs. The most common focal infections
involve the skeletal system, meninges, and intravascular sites. The peak
incidence of Salmonella meningitis is in infancy, and the infection may

SipB

thelial cell, Salmonellae assemble the
Salmonella pathogenicity island 1–encoded type III secretion system (TTSS1) and translocate effectors (yellow
­
spheres) into the eukaryotic cytoplasm.
Effectors such as SopE, SopE2, and
SopB then activate host Rho guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase), resulting in the rearrangement of the actin
cytoskeleton into membrane ruffles,
induction of mitogen-­activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathways, and destabilization of tight junctions. Changes in
the actin cytoskeleton, which are further modulated by the actin-­
binding
proteins SipA and SipC, lead to bacterial uptake. MAPK signaling activates the transcription factors activator
protein-­1 (AP-­1) and nuclear factor-­κB
(NF-­κB), which turn on production of
the proinflammatory polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) chemokine interleukin (IL)-­8. SipB induces caspase­1 activation in macrophages, with the
release of IL-­1β and IL-­18, augmenting
the inflammatory response. In addition, SopB stimulates Cl− secretion
by its inositol phosphatase activity.
The destabilization of tight junctions
allows the transmigration of PMNs
from the basolateral to the apical surface, paracellular fluid leakage, and
access of bacteria to the basolateral
surface. However, the transmigration
of PMNs also occurs in the absence of
tight-­junction disruption and is further
promoted by SopA. The actin cytoskeleton is restored, and MAPK signaling is
turned off by the enzymatic activities of
SptP. This also results in the downmodulation of inflammatory responses, to
which SspH1 and AvrA also contribute
by inhibiting activation of NF-­κB. (From
Haraga A, Ohlson MB, Miller SI. Salmonellae interplay with host cells. Nat Rev
Microbiol. 2008;6:53–66.)

be associated with a florid clinical course, high mortality, and neurologic sequelae in survivors.

Chronic Salmonella Carriage

Although traditionally considered a complication among adults with
Salmonella infection, chronic Salmonella carriage has important medical and epidemiologic implications and may occasionally occur in
children. Colonization of the gallbladder by S. Typhi and persistent
shedding from the gallbladder have long been appreciated. Reports suggest some nontyphoidal Salmonellae (e.g., invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella currently in Africa) can also establish long-­term carriage states.
Antibiotic treatments of Salmonella infections are paradoxical in that
the prospect of becoming a chronic carrier is believed to be increased
by exposure to antibiotics. Yet clearance of established chronic carrier
status requires prolonged medical treatment using antibiotics to which
the Salmonella is susceptible and sometimes requires gallstone or gallbladder removal.

DIAGNOSIS

Few clinical features are specific enough to Salmonella to allow differentiation from other infectious causes of gastroenteritis or diarrhea.
Serologic tests also do not have diagnostic value. Definitive diagnosis
requires identification of Salmonella via stool nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) or bacterial cultures. Stool cultures have higher yields

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 244 u Salmonella
than rectal swabs. Blood cultures are suggested for patients at higher
risk of bacteremia or endovascular focus and when enteric fever is a
concern. Additionally, cultures of bone marrow (particularly valuable

if antimicrobial agents have been administered or if stringent criteria
are met for fever of unknown origin), duodenal fluid, and urine may
be beneficial to detect enteric fever. In patients with sites of local suppuration, aspirated specimens should be Gram-­stained and cultured.
Salmonella organisms grow well on nonselective or enriched media,
such as blood agar, chocolate agar, and nutrient broth, but stool specimens containing mixed bacterial flora require a selective medium,
such as McConkey, xylose-­lysine-­deoxycholate, bismuth sulfate, or
Salmonella-­Shigella (SS) agar for isolation of Salmonella. Given Salmonella variation and evolution, it is important to pursue bacterial
isolation, species identification, and antibiotic susceptibility testing to
best inform the choice of effective therapeutic agents. State public health
laboratories require Salmonella isolates as part of outbreak detection
and investigation, increasingly via genomic characterization of strains.

TREATMENT

10 Pm

A

Appropriate therapy depends on the specific clinical presentation of
Salmonella infection. In children with gastroenteritis, rapid clinical
assessment, correction of dehydration and electrolyte disturbances,
and supportive care are key. Antimotility drugs (e.g., loperamide)
should not be given to children less than 18 years of age with acute
diarrhea, but antiemetic drugs (e.g., ondansetron) can be given to facilitate oral rehydration in children older than 4 years.
Antibiotics are generally not recommended for the treatment of isolated uncomplicated Salmonella gastroenteritis because they can disrupt normal intestinal flora and potentially prolong the fecal excretion
of Salmonella.
However, empiric antibiotics are started for young infants (<3 months
old) and for children with increased possibility of disseminated infection (e.g., children with HIV, malignancies, sickle cell disease, immunodeficiencies, or immunosuppression, as detailed earlier). In the United
States, this empiric therapy includes a third-­generation cephalosporin,
with a blood culture obtained just before the initial dose. If a patient
does not appear ill and does not have any evidence of disseminated
infection, oral azithromycin can be started, pending blood culture
results. Ampicillin, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, or a fluoroquinolone may be considered as treatment options for susceptible strains.
In cases of bacteremia, blood cultures need to be repeated to confirm clearance of infection. Transition from parenteral third-­generation

1 Pm

B

1769

Fig. 244.2 Salmonella SPI-­1–mediated effects include host cell actin

cytoskeletal rearrangements and host cell membrane ruffling as part of
Salmonella invasion. A, HeLa cell infected with Salmonella fixed and
stained for the actin cytoskeleton with phalloidin (green) and for Salmonella (yellow). B, Cos cell infected with Salmonella and prepared for
scanning electron microscopy. Cell surface extensions in the process of
enveloping the bacterium are pseudocolored green, and the microbe
is in yellow. (From Rottner K, Stradal TEB, Wehland J. Bacteria-­host-­cell
interactions at the plasma membrane: stories on actin cytoskeleton subversion. Dev Cell. 2005;9:3–17.)

Salmonella spp.

SspH2
SpvB
Ssel

Spacious
phagosome

SifA
PipB2

rs

oto

m
ule

tub

cro

Mi

SCV

Actin

Sif

SseJ

Epithelial cell

Microtubules

Nucleus
SseF
SseG
Golgi

Secretory vesicles

Fig. 244.3 Formation of the Salmonella-­containing
vacuole (SCV) and induction of the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-­2) type III secretion system (TTSS)
within the host cell. Shortly after internalization by
macropinocytosis, Salmonellae are enclosed in a spacious phagosome that is formed by membrane ruffles.
Later, the phagosome fuses with lysosomes, acidifies,
and shrinks to become adherent around the bacterium
and is called the SCV. It contains the endocytic marker
lysosomal-­
associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP­ ; purple). The Salmonella SPI-­
1
2 is induced within
the SCV and translocates effector proteins (yellow
spheres) across the phagosomal membrane several
hours after phagocytosis. The SPI-­2 effectors SifA and
PipB2 contribute to formation of Salmonella-­induced
filament along microtubules (green) and regulate microtubule motor (yellow star shape) accumulation on
the Sif and the SCV. SseJ is a deacylase that is active
on the phagosome membrane. SseF and SseG cause
microtubule bundling adjacent to the SCV and direct
Golgi-­
derived vesicle traffic toward the SCV. Actin
accumulates around the SCV in an SPI-­2–dependent
manner, in which SspH2, SpvB, and SseI are thought to
have a role. (From Haraga A, Ohlson MB, Miller SI. Salmonellae interplay with host cells. Nat Rev Microbiol.
2008;6:53–66.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1770 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
A

C

B

D

E

Fig. 244.4 Ultrastructural analysis of the distal small intestine with transmission electron microscopy. Distal small intestinal tissue was fixed with 1%

glutaraldehyde. Short segments were cut open, post fixed with osmium tetroxide, contrasted with uranyl acetate, and dehydrated with a graded ethanol series before been embedded in epoxy resin. Thin sections were contrasted with lead citrate and analyzed in a JEM-1400 transmission electron microscope (JEOL). Images were taken with TemCam-F216 camera using EM MENU software (both TVIPS). A, Enterocytes in the distal intestine of healthy
5-day old neonates exhibit large supranuclear vacuoles (SNV) in their apical cytoplasm; the nuclei are situated at the basolateral site (N). SNV contain
internalized milk proteins. Asterisks indicate intercellular spaces between enterocytes. B, 4 days after infection of 1-day-old mice with S. Typhimurium,
the epithelium is infiltrated by polymorphonuclear cells (PMN). C-E, Intraepithelial Salmonella microcolonies are observed. Some bacteria reside in
spherical vacuoles, which contain electron-dense material resembling the content of SNVs. Other bacteria appear to be localized in tight membranebound vesicles with few visible connections between them, or with vesicles filled with electron dense material. (From Zhang K, Griffiths G, Repnik U,
Hornef M. Seeing is understanding: Salmonella’s way to penetrate the intestinal epithelium. Int J Med Microbiol. 2018 Jan;308:97-106. Fig. 2.)

Fever: 95% of cases, no
apparent focus in 35%

Blood tests: Severe anemia in 40–50%
of adults and 25–40% of children,
95% of adults and 20% of children are
HIV positive, CD4 count <200 cells
per µL in 80% of adults

Pneumonia: 60% of children
and 30% of adults have an
apparent lower respiratory
tract infection focus, commonly
due to co-infection
Splenomegaly: 30–45% of cases
Diarrhea: 20–50% of cases, but
often not a prominent feature

Hepatomegaly: 15–35% of cases

Fig. 244.5 Clinical features of invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella (NTS)

disease in adults and children in Africa. (From Feasey NA, Dougan
G, Kingsley RA, et al. Invasive non-­typhoidal Salmonella disease: an
emerging and neglected tropical disease in Africa. Lancet. 2012;379:
2489–2499.)

cephalosporin to oral azithromycin or a fluoroquinolone can be considered after documented clearance of blood cultures and exclusion of

secondary sites, for a total 7-­to 10-­day course. Disseminated disease
needs to be rigorously excluded, as therapy is more prolonged for meningitis (4 weeks) and osteomyelitis or other focal metastatic infections
(4-­6 weeks).
Given the heterogeneity, evolution, and rapid geographic spread of
Salmonella, it is important to maintain awareness of resistance trends
as related to local and national community isolate patterns, any relevant
interstate outbreaks, and global patterns of emerging Salmonella resistance. Serially updated resources with this information include local
microbiology laboratory data and open-­access reporting systems like the
U.S. National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System for Enteric
Bacteria (NARMS). In NARMS reports from 2018, the majority (81%)
of nontyphoidal Salmonella from humans were still not resistant to any
of the antimicrobials tested. However, approximately 3%, 10%, and 0.3%
of nontyphoidal Salmonella isolated from humans were intrinsically
resistant to ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, and azithromycin, respectively.
Some contemporary nontyphoidal Salmonellae are of particular
interest, given their resistance to antimicrobials. S. Typhimurium
DT104 spread globally in the 1990s, when it was resistant to ampicillin,
chloramphenicol, streptomycin, sulfonamides, and tetracycline. DT104
now sometimes also has reduced susceptibility to fluoroquinolones.
Nontyphoidal Salmonella ST313 lineages (described earlier) continue

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 244 u Salmonella
to show resistance pattern evolution in Africa. In the United States, S.
Infantis has now supplanted other leading serotypes in poultry and not
only exhibits deceased susceptibility to fluoroquinolones because of a
gyrA pathogenic variant but also contains an MDR plasmid that carries up to 10 resistance genes, conferring resistance to cephalosporins,
tetracycline, chloramphenicol, and sulfonamides. This MDR strain of
serovar Infantis has been reported to account for up to 35% of the nontyphoidal Salmonella infections in Israel.

PROGNOSIS

Most otherwise healthy children with Salmonella gastroenteritis
recover fully without antimicrobial treatment. Malnourished children
and those who do not receive adequate supportive care can be at risk
for prolonged diarrhea and complications. Young infants and immunocompromised patients often have systemic involvement, and children with HIV can have a florid and recurring course.
After infection, nontyphoidal Salmonella are excreted in feces for a
median of 5 weeks, during which time the recovering patient can infect
others via fecal-­oral routes or by contaminating foods. A prolonged
carrier state is rare in children but is more common among those with
biliary tract disease and/or cholelithiasis.

PREVENTION

Control of transmission of Salmonella infections to humans requires
control of the infection in animal reservoirs, judicious use of agricultural antimicrobials, prevention of contamination of foodstuffs,
and appropriate standards of food processing and inspection. Parents
should be advised about the risk of various pets (especially reptiles,
amphibians, and rodents).
Large outbreaks are often related to mass food production, presenting among widely geographically distributed patients. In the United
States, CDC outbreak investigations are reported, via this site: https:
//www.cdc.gov/Salmonella/outbreaks.html, which includes maps and
epidemiologic, traceback, and laboratory data, including outbreaks
linked to specific foods, animals, and other sources. Awareness of these
events can potentially blunt the extent of a given outbreak and/or alert
caregivers of vulnerable hosts.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

244.2 Enteric Fever (Typhoid and
Paratyphoid Fever)
Jeffrey S. McKinney
Enteric fever (typhoid or paratyphoid fever) remains endemic in many
developing countries. Given the ease of modern travel, cases regularly
occur in developed countries as well, usually among returning travelers
or from secondary transmission from an asymptomatic carrier.

ETIOLOGY

Typhoid fever is caused by S. enterica serovar Typhi (S. Typhi). A
similar but often less severe disease is caused by Salmonella Paratyphi
A, B, and C. All are classically referred to as typhoidal Salmonellae.
Typhoidal Salmonellae share more than 90% of their genes with the
classic nontyphoidal strain, S. Typhimurium, but several genetic clusters known as pathogenicity islands and other genes have been acquired
during evolution. The inactivation of single genes and the acquisition
or loss of genes may have contributed to host adaptation and restriction
of typhoidal strains. Importantly, whereas nontyphoidal Salmonella are
found in many hosts and can be transmitted among them, typhoidal
Salmonella only infects humans.
In contrast to the diarrheal symptoms classically encountered in
gastroenteritis caused by nontyphoidal Salmonellae, enteric fever
caused by typhoid or paratyphoid Salmonellae may present as abdominal pain without diarrhea, a fever without focus, and/or with extraintestinal foci of infection. Indeed, although enteric fever clearly starts in
the gastrointestinal tract, the systemic nature of its presentation and

1771

symptomatology (and even its initial hard-­to-­detect primary bacteremia) can delay diagnosis, in particular among patients returning from
or living in endemic areas, where the differential diagnosis for fevers
is broad.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Recent large-­scale data and modeling efforts estimate that 14.3 million
cases of typhoid and paratyphoid fevers occurred globally in 2017, a
decline from 25.9 million cases in 1990. Incidence rates peak in the 5-­
to 9-­year-­old age-­group, with roughly 13% of cases occurring in children younger than 5 years and roughly 56% of cases among children
younger than 15 years of age. South and Southeast Asia have notably
high incidence rates, whereas moderate incidence rates are reported
from Central and South America, Africa, Central and East Asia, and
Oceania (Fig. 244.6).
Typhoid fever is notable for the ongoing emergence of heterogeneous new
patterns of drug resistance. After early outbreaks of chloramphenicol-­
resistant S. Typhi infections, S. Typhi strains emerged that were
multidrug resistant (MDR), fully resistant to all three of the traditional primary treatment antimicrobials: ampicillin, trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole, and chloramphenicol. There is also a considerable
increase in fluoroquinolone-­resistant and even ceftriaxone-­resistant
isolates of S. Typhi. In the United States, most travel-­associated cases of
typhoid fever are now fluoroquinolone resistant.
There are now S. Typhi strains that are extensively drug resistant
(XDR) not only to ampicillin, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, and
chloramphenicol but also to ceftriaxone and with full or intermediate resistance to ciprofloxacin. It appears that the new XDR S. Typhi
strains came from a large outbreak in 2016 linked to contaminated
water in Pakistan’s Sindh province. XDR Typhi infections were then
reported globally among travelers to or from Pakistan. In 2019 U.S. residents with no history of international travel were also diagnosed with
XDR typhoid fever. The optimal therapy for these XDR isolates is still
being determined, with preliminary recommendations suggesting the
empiric use of a carbapenem (e.g., meropenem), azithromycin, or both.
S. Typhi is highly adapted to infections of humans, and the discovery
of a large number of pseudogenes in S. Typhi suggests that its genome
may have undergone degeneration as part of a specialized association
with the human host. S. Typhi has no apparent ability to cause transmissible disease in other animals. Thus direct or indirect contact with
an infected human (either sick or a chronic carrier) is a prerequisite for
infection. Ingestion of foods or water contaminated with human feces
is the most common mode of transmission. So-­called street vendor
foods outside the home are one risk factor noted in one case control
study from Pakistan; such risks are included in practical guidance for
travelers about food and water precautions from the CDC Yellow Book
(Health Information for International Travel). However, more general
water-­borne outbreaks related to poor sanitation or water system contamination have also been described. Other causes of infection include
consuming oysters and other shellfish cultivated in water contaminated
by human sewage and the use of night soil as fertilizer.

PATHOGENESIS

Human volunteer experiments have established an infecting dose of
about 105–109 organisms, with an incubation period ranging from
4 to 14 days. After ingestion, S. Typhi invades the gut mucosa of
the terminal ileum via specialized antigen sampling cells known
as M cells that overlie gut-­associated lymphatic tissues, through
enterocytes, or via a paracellular route. In contrast to nontyphoidal Salmonella, S. Typhi expresses factors that notably downregulate the pathogen receptor–mediated host inflammatory response. It
assembles type III secretion systems to inject bacterial effectors that
modulate host cell biology in elegant ways, including but not limited
to rearrangements of host cell actin, facilitating invasion across the
outer cell membrane and a host cell membrane ruffling process that
forms a phagosome containing the bacteria. This phagosome fuses
with lysosomes, acidifies, and shrinks to become adherent around
the bacterium, forming the Salmonella-­containing vacuole (SCV).
This intracellular niche offers Salmonella a physical barrier to some

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1772 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Incidence rate (per100000)
0 to <15
15 to <50
50 to <100
100 to <200
200 to <500
500 to <700

ATG

VCT

Barbados

Comoros
West Africa

Dominica

Caribbean

LCA

Grenada

TTO

Maldives

TLS

Mauritius

Seychelles

Marshall Isl

Kiribati

Solomon Isl

FSM

Vanuatu

Samoa

Fiji

Tonga

Eastern
Mediterranean

Malta

Persian Gulf

Singapore

Balkan Peninsula

Fig. 244.6 Incidence rates (per 100,000) of typhoid and paratyphoid fevers, by country, in 2017. Inset maps detail smaller locations. ATG, Antigua

and Barbuda; FSM, Federated States of Micronesia; Isl, Islands; LCA, Saint Lucia; TLS, Timor-­Leste; TTO, Trinidad and Tobago; VCT, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines. (From GBD 2017 Typhoid and Paratyphoid Collaborators. The global burden of typhoid and paratyphoid fevers: a systematic
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet Infect Dis. 2019;19[4]:369–381.)

drugs (e.g., gentamicin, which has very poor intracellular penetration) and an intracellular replication site and means of host cell–
mediated systemic spread.
After passing through the intestinal mucosa, S. Typhi organisms
enter the mesenteric lymphoid system and then pass into the bloodstream via the lymphatics. This primary bacteremia is usually asymptomatic, and blood culture results are frequently negative at this early
stage. The blood-­borne bacteria are disseminated through the body and
are thought to colonize the organs of the reticuloendothelial system,
where they replicate within macrophages. After a period of bacterial
replication, S. Typhi organisms are shed back into the blood, causing
a secondary bacteremia that coincides with the onset of clinical symptoms and marks the end of the incubation period (Fig. 244.7). During
this secondary bacteremia, classically with fever, blood cultures are far
more frequently positive, although culture of bone marrow can be even
more sensitive.
Both typhoidal and nontyphoidal Salmonellae are members of the
same species and share substantive commonalities, including more
than 90% of their DNA sequences. Yet a deeper appreciation of how
and why typhoidal and nontyphoidal species differ offers insights at
multiple levels, ranging from genetics and ecology, to pathobiology, to
more nuanced clinical recognition and care.
Despite typhoidal (and paratyphoidal, used interchangeably in this
section, unless specified otherwise) fevers being synonymous with
the clinical diagnosis of enteric fever, the initial enteric inflammation from S. Typhi is notably less than that caused from most nontyphoidal Salmonellae. Clinically, presenting symptoms of typhoid
tend to include less diarrhea and far less gut mucosal inflammation.
In host cell cultures, S. Typhi induces lower levels of IL-­8 neutrophil
chemoattractant and less of a toll-­like receptor 5 (TLR5)–driven proinflammatory response than seen with nontyphoidal Salmonella. One
potential implication of this is that nontyphoidal Salmonella may use
inflammation-­derived luminal substances such as electron acceptors

like nitrate and tetrathionate, perhaps in competition with other fermenting gut microbes. Intriguingly, S. Typhi has genomic decay in a
network of nontyphoidal Salmonella genes that are involved in anerobic metabolic pathways.
This is not to say that S. Typhi never results in intestinal lesions. In
advanced stages of typhoid fever, life-­threatening intestinal perforation
can occur. However, the histopathology of typhoid perforation is distinct from the inflammation seen with nontyphoidal Salmonella gastroenteritis. With S. Typhi, inflammation that can finally penetrate the
intestinal muscularis and serosa to cause perforation seems to originate
from deeper sites, including underlying lymphoid tissue. In other tissues, including liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow, typhoid
nodules composed of macrophage aggregates can also form.
Gallbladder colonization is also a notable feature of S. Typhi and
can result in years-­long Salmonella carriage and shedding, with profound public health implications. The primary bacteremia of S. Typhi
can seed the gallbladder, where exposure to bile upregulates S. Typhi
(but seemingly not nontyphoidal Salmonella) type 3 secretion system
genes that result in increased epithelial cell invasion.
S. Typhi expresses a surface Vi (virulence) capsular polysaccharide that is not present in nontyphoidal Salmonella or in S. Paratyphi
A or B (which is relevant to the community-­level impact of current
Vi-­based vaccines). Encoded as part of the S. Typhi pathogenicity
island 7 (SPI-­7), the Vi capsular polysaccharide interferes with the surface exposure of S. Typhi lipopolysaccharide and flagellin in ways that
dampen host TLR-­4 and -­5 mediated innate immune responses. Vi
also blocks complement C3 binding to the S. Typhi surface, interfering
with phagocytosis.
Characterization of the typhoid toxin represents a major advance
in understanding typhoid fever. Furthermore, in contrast to the Vi
capsular polysaccharide, the typhoid toxin is expressed in both typhoidal and paratyphoidal Salmonellae. This toxin may prove important
for new therapeutic or diagnostic innovations based on antitoxin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 244 u Salmonella

1773

Pathogenesis of typhoid fever
Salmonella
typhi
M cell
Enterocytes lining
terminal ileum

Widespread
dissemination
Peyer patches
re-exposed to
S. typhi via bile

Secondary
bacteremia

Peyer patch
and resident
macrophage

Fig. 244.7 Pathogenesis of typhoid fever,
Mesenteric
lymph nodes
Primary
bacteremia

approaches. Typhoid toxin has three subunits. Subunit CdtB has
DNAse I–like nuclease activity that causes double-­stranded breaks in
host cell DNA, leading to host G2/M cell cycle arrest and/or cell death.
Subunit PltA is a pertussis-­like toxin with mono–adenosine diphosphate (ADP)–ribotransferase activity. Subunit PltB is a pertussis-­like
toxin with receptor binding activity to glycans, especially sialoglycans,
terminated in Neu5Ac. The functional typhoid toxin is composed of
one CdtB and one PltA subunit, plus five PltB subunits. Typhoid toxin
genes are expressed by intracellular S. Typhi in the SCV of host cells.
The trafficking of the toxin uses an elegant mechanism, in which PltB
binding to Neu5Ac is involved in both toxin export and toxin endocytosis into target cells. The fact that Neu5Ac is the target for binding by
PltB may help explain the cell tropism of typhoid toxin and also some
of the human restriction of typhoidal infections and pathobiology at a
molecular level.
The presence/gain/site-­
specific expression of certain virulence
factors by typhoidal Salmonellae may help explain disease nuances
involved in typhoid fever. Acquisition and spread of resistance genes
are also a clear and present danger.
The overall quantity of pseudogenes in S. Typhi versus nontyphoidal Salmonella genomes is also noteworthy. Whereas S. Typhi’s 200
pseudogenes account for roughly 4% of all its genes, the classic nontyphoidal Salmonella exemplar S. Typhimurium genome includes less
than 1% pseudogenes. One broad conceptual model for this is that S.
Typhimurium remains more of a “generalist,” with a broad host range
and more genes to facilitate survival in different hosts. By contrast, S.
Typhi may have become a “specialist,” evolving to infect only humans.
Furthermore, S. Typhi may infect humans in specific ways that better evade/suppress early mucosal inflammatory events and cause more
systemic spread, as well as sustained colonization and long-­term shedding. This conceptual model may offer insights to understand the
ongoing evolution or emergence of some new nontyphoidal Salmonella strains that (akin to typhoidal strains) tend to cause more systemic infections, as highlighted by the evolution of the nontyphoidal
Salmonella ST313 strain in Africa.
In addition to the virulence of infecting organisms, host factors
also influence predisposition to infection. Patients with HIV are at
significantly higher risk for infection with S. Typhi and S. Paratyphi.
Patients with Helicobacter pylori infection also have an increased
risk of acquiring typhoid fever. Compared to most nontyphoidal

Seeding of RES:
liver, spleen,
gall bladder,
bone marrow

involving invasion of ileal enterocyte and
Peyer patches and mesenteric lymph nodes,
seeding the reticuloendothelial system (RES).
Both primary and secondary bacteremia
events can occur and relate to clinical stages
of disease. (Adapted from Richens J. Typhoid
fever. In: Cohen J, Powderly WG, Opal SM,
eds. Infectious Diseases, 2nd ed. London:
Mosby; 2004:1561–1566.)

Salmonella infections that are often more severe and systemic in hosts
with immune abnormalities, outbreaks of typhoid fever with systemic
spread often affect many hosts who do not have significant underlying
immunocompromise.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The incubation period of typhoid fever is usually 7-­14 days but depends
on the infecting dose and ranges between 3 and 30 days. The presentation varies, from mild illness with low-­grade fever and malaise, to a
severe clinical picture with profound abdominal discomfort and multiple complications.
Severity and clinical outcome are influenced by many factors.
These include duration of illness, age, previous exposure or vaccination history, virulence of the infecting strain, and quantity of the
inoculum ingested. Given the profound changes in antimicrobial
susceptibility patterns, choice of appropriate antimicrobial therapy
is increasingly challenging, both empirically (given multiple various
patterns of resistance) and after antimicrobial susceptivity results are
secured (given the increasing inadequacy of many previously effective drugs).
The presentation of typhoid fever may vary by patient age. Some
reports from South Asia suggest typhoid fever may be more severe in
children less than 5 years old in terms of rates of complications and
hospitalization. In infancy, complications such as disseminated intravascular coagulation seem more common, with higher case fatality
rates. By contrast, neurologic complications and intestinal bleeding or
perforation seem less common among children.
Typhoid fever can start as a seemingly mild illness and then
progress to a clinical picture that manifests as high-­grade fever. It
can include a wide variety of associated features, such as anorexia,
vomiting, hepatomegaly or splenomegaly, abdominal pain, and/or
headache (Table 244.1). In children, diarrhea may occur in earlier
stages of the illness but may be followed by constipation, potentially
interfering with ready access to stool for important microbial culture
and susceptibility testing. In the absence of localizing signs, the early
stages of the disease may be very difficult to differentiate from other
endemic diseases, such as malaria and dengue fever. In some cases, a
macular or maculopapular rash (“rose spots”) may be visible around
the seventh to tenth day of the illness. These lesions may be difficult
to see in dark-­skinned children and may occur in crops on the lower

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1774 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
chest and abdomen, typically lasting 2-­3 days (Fig. 244.8). Although
so-­called pulse fever dissociation (relative bradycardia during fevers)
has historically been invoked as a feature of typhoid fever, it has low
positive predictive value, is nonspecific, and seems much less common in children than in adults.
It is recognized that MDR S. Typhi infection is a more severe clinical illness with higher rates of toxicity, complications, and case fatality
rates. Depending on the specific infecting strain, this may be related to
greater virulence and higher numbers of circulating bacteria.
If no complications occur, symptoms and physical findings gradually resolve within 2-­4 weeks. However, illness may contribute to
malnutrition. Although enteric fever caused by S. Paratyphi has traditionally been considered a more mild illness than that from S. Typhi,
paratyphoid fever can also be severe, with significant drug resistance,
morbidity, and complications.

COMPLICATIONS

Although altered liver function is found in many patients with enteric
fever, clinically significant hepatitis, jaundice, and cholecystitis are
relatively rare and may be associated with worse outcomes. Intestinal
hemorrhage and perforation are infrequent among children. Intestinal
perforation may be preceded by marked increase in abdominal pain
(often in the right lower quadrant), tenderness, vomiting, and features
of peritonitis. Peritoneal signs may be masked in patients receiving
steroids.
Rare complications include toxic myocarditis, which may manifest as arrhythmias, sinoatrial block, or cardiogenic shock (Table
244.2). Neurologic complications are relatively uncommon among
children; they include delirium, psychosis, increased intracranial
pressure, acute cerebellar ataxia, chorea, deafness, and Guillain-­
Barré syndrome. Although case fatality rates can be higher among
patients with neurologic complications, recovery usually occurs
without sequelae. Other reported complications include fatal
bone marrow necrosis, disseminated intravascular coagulation,
hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, pyelonephritis, nephrotic syndrome,
meningitis, endocarditis, parotitis, orchitis, and suppurative
lymphadenitis.
The propensity to become a carrier follows the epidemiology of gallbladder disease and cholelithiasis, generally increasing with patient age
and antimicrobial resistance.

Table 244.1  Common Clinical Features of Typhoid Fever
in Children*
FEATURE

RATE (%)

High-­grade fever

95

Coated tongue

76

Anorexia

70

Vomiting

39

Hepatomegaly

37

Diarrhea

36

Toxicity

29

Abdominal pain

21

Pallor

20

Splenomegaly

17

Constipation

7

Headache

4

Jaundice

2

Obtundation

2

Ileus

1

Intestinal perforation

0.5

*Data collected in Karachi, Pakistan, from 2,000 children.

DIAGNOSIS

The mainstay of the diagnosis of typhoid fever is a positive culture of
S. Typhi or S. Paratyphi from the blood or other anatomic site. Results
of blood cultures are positive in 40–60% of patients seen early in
the course of disease, but serial high-­volume blood cultures may be
required to identify Salmonella bacteremia. Stool and urine culture
results may also become positive after the first week, and the stool culture may occasionally be positive even during the incubation period.
NAATs for Salmonella can be part of diagnostic screening, but rectal swab samples are less sensitive than stool samples. In this era of
increasing antibiotic resistance (not only common but also heterogeneous patterns), species identification without culture to check antibiotic susceptibilities is suboptimal. Indeed, antibiotic susceptibility
testing is now essential for determining optimal therapy. Bone marrow
culture is highly sensitive (around 90%) and remains positive in more
than 50% of cases despite several days of antibiotic therapy. Bone marrow collection is relatively invasive, however, and tends to be employed
as part of an extensive workup for patients meeting stringent criteria
for a true fever of unknown origin. Punch biopsies from characteristic
rose spots may be culture positive in up to 63% of cases, even with prior
antibiotic treatment.
Results of other laboratory investigations are largely nonspecific
for the diagnosis of typhoid fever. The Widal test has common false-­
negative and false-­positive results, and as a serologic test is highly
dependent on geographic area and endemicity. Tests such as coagulation studies, liver function studies, and abdominal imaging are
examples of studies that may be of use in assessing for complications
of typhoid fever.

A

B
Fig. 244.8 A, “Rose spot” in volunteer with experimental typhoid
fever. B, Small cluster of rose spots, usually located on lower abdomen. Lesions may be more difficult to identify in darker-­skinned people.
(From Huang DB, DuPont HL. Problem pathogens: extra-­intestinal complications of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi infection. Lancet Infect
Dis. 2005;5:341–348.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 244 u Salmonella

1775

Table 244.2  Extraintestinal Infectious Complications of Typhoid Fever Caused by Salmonella enterica Serotype Typhi
ORGAN SYSTEM

PREVALENCE (%)

RISK FACTORS

COMPLICATIONS

Central nervous system

3–35

Residence in endemic region, malignancy,
endocarditis, congenital heart disease,
paranasal sinus infections, pulmonary
infections, meningitis, trauma, surgery,
osteomyelitis of skull

Encephalopathy, cerebral edema,
subdural empyema, cerebral abscess,
meningitis, ventriculitis, transient
Parkinsonism, motor neuron disorders,
ataxia, seizures, Guillain-­Barré
syndrome, psychosis

Cardiovascular system

1–5

Cardiac abnormalities (e.g., existing
valvular abnormalities, rheumatic heart
disease, congenital heart defects)

Endocarditis, myocarditis, pericarditis,
arteritis, congestive heart failure

Pulmonary system

1–6

Residence in endemic region, past
pulmonary infection, sickle cell anemia,
alcohol abuse, diabetes, HIV infection

Pneumonia, empyema, bronchopleural
fistula

Bone and joint

<1

Sickle cell anemia, diabetes, systemic
lupus erythematosus, lymphoma, liver
disease, previous surgery or trauma,
extremes of age, corticosteroid use

Osteomyelitis, septic arthritis

Hepatobiliary system

1–26

Residence in endemic region, pyogenic
infections, intravenous drug use, splenic
trauma, HIV, hemoglobinopathy

Cholecystitis, hepatitis, hepatic
abscesses, splenic abscess, peritonitis,
paralytic ileus

Genitourinary system

<1

Urinary tract abnormalities, pelvic
pathology, systemic abnormalities

Urinary tract infection, renal abscess,
pelvic infections, testicular abscess,
prostatitis, epididymitis

Soft tissue infections

At least 17 cases reported
in English-­language
literature

Diabetes

Psoas abscess, gluteal abscess,
cutaneous vasculitis

Hematologic

At least 5 cases reported
in English-­language
literature

Hemophagocytosis syndrome

From Huang DB, DuPont HL. Problem pathogens: extra-­intestinal complications of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi infection. Lancet Infect Dis. 2005;5:341–348.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Typhoid fever may mimic many febrile illnesses without localizing signs.
In early stages, it can be confused with alternative conditions, such as
gastroenteritis, bronchitis, and bronchopneumonia. As the disease progresses, the differential diagnosis may include bacterial sepsis, malaria,
dengue fever, infectious mononucleosis, acute hepatitis, tuberculosis,
brucellosis, tularemia, leptospirosis, amebiasis, Q fever, toxoplasmosis, and rickettsial diseases. A classic cause of fevers among travelers
returning from endemic areas, typhoid fever can also occur in those
with direct, or even unappreciated, contact with other infected people.

TREATMENT

Antibiotic resistance among S. Typhi strains is now so heterogeneous
and dynamic that the importance of obtaining antibiotic susceptibility
tests on clinical isolates cannot be overemphasized. Although empiric
antibiotics still may be started, final decision-­making about optimal
treatment should be based on antibiotic susceptibility results. Molecular testing of specific resistance genes can also help assess mechanisms
and evolution of resistance.
For years, third-­generation cephalosporins (e.g., ceftriaxone or cefotaxime) were a mainstay of empiric therapy. They were considered
effective even for MDR S. Typhi and/or for the increasing number of
S. Typhi that were quinolone resistant. Yet now, with the recent emergence of XDR S. Typhi, third-­generation cephalosporins may no longer be sufficient.
In S. Typhi, MDR isolates are defined as resistant to all the first
line of antibiotics previously suggested by the World Health Organization (WHO): ampicillin, trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole, and
chloramphenicol. XDR S. Typhi is not only resistant to ampicillin, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, and chloramphenicol but also
resistant to third-­generation cephalosporins and quinolones. Gene
sequencing, including one innovative study using clinical isolates from
children with S. Typhi septicemia, found the phenotype of the XDR S.

Typhi isolates matches with their genotypes, featured by the acquisitions of the genes blaTEM1, dhfR7, sul1, catA1, qnrS, and blaCTX-­M-­15
and a point mutation on gyrA.
XDR S. Typhi cases were first noted by Pakistani health authorities
in 2016, originating in Hyderabad, Sindh. By 2018, international transmission of XDR S. Typhi cases had been noted. In 2019 and 2020, XDR
S. Typhi was recovered from patients in the United States, both with
and without a travel history. Patients without a travel history lived in six
widely distributed states and did not appear to be linked or have a common source of infection. An unrelated cluster of ceftriaxone-­resistant
Typhi infections linked to Iraq has also been reported in the United
States and the United Kingdom.
Taken together, this information led to an official CDC Health Advisory in 2021 suggesting the need for empiric carbapenem, azithromycin, or both for patients in the United States with suspected typhoid
fever who traveled to Pakistan or Iraq, as well as those who had not traveled from the United States. Patients with severe or complicated illness
should receive a carbapenem, such as meropenem. Case reports have
suggested that patients who do not improve on a carbapenem alone may
benefit from the addition of a second antibiotic such as azithromycin.
Patients with uncomplicated illness may be treated with oral azithromycin alone. By contrast, for patients in the United States who traveled to
countries other than Pakistan or Iraq, ceftriaxone may still be effective.
In the United States, resistance to meropenem (a carbapenem) or
azithromycin was not reported during 2017–2021. By contrast, roughly
80% of Typhi strains isolated in the United States now are resistant or
have decreased susceptibility to quinolones, including ciprofloxacin.
New MDR and XDR strains illustrate the profound importance of
recognizing what antimicrobials will likely not work. Meanwhile, an
encouraging relative reduction in the proportion of MDR strains in
some areas of Asia means some patients with susceptible S. Typhi
infections can be treated with agents recently considered ineffective.
Namely, in some highly endemic regions of South and Southeast Asia,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1776 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
strains susceptible to amoxicillin or trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole
are increasingly common.
The optimal duration of antimicrobial therapy is unclear, but most
agents are suggested for at least 10-­14 days, with longer courses for
amoxicillin or trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, 21 days for chloramphenicol, and as little as 7 days for azithromycin. Relapse rates can
occur in almost 20% of patients within 4 weeks, especially in immunocompromised patients.
In addition to antimicrobials, supportive treatment and maintenance of appropriate fluid and electrolyte balance are important.
Although additional treatment with dexamethasone (3 mg/kg initial
dose, followed by 1 mg/kg every 6 hours for 48 hours) is recommended
by some for severely ill patients with shock, obtundation, stupor, or
coma, corticosteroids should be administered only under strict supervision, because their use may mask signs of abdominal complications.

million children age from 9 months to 15 years against typhoid fever,
with a coverage rate of 95%. Pakistan is the first country in the world to
introduce the WHO-­recommended typhoid conjugate vaccine (TCV)
into its routine immunization program.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 245

Shigella
Patrick C. Seed

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for a patient with enteric fever depends on the rapidity
of diagnosis and institution of appropriate antibacterial therapy. Other
factors are patient age, underlying health and nutrition, the causative
Salmonella serotype, and the appearance of complications. Infants and
children with underlying malnutrition and infections with resistant
isolates are at higher risk of adverse outcomes.
Despite appropriate therapy, 2–4% of infected children may experience relapse. Individuals who excrete S. Typhi more than 3 months
after infection are regarded as chronic carriers. A chronic urinary carrier state can develop in children with schistosomiasis.

PREVENTION

Of the major risk factors for outbreaks of typhoid fever, contamination
of water supplies with sewage is most important. Other risk factors are
contact with another acutely infected individual or a chronic carrier
and lack of water or sanitation services. During outbreaks, central chlorination and domestic water purification are important. In endemic situations, consumption of street foods, especially ice cream and cut fruit,
is recognized as an important risk factor. Human-­to-­human spread by
chronic carriers is also important, and attempts should be made to target food handlers and high-­risk groups for S. Typhi carriage screening.
Chronic carriers can be counseled as to the risk for disease transmission and the importance of handwashing.
In the United States, two vaccines have been licensed by the FDA.
Systematic review and meta-­analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials estimate the cumulative efficacy of these two vaccines as
only roughly 50%. The Ty21a live attenuated vaccine can be used
in people 6 years and older. It is administered orally, every other day,
for a total of four doses to be completed at least 1 week before potential exposure; booster frequency is every 5 years. The Ty21a vaccine
induces both cell-­mediated and humoral immune responses against
S. Typhi. It also may provide some protection against S. Paratyphi B.
The unconjugated Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine can be used
in people 2 years and older. It is administered intramuscularly in a
single dose to be administered at least 2 weeks before potential exposure; booster frequency is every 2 years. This unconjugated vaccine
induces a T-­cell–independent humoral immune response with lack
of prolonged protection.
Conjugated vaccines have been recommended, developed, and
now deployed by the WHO. By covalently conjugating the Vi capsular polysaccharide to carrier proteins, conjugate vaccines can induce
a T-­cell–dependent humoral immune response, even in young children. Conjugated typhoid vaccines are under development, using a
variety of carrier proteins, including tetanus toxoid, Exoprotein A from
Pseudomonas, and diphtheria toxoid. The WHO has recommended the
introduction of a single-­dose typhoid conjugate vaccine for infants and
children age 6 months and older. A large study of the Typbar-­TCV
conjugate vaccine in Hyderabad, Pakistan, found vaccine effectiveness
was 55% against suspected typhoid fever and 95% against blood culture–confirmed S. Typhi. The vaccine was also 97% effective against
XDR S. Typhi. In 2019, a historic milestone was successfully achieved
in Pakistan with the vaccination in Sindh province of more than 9.4

Shigellosis, infection by Shigella species, is acute invasive enteric infection clinically manifested by diarrhea that is often bloody. The term
dysentery describes a syndrome of bloody diarrhea with fever, abdominal cramps, rectal pain, and mucoid stools. Bacillary dysentery is a
term often used to distinguish dysentery caused by Shigella from amebic dysentery caused by Entamoeba histolytica.

ETIOLOGY

Four species of Shigella cause the disease shigellosis: Shigella dysenteriae (group A), Shigella flexneri (group B), Shigella boydii (group C),
and Shigella sonnei (group D). Serotypes 15, 19, 19, and 1 in groups
A-­D, respectively, further distinguish the species. Species and group
distributions vary geographically and by antimicrobial susceptibility.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 80-­165 million
cases of shigellosis occur each year worldwide, resulting in 600,000
deaths annually. Shigella spp. are endemic to temperate and tropical
climates and are most common in countries and regions with inadequate public health sanitation and hygiene. In the U.S. Foodborne
Disease Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet), Shigella remains the
third most important pathogen. In 2020, the top three diarrheagenic
pathogens, Campylobacter, Salmonella, and Shigella, had laboratory-­
confirmed incidence rates (cases per 100,000 population) of 14.35,
13.33, and 3.05, respectively. Although infection can occur at any age,
children younger than 10 years, identified as Black and of Hispanic
ethnicity, have the highest incidence rates. Males have an approximately 2.7-­fold higher incidence than females. Upwards of 30% of
children with shigellosis are hospitalized. Death resulting from shigellosis is rare among children (<0.1%). Infection in the first 6 months of
life is rare. Breast milk from women living in endemic areas contains
antibodies to both virulence plasmid-­encoded antigens and lipopolysaccharides, and breastfeeding might partially explain the age-­related
incidence.
Asymptomatic infection of children and adults occurs frequently
in endemic areas. In cases of Shigella dysentery, up to 75% of family
member contacts may have asymptomatic infection. Infection with
Shigella occurs most often during the warm months in temperate climates and during the rainy season in tropical climates. In industrialized societies, up to 50% of locally diagnosed cases are associated with
international travel; the highest-­risk travel designation is Africa, followed by Central America, South America, and parts of Asia. In recent
years in the United States, travel to Haiti, the Dominican Republic, or
India has been associated with acquisition of antibiotic-­resistant (fluoroquinolone) S. sonnei infections. Additional risk factors include men
who have sex with men (MSM), including recent U.S. outbreaks of
azithromycin-­resistant S. sonnei infections among affected individuals
in the Midwest.
In developed countries, S. sonnei is the most common cause and S.
flexneri is the second most common cause of bacillary dysentery; in
preindustrial societies, S. flexneri is most common and S. sonnei second

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 245 u Shigella
in frequency. S. boydii is found primarily in India. S. dysenteriae serotype 1 tends to occur in massive epidemics but is also endemic in Asia
and Africa, where it is associated with high mortality rates (5–15%).
The epidemiologic transition has favored the emergence of S. sonnei
as the dominant serogroup in some countries, although the reason for
this epidemiologic shift is not clear.
Contaminated food (often a salad or other item requiring extensive
handling of the ingredients) and water are important vectors. Exposure to both contaminated freshwater and contaminated salt water
is a risk factor for infection. Rapid spread within families, custodial
institutions, and childcare centers demonstrates the ability of Shigella
to be transmitted from one individual to the next and the requirement
for ingestion of very few organisms to cause illness. Human challenge
studies have demonstrated the high infectivity and low infectious dose
for Shigella spp. Ten bacteria of the species S. sonnei and S. dysenteriae
can cause dysentery. In contrast, ingestion of 108-­1010 Vibrio cholerae is
necessary to cause cholera.

PATHOGENESIS

Shigella has specialized mechanisms to survive the low gastric pH. Shigella survives the acid environment in the stomach and moves through
the gut to the colon, its target organ. Shigella spp. use a coordinated,
temperature-­controlled program to hijack and invade colonic epithelial cells. A large (220 kb) plasmid encodes a group of polypeptides
involved in cell invasion and killing, and loss of the plasmid attenuates
virulence. Enteroinvasive Escherichia coli (EIEC) that harbor a closely
related plasmid containing these invasion genes behave clinically similar to Shigellae (see Chapter 246). The virulence plasmid encodes a type
III secretion system required to trigger entry into epithelial cells and
apoptosis in macrophages. This secretion system translocates effector
molecules from the bacterial cytoplasm to the membrane and cytoplasm of target host cells through a needle-­like appendage. The type III
secretion system is composed of approximately 50 proteins, including
the Mxi and Spa proteins involved in assembly and regulation of the
type III secretion system, chaperones (IpgA, IpgC, IpgE, and Spa15),
transcription activators (VirF, VirB, and MxiE), translocators (IpaB,
IpaC, and IpaD), and approximately 30 effector proteins. In addition to
the major plasmid-­encoded virulence traits, chromosomally encoded
factors are required for full virulence.
Shigellosis mostly affects the distal colon, although pancolitis can
occur. Shigella spp. traverse the colonic epithelium through M cells in
the follicle-­associated epithelium overlying the Peyer patches. Localized or diffuse mucosal edema, ulcerations, friable mucosa, bleeding,
and exudate may occur. Microscopically, ulcerations, pseudomembranes, epithelial cell death, infiltration extending from the mucosa
to the muscularis mucosae by polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs)
and mononuclear cells, and submucosal edema occur.
After Shigella transcytosis through M cells, it encounters resident macrophages and subverts macrophage killing by activating the
inflammasome and inducing pyroptosis, apoptosis, and proinflammatory signaling. Free bacteria invade the epithelial cells from the basolateral side, move into the cytoplasm by actin polymerization, and spread
to adjacent cells. Proinflammatory signaling by macrophages and epithelial cells further activates the innate immune response involving
natural killer cells and attracts PMNs. The influx of PMNs disintegrates
the epithelial cell lining, which initially exacerbates the infection and
tissue destruction by facilitating the invasion of more bacteria. Ultimately, PMNs phagocytose and kill Shigella, thus contributing to the
resolution of the infection.
Some Shigella spp. produce toxins, including Shiga toxin and enterotoxins. Shiga toxin is a potent exotoxin that inhibits protein synthesis.
It is produced in significant amounts by S. dysenteriae serotype 1, by a
subset of E. coli known as enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) or Shiga
toxin–producing E. coli, and occasionally by other Shigella spp. Shiga
toxin inhibits protein synthesis to injure vascular endothelial cells and
trigger the severe complication of hemolytic-­uremic syndrome (see
Chapter 246). Targeted deletion of the genes for other enterotoxins
(ShET1 and ShET2) decreases the incidence of fever and dysentery in
human challenge studies. Lipopolysaccharides are virulence factors for

1777

all Shigellae; other traits are important for only a few serotypes (e.g.,
Shiga toxin synthesis by S. dysenteriae serotype 1 and ShET1 by S. flexneri 2a).

IMMUNITY

In symptomatic infection, Shigella activates an intense innate immune
response through triggering extracellular and intracellular pathogen
recognition systems. The induction of acute inflammation with a massive recruitment of PMNs produces intensive local tissue destruction.
In rectal biopsies of infected patients, acute-­phase proinflammatory
cytokines are induced, including interleukin (IL)-­1β, IL-­6, IL-­8, tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, and TNF-­β. Concurrently, antiinflammatory genes encoding IL-­10 and transforming growth factor-­β are also
upregulated to mitigate uncontrolled inflammation. Furthermore,
interferon-­γ expression is induced during human infection and is
required to limit Shigella invasion in intestinal epithelial cells and macrophages. Shigella-­specific immunity elicited upon natural infection is
characterized by the induction of a humoral response. Local secretory
immunoglobulin A (IgA) and serum IgG are produced against lipopolysaccharide and some protein effectors (Ipas). Protection is thought
to be serotype specific. Natural protective immunity arises only after
several episodes of infection, is of short duration, and seems to be
effective in limiting reinfection, particularly in young children. However, children have delayed and reduced antigen-­specific antibody-­
secreting cells with late and reduced mucosa IgA production against
Shigella. Less effective adaptive immunity may put children at more
risk for increased disease severity, mortality, and recurrences.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND COMPLICATIONS

Shigella spp. produce intraintestinal and extraintestinal symptoms.
Bacillary dysentery is clinically similar regardless of infecting serotype or
species, but different species produce illnesses with different severity
and risk for mortality, with S. dysenteriae type 1 most likely to produce any single manifestation and with greater severity. Ingestion of
Shigellae is followed by an incubation period of 12 hours to several
days before symptoms ensue. Severe abdominal pain, emesis, anorexia,
generalized toxicity, urgency, and painful defecation characteristically
occur (Table 245.1). The typically high fever with shigellosis distinguishes it from EHEC. The diarrhea may be watery and large volume
initially, evolving into frequent, small-­volume, bloody, mucoid stools.
Most children never progress to the stage of bloody diarrhea, but some
have bloody stools from the outset. Significant dehydration is related to
the fluid and electrolyte losses in stool and emesis. Untreated diarrhea
can last 7-­10 days; only approximately 10% of patients have diarrhea
persisting for >10 days. Persistent diarrhea occurs in malnourished
infants, children with AIDS, and occasionally previously normal children. Even nondysenteric disease can be complicated by persistent illness. Physical examination initially shows abdominal distention and
tenderness, hyperactive bowel sounds, and a tender rectum on digital
examination. Rectal prolapse may be present, particularly in malnourished children.
Neurologic findings are among the most common extraintestinal
manifestations of bacillary dysentery, occurring in as many as 40%
of hospitalized children. EIEC can cause similar neurologic toxicity.
Convulsions, headache, lethargy, confusion, nuchal rigidity, or hallucinations may be present before or after the onset of diarrhea. Animal models suggest Shiga toxins activate brain endothelial cells and
microglia and increase neurotransmitter levels. However, infections
with Shiga toxin–positive and –negative strains can lead to neurologic
features. Seizures sometimes occur when little fever is present, suggesting that simple febrile convulsions do not explain their appearance.
Hypocalcemia or hyponatremia may be associated with seizures in a
small number of patients. Although symptoms often suggest central
nervous system infection, and cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis with
minimally elevated protein levels can occur, meningitis caused by Shigellae is rare. Based on animal studies, it has been suggested that proinflammatory mediators, including TNF-­α and IL-­1β, nitric oxide, and
corticotropin-­releasing hormone, play a role in the enhanced susceptibility to Shigella-­mediated seizures and encephalopathy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1778 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
The most common complication of shigellosis is dehydration (Table
245.2). Inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone with profound
hyponatremia can complicate dysentery, particularly when S. dysenteriae is the etiologic agent. Hypoglycemia and protein-­losing enteropathy are common and are decreased by early appropriate antibiotic
therapy. Severe protein-­losing enteropathy is associated with prolonged
illness and linear growth shortfalls. Bacteremia is uncommon except
in girls or women infected with HIV, malnourished children, young
infants, and children with S. dysenteriae serotype 1 infection. When
bacteremia occurs with dysentery (<5%), it is as likely to be caused by
other enteric bacteria as by Shigella itself. The presence of E. coli, Klebsiella, and other enteric bacteria in blood cultures of children with shigellosis may reflect the loss of the barrier function during severe colitis.
The mortality rate is high (approximately 20%) when sepsis occurs,
with a greater likelihood of occurrence in HIV-­infected persons. Other
major complications include disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC), particularly in very young, malnourished children. Despite the
extent to which the intestinal epithelial barrier is lost, bacteremia and
DIC are uncommon.
Neonatal shigellosis is rare, particularly among exclusively breastfed
infants. Neonates may have only low-­grade fever with mild, nonbloody
diarrhea. However, complications occur more often in neonates than
in older children and include septicemia, meningitis, dehydration,
colonic perforation, and toxic megacolon.
Hemolysis, anemia, and hemolytic-­uremic syndrome (HUS) frequently complicate S. dysenteriae serotype 1 infection. HUS is caused
by Shiga toxin–mediated vascular endothelial injury. Shiga toxin–producing non-­dysenteriae Shigella and E. coli that produce Shiga toxins
(e.g., E. coli O157:H7, E. coli O111:NM, E. coli O26:H11, and less often,
many other serotypes) also cause HUS (see Chapter 560.5).
Rectal prolapse, toxic megacolon or pseudomembranous colitis
(usually associated with S. dysenteriae), cholestatic hepatitis, conjunctivitis, iritis, corneal ulcers, pneumonia, arthritis (usually 2-­5 weeks
after enteritis), reactive arthritis, cystitis, myocarditis, and vaginitis
(typically with blood-­tinged discharge associated with S. flexneri) are
uncommon events. Although rare, surgical complications of shigellosis
can be severe; the most common are intestinal obstruction and appendicitis with and without perforation.
On average, the severity of illness and risk of death are least with
disease caused by S. sonnei and greatest with infection by S. dysenteriae type 1. Risk groups for severe illness and poor outcomes include
infants; children who are not breastfed; children with HIV; children
recovering from measles; malnourished children and adults; adults
>50 years old; and patients with dehydration, unconsciousness, hypothermia or hyperthermia, hyponatremia, or lesser stool frequency who
have a history of convulsions when first seen. Death is a rare outcome
in well-­nourished older children. Multiple factors contribute to death
in malnourished children with shigellosis, including illness in the first
year of life, altered consciousness, dehydration, hypothermia, thrombocytopenia, anemia, hyponatremia, renal failure, hyperkalemia,
hypoglycemia, bronchopneumonia, and bacteremia.

The rare shigellosis-­
associated Ekiri syndrome, or “lethal toxic
encephalopathy,” constitutes severe toxicity, convulsions, extreme
hyperpyrexia, and headache, followed by brain edema and a rapidly
fatal outcome without sepsis or significant dehydration.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Although clinical features suggest shigellosis, they usually are insufficiently specific to allow confident diagnosis. Infection by Campylobacter jejuni, Salmonella spp., EIEC, Shiga toxin–producing E.
coli (EHEC, e.g., E. coli O157:H7), Yersinia enterocolitica, Clostridioides difficile, and Entamoeba histolytica, as well as inflammatory
bowel disease, produce overlapping features and may challenge the
clinician.

DIAGNOSIS

Presumptive data supporting a diagnosis of bacillary dysentery include
the finding of fecal leukocytes (usually >50 or 100 PMNs per high-­
power field, confirming the presence of colitis), fecal blood, and
Table 245.2  Clinical Complications of Shigellosis
INTESTINAL COMPLICATIONS
Rectal prolapse*
Toxic megacolon
Intestinal perforation
Intestinal obstruction
Appendicitis
Persistent diarrhea
EXTRAINTESTINAL COMPLICATIONS
Dehydration
Severe hyponatremia (serum sodium <126 mmol/L)*
Hypoglycemia
Focal infections (e.g., meningitis, osteomyelitis, arthritis, splenic
abscesses, vaginitis)
Sepsis, usually in malnourished or immunocompromised persons
Seizure or encephalopathy
Leukemoid reaction (peripheral leukocytes >40 000/μL)*
POSTINFECTIOUS MANIFESTATIONS
Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome (HUS)*
Reactive arthritis†
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)‡
Malnutrition
*Significantly more common in episodes with Shigella dysenteriae type 1 than with all
other Shigella spp. among Bangladeshi children younger than 15 yr during the 1990s
(rectal prolapse [52% vs 15%], severe hyponatremia [58% vs 26%], leukemoid reaction
[22% vs 2%], and HUS [8% vs 1%]).
†Typical acute symptoms include asymmetric oligoarthritis (usually lower limb),
enthesitis, dactylitis, and back pain. Extraarticular manifestations include
conjunctivitis and uveitis; urethritis and other genitourinary tract manifestations; oral,
skin, and nail lesions; and rarely, cardiac abnormalities.
‡IBS follows approximately 4% of Shigella episodes in studies from high-­resource
settings.
Adapted from Kotloff KL, Riddle MS, Platts-­Mills JA, et al. Shigellosis. Lancet.
2018;391:801–810.

Table 245.1  Acute Clinical Manifestations of Shigellosis in Children <5 Years Old
MANIFESTATION

DYSENTERY
(n = 757)

WATERY DIARRHEA
(n = 288)

Fever

607 (80%)

207 (72%)

Abdominal cramps

616 (81%)

137 (48%)

Vomiting

136 (18%)

89 (31%)

WHO-­defined dehydration

95 (13%)

134 (47%)

Tenesmus

511 (68%)

32 (11%)

Rectal prolapse

19 (3%)

4 (1%)

From Kotloff KL, Riddle MS, Platts-­Mills JA, et al. Shigellosis. Lancet. 2018;391:801–810.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 245 u Shigella
demonstration in peripheral blood of leukocytosis with a dramatic left
shift (often with more bands than mature segmented neutrophils). The
total peripheral white blood cell count is usually 5,000-­15,000 cells/μL,
although leukopenia and leukemoid reactions occur.
Culture of both stool and rectal swab specimens optimizes the chance
of diagnosing Shigella infection. Culture media should include MacConkey agar and selective media such as xylose-­lysine-­deoxycholate
and Salmonella-­Shigella agar. Transport media should be used if specimens cannot be cultured promptly. Appropriate media should be used
to exclude Campylobacter and Salmonella spp. and other agents. Studies of outbreaks and illness in volunteers show that the laboratory is
often not able to confirm the clinical suspicion of shigellosis even when
the pathogen is present. Multiple fecal cultures improve the yield of
Shigella.
Culture-­
based diagnosis of Shigella infection, as with other
enteric infections, is being displaced by molecular methods, often
multiplexed, allowing testing for a panel of potential agents in a
single rapid assay. Studies using molecular methods such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) suggest that culture significantly
underestimates the true frequency of infection. Quantitative PCR
improves the ascertainment of Shigella burden in children with
moderate to severe diarrhea in low-­income countries. The generally high negative predictive value (NPV) of many molecular tests
for Shigella (generally >95–97%) make the tests useful for decisions
regarding antibiotic use and discontinuation and the necessity to
test for additional etiologies of diarrhea. Molecular testing provides
no information about antibiotic susceptibility. Stool cultures should
be considered where antibiotic-­resistant organisms are prevalent.
In children who appear toxic, blood cultures should be obtained,
especially in very young or malnourished infants, because of their
increased risk of bacteremia.

TREATMENT

As with gastroenteritis from other causes, the first concern in a child
with suspected shigellosis should be for fluid and electrolyte correction and maintenance (see Chapter 387). Drugs that impair intestinal
motility (e.g., diphenoxylate hydrochloride with atropine [Lomotil] or
loperamide [Imodium]) should not be used because of the risk of more
severe and prolonged illness.
Nutrition is a key concern in areas where malnutrition is common.
A high-­protein and high-­caloric diet during convalescence enhances
growth in 6 months after infection. Controlled studies show that
cooked green bananas, a food rich in amylase-­resistant starches, significantly improves outcome in severe disease. A single large dose of
vitamin A (200,000 IU) lessens the severity of shigellosis in settings
where vitamin A deficiency is common. Zinc supplementation (20
mg elemental zinc for 14 days) significantly decreases the duration of
diarrhea, improves weight gain during recovery, enhances adaptive
immunity to Shigellae, and decreases diarrheal disease in malnourished children.
The decision to use antibiotics remains challenging (Fig. 245.1).
Many experts recommend withholding antibacterial therapy because
of the self-­limited nature of the infection, the cost of drugs, the risk
of emergence of resistant organisms, the risk of prolonging carriage
(if Salmonella is present), or increasing the risk for HUS (EHEC).
When a rapid multiplexed molecular stool pathogen detection test
is available, waiting for a definitive diagnosis before administrating
antibiotics should be considered. However, a counter-­argument of
empirical treatment for all children with suspected shigellosis has
validity. Untreated illness can cause a child to have prolonged illness;
chronic or recurrent diarrhea can ensue. Malnutrition can develop
or worsen during prolonged illness, particularly in children in developing countries. The risk of continued excretion and subsequent
infection of family contacts further argues against the strategy of
withholding antibiotics.
Shigella antimicrobial susceptibility varies by species and geography.
In the United States, strains are frequently resistant to ampicillin (74%)
and trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX) (36%). In general,

1779

the proportion of antibiotic-­resistant isolates is lower in North America and Europe than in Asia or Africa. Previously, Shigella was widely
regarded as susceptible in vitro to azithromycin, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, cefixime, nalidixic acid, and quinolones. However, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that 87% of S.
sonnei–related U.S. cases are ciprofloxacin nonsusceptible, of which
only approximately half followed international travel. Among MSM,
clusters of shigellosis caused by S. sonnei and, to a lesser extent, S.
flexneri were reported with up to 87% azithromycin resistance. International travel increases the risk for antibiotic-­resistant infection. For
example, Chinese isolates of S. sonnei are often resistant to TMP-­SMX
(94.5%), ampicillin (40.3%), piperacillin (36.5%), and ceftriaxone
(12.8%).
Currently, in most developed and resource-poor countries, Shigella
strains are often resistant to ampicillin and TMP-­SMX. Therefore
these drugs should not be used for empirical treatment of suspected
shigellosis; they should be instituted only if the strain is known to be
susceptible (e.g., in an outbreak caused by a defined strain). Empirical therapy in children with dysentery should be given based on
considerations of regional infection cluster data and international
travel history. Ceftriaxone (50-­100 mg/kg/24 hr as a single daily dose
intravenously or intramuscularly) can be used for empirical therapy,
especially for small infants. The oral third-­generation cephalosporin
cefixime (8 mg/kg/24 hr divided every 12-­24 hours) may be considered, although treatment failures for S. sonnei infections have been
reported in adults; oral first-­and second-­generation cephalosporins
are inadequate as alternative drugs despite in vitro susceptibility.
Azithromycin (12 mg/kg/24 hr orally for the first day, followed by 6
mg/kg/24 hr for the next 4 days) has proved to be an effective alternative drug for shigellosis. Ciprofloxacin (20-­30 mg/kg/24 hr divided
into two doses) is the drug of choice recommended by the WHO for
all patients with bloody diarrhea, regardless of age. Note that since
2015, the CDC has tracked increasing resistance and reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin and azithromycin in the United States.
Concurrent zinc supplementation is recommended with antibiotic
therapy.
Although quinolones are reported to cause arthropathy in immature animals and are associated with neuropathy, these risks are
low in children and are outweighed by the value of these drugs for
the treatment of this potentially life-­threatening disease. However,
some experts recommend that the quinolones be reserved for seriously ill children with bacillary dysentery caused by an organism
suspected or known to be resistant to other agents, because overuse of quinolones promotes the development of resistance to these
drugs.
Treatment of patients in whom Shigella infection is suspected on
clinical grounds should be initiated when these patients are first
evaluated. Molecular stool testing or culture is obtained to exclude
other pathogens and, in the case of culture, to assist in antibiotic
changes should a child fail to respond to empirical therapy. A child
who has typical dysentery and who responds to initial empirical antibiotic treatment should be continued on that drug for a full 5-­day
course even if the stool culture is negative, because of the method’s
low NPV. The logic of this recommendation is based on the proven
difficulty of culturing Shigella from stools of ill patients during adult
volunteer infection studies. In a child who fails to respond to therapy
of a dysenteric syndrome in the presence of initially negative stool
culture results, additional cultures should be obtained, or molecular
testing, where available and cost-­permissive, should be performed,
and the child should be reevaluated for other possible diagnoses. In
the child with negative molecular stool testing for Shigellae, the high
NPV makes the diagnosis less likely, and alternative diagnoses should
be considered.

PREVENTION

Numerous measures have been recommended to decrease the risk
of Shigella transmission to children. Mothers should be encouraged
to prolong breastfeeding of infants. Families and daycare personnel

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1780 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Children

Adults

First-line:
• Oral therapy
- Ciproﬂoxacin* 15 mg/kg twice daily for 3 days
• Parenteral therapy
- Ceftriaxone 50–100 mg once daily for 3 days,
intravenous or intramuscular
PLUS
• Zinc 20 mg (10 mg for infants <6 months) for
10–14 days, by mouth

First-line:
• Oral therapy
- Ciproﬂoxacin* 500 mg once a day for 3 days
• Parenteral therapy
- Ceftriaxone 1 g every 24 h for 3 days,
intravenous or intramuscular

Second-line oral therapy:
• Azithromycin* 12 mg/kg once on day 1, then
6 mg/kg once daily on days 2–4 (total course
4 days), oral
• Ceﬁxime 8 mg/kg once daily for 3 days, oral
• Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole†: 4 mg/kg of
trimethoprim and 20 mg/kg sulfamethoxazole
twice a day for 5 days

Second-line oral therapy:
• Azithromycin* 1 g for 1 day OR 500 mg every
12 h for 1 day, oral
• Ceﬁxime 400 mg once daily for 3 days, oral
• Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole†: 160 mg of
trimethoprim and 800 mg sulfamethoxazole
twice a day for 5 days

Improvement after 48 h of antibiotics?
Yes

No
Known antibiotic susceptibilities?

Finish therapy

No

Yes
Adjust therapy based on susceptibilities

Choose different ﬁrst-line or second-line therapy
not used previously

Improvement after an additional 48 h of antibiotics?
Yes
Finish therapy

No
Consider if amebiasis is possible and give 5 days
of oral metronidazole‡
• Children: 20 mg/kg three times per day
• Adults: 500–750 mg three times per day

Fig. 245.1 Management algorithm: guidelines for treatment of

shigellosis. Empirical therapy should be directed by hospital, clinical
laboratory, or public health antibiograms whenever possible. Minimal
inhibitory concentrations of 0.12-­1.0 μg/mL for ciprofloxacin might be
considered susceptible by laboratory standards but could harbor resistance genes known to confer decreased susceptibility. *Fluoroquinolones and azithromycin should be used with caution in patients taking the
antimalarial artemether, because these drugs can prolong the QT interval on the electrocardiogram and trigger arrhythmias. †Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole should be used if susceptibility is known or expected
based on local data. ‡Per WHO recommendations. Another acceptable
regimen is a 7-­to 10-­day course of metronidazole followed by a luminal
agent such as paromomycin or diiodohydroxyquinoline. (Data from The
selection and use of essential medicines: report of the WHO Expert
Committee, 2017. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017. WHO
technical report series; no. 1006.)

should be educated in proper handwashing techniques and encouraged
to wash hands after using the toilet, changing diapers, or engaging in
preparation of foods. They should be taught how to manage potentially contaminated materials such as raw vegetables, soiled diapers,
and diaper-­changing areas. Children with diarrhea should be excluded
from childcare facilities. Children should be supervised when handwashing after they use the toilet. Caretakers should be informed of the
risk of transmission if they prepare food when they are ill with diarrhea. Families should be educated regarding the danger of swallowing
contaminated water from ponds, lakes, or untreated pools. In developing countries, a safe water supply and appropriate sanitation systems
are important measures for reducing the risk for shigellosis. There is
not yet a vaccine that is effective for preventing infection by Shigella.
Measles immunization can substantially reduce the incidence and
severity of diarrheal diseases, including shigellosis. Every infant should
be immunized against measles at the recommended age.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 246

Escherichia coli
Patrick C. Seed
Escherichia coli is an important cause of intraintestinal and extraintestinal infections. Intraintestinal infections present as diarrheal illnesses. Extraintestinal infections include disease of the urinary tract
(see Chapter 575), bloodstream (Chapters 148, 220, and 221), and central nervous system (Chapter 643). E. coli causing extraintestinal and
intraintestinal infections carry unique genetic attributes that encode
different sets of virulence factors and genetic programs. Extraintestinal
pathogenic E. coli increasingly harbor multidrug resistances, including transferrable plasmids resulting in extended-­spectrum β-­lactamase
(ESBL) production and resistance to penicillins, cephalosporins, and
aztreonam. Carbapenemase-­bearing E. coli have also emerged, often in
combination with multi–antibiotic class resistance, resulting in highly
drug-­resistant strains.
E. coli are members of the Enterobacteriaceae family and are facultative anaerobic, gram-­negative bacilli that usually ferment lactose.
Most fecal E. coli organisms are commensal, are ubiquitous among the
human gut microbiota starting in the first month of life, and do not
cause diarrhea. Six major groups of diarrheagenic E. coli pathotypes
have been characterized based on clinical, biochemical, and molecular-­
genetic features: enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC); enteroinvasive E.
coli (EIEC); enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC); Shiga toxin–producing
E. coli (STEC), also known as enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) or
verotoxin-­producing E. coli (VTEC); enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC
or EggEC); and diffusely adherent E. coli (DAEC).
E. coli strains can also be categorized by their serogroup, where O
refers to the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) O-­antigen or serotype and H
refers to the flagellar antigen, for example, E. coli O157:H7. However,
because each pathotype contains many serotypes (e.g., 117 ETEC serotypes have been identified) and some serotypes can belong to more
than one pathotype (e.g., O26:H11 can be either EPEC or EHEC
depending on which specific virulence genes are present), serotyping
usually does not provide definitive identification of pathotypes.
Virulence characteristics and the association of those traits with illness define enteric E. coli pathogenicity (Table 246.1). The mechanism
by which E. coli produces diarrhea typically involves specific adherence to a glycoprotein or glycolipid receptor on a target intestinal cell,
followed by production of a factor that injures or disturbs the function of intestinal cells. The genes for virulence properties and antibiotic
resistance are often carried on transferable plasmids, pathogenicity
islands, or bacteriophages.
In the developing world, diarrheagenic E. coli cause frequent infections in the first years of life and are responsible for 30–40% of all diarrhea cases in children worldwide. Cases peak during the warm months
in temperate climates and during rainy season months in tropical climates. Most diarrheagenic E. coli strains (except STEC) require a large
inoculum of organisms to induce disease, thus necessitating exposure
to grossly contaminated ingestible materials. Infection is most likely
when food-­handling or sewage-­disposal practices are suboptimal. The
diarrheagenic E. coli pathotypes are also important in North America
and Europe, although their epidemiology is less well defined in these
areas than in the developing world. In North America, the various diarrheagenic E. coli strains may cause as much as 30% of infectious diarrhea in children <5 years old.
A significant proportion of asymptomatic healthy children living
in developing countries carry diarrheagenic E. coli pathotypes. Fecal
contamination (human and animal), which is common in the low-­
resource environments, facilitates the transmission of pathogens. Modern, highly sensitive microbiologic methods enhance the sensitivity

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 246 u Escherichia coli

1781

Table 246.1  Clinical Characteristics, Pathogenesis, and Diagnosis of Diarrheagenic E. coli
CHARACTERISTICS OF DIARRHEA
PATHOGEN

POPULATIONS
AT RISK

DURATION

MAIN VIRULENCE FACTORS
ADHERENCE
FACTORS

WATERY

BLOODY

ETEC

>1 yr old and
travelers

+++

−

Acute

Colonization
factor antigens
(CFs or CFAs);
ECP

TOXINS

EIEC

>1 yr old

+

++

Acute

Invasion plasmid
antigen
(IpaA-­D)

EPEC

<2 yr old

+++

+

Acute,
prolonged or
persistent

A/E lesion,
intimin/Tir,
EspABD, Bfp

EspF, Map,
EAST1, SPATEs
(EspC)

Detection of intimin
gene (eae) ±
bundle-­forming
pili (bfpA) by PCR
and absence of
Shiga toxins; HEp-­
2 cells adherence
assay (LA, LLA)

STEC (EHEC/
VTEC)

6 mo to 10 yr
and elderly
persons

+

+++

Acute

A/E lesion,
intimin/Tir,
EspABD

Shiga toxins
(Stx1, Stx2,
and variants of
Stx2)

Detection of Shiga
toxins by enzyme
immunoassays or
PCR (Stx1, Stx2);
stool culture on
MacConkey-­
sorbitol media
to detect E.
coli O157.
Simultaneous
culture for O157
and nonculture
assays to detect
Shiga toxins

EAEC

<2 yr old,
HIV-­infected
patients, and
travelers

+++

+

Acute,
prolonged, or
persistent

Aggregative
adherence
fimbriae (AAF)

SPATEs (Pic,
Pet), ShET1,
EAST1

Detection of AggR,
AA plasmid, and
other virulence
genes: aap, aatA,
astA, set1A by
PCR; HEp-­2 cells
adherence assay
(AA)

DAEC

>1 yr old and
travelers

++

−

Acute

Afa/Dr, AIDA-­I

SPATEs (Sat)

Detection of Dr
adhesins (daaC
or daaD) and Dr-­
associated genes
by PCR; HEp-­2
cells adherence
assay (DA)

Heat-­labile
enterotoxin
(LT)
Heat-­stable
enterotoxin
(ST)

DIAGNOSIS
Detection of
enterotoxins
(LT and ST)
by enzyme
immunoassays or
PCR (lt, st)
Detection of
invasion plasmid
antigen of
Shigella (ipaH) by
PCR

−, Not present; +, present; ++, common; +++, very common; A/E lesion, attaching and effacing lesion; AA, aggregative adherence; Bfp, bundle-­forming pili; DA, diffuse adherence;
DAEC, diffusely adherent E. coli; EAEC, enteroaggregative E. coli; EAST1, enteroaggregative heat-­stable toxin; ECP, E. coli common pilus; EHEC, enterohemorrhagic E. coli; EIEC,
enteroinvasive E. coli; EPEC, enteropathogenic E. coli; EspABD, E. coli–secreted proteins A, B, and D; ETEC, enterotoxigenic E. coli; LA, localized adherence; LLA, localized-­like
adherence; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; ShET1, Shigella enterotoxin 1; SPATEs, serine-­protease autotransporter of Enterobacteriaceae; STEC, Shiga toxin–producing E. coli;
Tir, translocated intimin receptor; VTEC, verotoxin-­producing E. coli.

of detection in stool samples, and small numbers of bacteria can be
detected in stool samples. Therefore the prevalence of various enteropathogens in children with and without diarrhea must be considered.
Excretion of enteropathogens by children without diarrhea may be
explained by characteristics of the pathogens (virulence heterogeneity), the host (host susceptibility, age, nutritional status, breastfeeding,
immunity), and environmental factors (inoculum size).

ENTEROTOXIGENIC ESCHERICHIA COLI

ETEC accounts for a sizable fraction of dehydrating infantile diarrhea
in the developing world (10–30%) and of traveler’s diarrhea (20–60%
of cases); ETEC is the most common cause of traveler’s diarrhea. The

Global Enteric Multicenter Study (GEMS) found heat-­stable enterotoxin (ST)–expressing ETEC (with or without coexpression of heat-­
labile enterotoxin [LT]) to be a leading cause of diarrhea and increased
risk for death in young children in developing countries of Asia and
Africa. The typical signs and symptoms include explosive watery, nonmucoid, nonbloody diarrhea; abdominal pain; nausea; vomiting; and
little or no fever. The illness is usually self-­limited and resolves in 3-­5
days but occasionally lasts >1 week.
Diarrhea follows ETEC colonization of the small intestine and
elaboration of enterotoxin; however, ETEC causes few to no structural
alterations in the gut mucosa. ETEC strains secrete one or two enterotoxins. LT, a large molecule consisting of five receptor-­binding subunits

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1782 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
and one enzymatically active subunit, is structurally, functionally, and
neutralizing antibody cross-­reactive with cholera toxin produced by
Vibrio cholerae. LT stimulates adenylate cyclase, resulting in increased
cyclic adenosine monophosphate. ST is not related to cholera toxin and
stimulates guanylate cyclase, resulting in increased cyclic guanosine
monophosphate. Each toxin induces ion and water secretion into the
intestinal lumen, resulting in profuse watery diarrhea. The toxin genes
are carried on plasmids.
Colonization of the intestine requires fimbria colonization factor
antigens (CFAs), which promote adhesion to the intestinal epithelium.
Over 25 CFA types exist and can be expressed alone or in combination.
Roughly 30–50% of ETEC isolates lack a characterized CFA. However,
novel CFAs continue to be identified.
CFAs are highly immunogenic, but their multiplicity and allelic
variation elude vaccine development. Many strains produce a type IV
pilus involved in colonization and shared among other gram-­negative
bacterial pathogens. ETEC express type 1 pili (the “common pilus”),
produced by commensal and pathogenic E. coli strains. TibA, a nonfimbrial adherence factor, mediates potent bacterial attachment and
invasion of cells. For many years, the O serogroup was used to distinguish pathogenic from commensal E. coli. Molecular classification of
pathogenic E. coli based on specific virulence genes and whole genome
phylogeny has largely replaced classic O serogroup typing.

ENTEROINVASIVE ESCHERICHIA COLI

EIEC infections produce watery diarrhea or dysentery with blood,
mucus, and leukocytes in the stools, as well as fever, systemic toxicity,
crampy abdominal pain, tenesmus, and urgency. The illness resembles
bacillary dysentery because EIEC shares virulence genes with Shigella
spp. Sequencing of multiple housekeeping genes indicates that EIEC
is more related to Shigella than to noninvasive E. coli. EIEC diarrhea
occurs mostly in outbreaks; however, endemic disease occurs in developing countries. In some areas of the developing world, as many as 5%
of sporadic diarrhea episodes and 20% of bloody diarrhea cases are
caused by EIEC (see Chapter 245).
EIEC behave like Shigella in their capacity to invade gut epithelium
and cause colonic lesions with ulcerations, hemorrhage, mucosal and
submucosal edema, and infiltration by polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs). The invasive process involves initial entry into cells,
intracellular multiplication, intracellular and intercellular spread, and
host cell death. All bacterial genes necessary for entry into the host
cell are clustered within a 30-­kb region of a large virulence plasmid;
these genes are closely related to those found on the invasion plasmid
of Shigella spp. This region carries genes encoding the entry-­mediating
proteins, including proteins that form a needle-­like injection apparatus called type III secretion, required for secreting the invasins (IpaA-­D
and IpgD). The Ipas are the primary effector proteins of epithelial cell
invasion. EIEC contact with host cells triggers the syringe-­like type III
secretion apparatus and injection of Ipas into the host cell cytoplasm.
Like Shigella spp., EIEC are nonmotile (they lack H or flagellar antigens) and are usually non–lactose fermenting. The serogroups of EIEC
share LPS antigens related to Shigella LPS.

ENTEROPATHOGENIC ESCHERICHIA COLI

EPEC causes acute, prolonged, and persistent diarrhea, primarily in
children <2 years old in resource-poor countries, where the organism may account for 20% of infant diarrhea. In developed countries,
EPEC causes occasional daycare center and pediatric ward outbreaks.
Profuse watery, nonbloody diarrhea with mucus, vomiting, and low-­
grade fever are common symptoms. Prolonged diarrhea (>7 days) and
persistent diarrhea (>14 days) can lead to malnutrition, a potentially
mortality-­
associated outcome of EPEC infection in infants in the
developing world. Studies show that breastfeeding is protective against
diarrhea caused by EPEC.
EPEC colonization causes blunting of intestinal villi, local inflammatory changes, and sloughing of superficial mucosal cells; EPEC-­
induced lesions extend from the duodenum through the colon. EPEC
induces a characteristic attaching and effacing histopathologic lesion,
which is defined by the intimate attachment of bacteria to the epithelial

surface and effacement of host cell microvilli. Factors responsible for
the attaching and effacing lesion formation are encoded by the locus of
enterocyte effacement (LEE), a pathogenicity island with genes for a type
III secretion system, the translocated intimin receptor (Tir) and intimin, and multiple effector proteins such as the E. coli–secreted proteins
(EspA-­B-­D). Some strains adhere to the host intestinal epithelium in a
pattern known as localized adherence, a trait that is mediated in part by
the type IV bundle-­forming pilus (Bfp) encoded by a plasmid (the EAF
plasmid). After initial contact, proteins are translocated through filamentous appendages, forming a physical bridge between the bacteria
and the host cell; bacterial effectors (EspB, EspD, Tir) are translocated
through these conduits. Tir moves to the surface of host cells, where it
is bound by a bacterial outer membrane protein intimin (encoded by
the eae gene). Intimin-­Tir binding triggers polymerization of actin and
other cytoskeletal components at the site of attachment. These cytoskeletal changes result in intimate bacterial attachment to the host cell,
enterocyte effacement, and pedestal formation.
Other LEE-­encoded effectors include Map, EspF, EspG, EspH, and
SepZ. Various other effector proteins are encoded outside the LEE and
secreted by the type III secretion system (the non–LEE-­encoded proteins, or Nle). The contribution of these putative effectors (e.g., NleA/
EspI, NleB, NleC, NleD) to virulence is still under investigation. The
presence and expression of virulence genes vary among EPEC strains.
The eae (intimin) and bfpA genes serve as molecular markers of
EPEC and genetically subdivide EPEC into typical and atypical strains.
E. coli strains that are eae+/bfpA+ are classified as “typical” EPEC; most
of these strains belong to common O:H serotypes. E. coli strains that
are eae+/bfpA− are classified as “atypical” EPEC. Current data suggest that atypical EPEC are more prevalent than typical EPEC in both
developed and developing countries, even in persistent diarrhea cases.
In the GEMS study, typical EPEC was most associated with increased
risk of mortality, particularly in infants in Africa.

ENTEROAGGREGATIVE ESCHERICHIA COLI

EAEC infection produces (1) acute, prolonged, and persistent pediatric diarrhea in developing countries, most prominently in children
<2 years old and in malnourished children; (2) acute and persistent
diarrhea in HIV-­infected adults and children; and (3) acute traveler’s
diarrhea; EAEC is the second most common cause of traveler’s diarrhea after ETEC. Typical EAEC illness is manifested by watery, mucoid,
secretory diarrhea with low-­grade fever and little or no vomiting. The
watery diarrhea can persist for ≥14 days. Patients with EAEC may have
grossly bloody stools, and EAEC cannot be excluded on stool characteristics. EAEC colonization and infection lead to growth retardation
and malnutrition in infants in the developing world.
EAEC organisms form a characteristic biofilm on the intestinal
mucosa and induce shortening of the villi, hemorrhagic necrosis, and
inflammatory responses. The proposed model of pathogenesis of EAEC
infection involves three phases: adherence to the intestinal mucosa by
way of the aggregative adherence fimbriae or related adhesins, stimulation of enhanced mucus production, and toxin-­mediated inflammation
that results in damage to the mucosa and intestinal secretion. Diarrhea
caused by EAEC is predominantly secretory. The intestinal inflammatory response (elevated fecal lactoferrin, interleukin [IL]-­8 and IL-­1β)
may be related to growth impairment and malnutrition.
EAEC strains adhere in an aggregative, stacked-­brick pattern, called
aggregative adherence (AA), mediated by the AA fimbriae (AAF-­I, -­II,
and -­III). Some strains produce toxins, including the plasmid-­encoded
enterotoxin EAST1 (encoded by astA), a homolog of the ETEC ST; an
autotransporter toxin called Pet; other STATE toxins; and the chromosomally encoded enterotoxin ShET1 (encoded by setA and setB). Other
virulence factors include outer membrane and secreted proteins, such
as dispersin (aap), and the dispersin transport complex (aatPABCD).
EAEC is a heterogeneous group of E. coli. A transcriptional activator
called AggR controls the expression of plasmid-­borne and chromosomal virulence factors. Identification of AggR appears to reliably
identify illness-­associated pathogenic EAEC strains (“typical” EAEC).
EAEC aggR-­positive strains carrying one to three of the genes aap,
astA, and set1A are significantly associated with diarrhea compared

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 246 u Escherichia coli
with EAEC isolates lacking these genes. Other than the AAF and AggR
factors, EAEC strains are genetically diverse, display variable virulence,
and belong to multiple serogroups.

SHIGA TOXIN–PRODUCING ESCHERICHIA COLI

The STEC, which include EHEC, produce a range of clinical syndromes
from asymptomatic colonization, to mild diarrhea, to severe hemorrhagic colitis. Watery diarrhea that becomes bloody over several days
characterizes STEC illness. STEC infrequently causes fever, a distinguishing difference with shigellosis or EIEC disease. Most people with
STEC recover from the infection without further complication. However, 5–10% of children with STEC hemorrhagic colitis go on within a
few days to develop systemic complications such as hemolytic-­uremic
syndrome (HUS), characterized by acute kidney failure, thrombocytopenia, and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (see Chapter 560).
Severe illnesses occur most often among children 6 months to 10 years
old. Young children with STEC-­associated bloody diarrhea and neutrophilic leukocytosis in the early course of their diarrhea are at risk for
HUS progression. Older individuals can also develop HUS or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
STEC transmits person to person (e.g., in families and daycare centers) and in contaminated food and water; a small inoculum can lead to
infection. STEC food-­borne outbreaks have arisen from undercooked
hamburger, apple cider, lettuce, spinach, mayonnaise, salami, dry fermented sausage, and unpasteurized dairy products.
STEC primarily affects the colon, where organisms adhere to intestinal cells and produce attaching-­effacing lesions such as those seen with
EPEC and contain related genes (e.g., intimin, Tir, EspA-­D). Unlike
EPEC, STEC produces two major Shiga toxins (Stx1 and Stx2; previously called verotoxins and Shiga-­like). STEC may produce one or both
toxins and their closely related variants. Stx1 is essentially identical to
Shiga toxin, the protein synthesis–inhibiting exotoxin of Shigella dysenteriae serotype 1. Stx2 and variants of Stx2 are more distantly related
to Shiga toxin, although they share conserved sequences.
STEC Shiga toxins are composed of a single A subunit noncovalently
associated with a pentamer composed of identical B subunits. The B
subunits bind to globotriaosylceramide (Gb3), a glycosphingolipid
receptor on host cells. The A subunit is taken up by endocytosis. The
toxin target is the 28S ribosomal RNA (rRNA), which is depurated by
the toxin at a specific adenine residue, causing protein synthesis to cease
and affected cells to die. These toxins are carried on bacteriophages
that are normally inactive (lysogenic) in the bacterial chromosome;
when the phages are induced to replicate (e.g., by the stress induced by
many antibiotics), they cause lysis of the bacteria and release of large
amounts of toxin. Toxin translocation across the intestinal epithelium
into the systemic circulation can lead to damage of vascular endothelial
cells, resulting in activation of the coagulation cascade, formation of
microthrombi, intravascular hemolysis, and ischemia.
The clinical outcome of an STEC infection depends on a strain-­
specific combination of epithelial attachment and the toxin factors. The
Stx2 toxins are associated with a higher risk of causing HUS. Strains
producing only Stx1 often cause only watery diarrhea and, infrequently, HUS.
The most common STEC serotypes are E. coli O157:H7, E. coli
O111:NM, and E. coli O26:H11, although several hundred other STEC
serotypes have also been described. E. coli O157:H7 is the most virulent serotype and the serotype most frequently associated with HUS;
however, other non-­O157 serotypes also cause this illness.

ENTEROAGGREGATIVE HEMORRHAGIC
ESCHERICHIA COLI

In 2011, a massive outbreak of an unusual O104:H4 strain of diarrheagenic E. coli began in Germany. Eventually, >4,000 individuals were
sickened with hemorrhagic colitis; the outbreak involved primarily
adults (<100 children were reported affected). More than 800 people
developed HUS, and >50 of these individuals died. Genomic analysis
suggested the outbreak strain was most closely related to EAEC and
had acquired a lambdoid bacteriophage with genes for Shiga toxin
Stx2a. It was thus a hybrid pathogen with colonization mechanisms

1783

similar to a typical EAEC strain and toxin production typical of an
STEC strain. This outbreak strain carries Pic on the chromosome and
a pAA-­like plasmid encoding AAF, AggR, Pet, ShET1, and dispersin. A
second virulence plasmid encodes multiple antibiotic resistances. The
high morbidity and mortality associated with this strain may reflect
the stronger adherence of EAEC compared with STEC, delivering
more Stx to target cells. Alternative terminology for this strain includes
enteroaggregative hemorrhagic E. coli and Shiga toxin–producing
EAEC. Whether Shiga toxin production in an EAEC background merits separate classification is unclear. Organisms with Shiga toxin genes
in an atypical EPEC background were designated as a separate group
(referred to as STEC, EHEC, or verotoxin-­producing E. coli) before
the relative importance of the various genes was clear. EPEC strains
are a heterogeneous group themselves. The important issue is not the
nomenclature, but rather the concept that virulence genes can move
between E. coli, resulting in new variants.

DIFFUSELY ADHERENT ESCHERICHIA COLI

Multiple studies in both developed and developing countries find
DAEC associated with diarrhea, particularly in children after the first
1-­2 years of life. DAEC strains isolated from children and adults seem
to represent two different bacterial populations. Age-­dependent susceptibility or the use of inappropriate detection methods may explain
discrepancies among epidemiologic studies. Data suggest that these
organisms also cause traveler’s diarrhea in adults. DAEC produces prolonged watery diarrhea that is usually not dysenteric.
DAEC strains produce diffuse adherence on intestinal epithelial
cells using the Afa/Dr-­like surface fimbriae (designated F1845). The
outer membrane protein AIDA-­I also associates with diffuse adherence. DAEC secrete the serine-­protease autotransporters of Enterobacteriaceae (SPATE) cytotoxin Sat. Bacteria expressing Afa/Dr adhesins
interact with membrane-­bound receptors, including decay-­accelerating
factor (DAF). The structural and functional lesions induced by DAEC
include loss of microvilli and a decrease in the expression and enzyme
activities of functional brush border–associated proteins. Afa/Dr
DAEC isolates produce a secreted autotransporter toxin that induces
marked fluid accumulation in the intestine. DAEC strains typically
induce IL-­8 production in vitro.

DIAGNOSIS

The features of suspected E. coli diarrheal illness are seldom distinctive enough to allow confident diagnosis strictly on clinical observations and routine laboratory studies such as blood counts. Practical,
non–DNA-­dependent methods for routine diagnosis of diarrheagenic
E. coli have been developed primarily for STEC. Serotype O157:H7
is suggested by isolation of an E. coli that fails to ferment sorbitol
on MacConkey sorbitol medium; latex agglutination confirms that
the organism contains O157 LPS. Commercially available enzyme
immunoassay or latex agglutination assays detect Shiga toxins in the
routine hospital laboratory, although their variable sensitivity may
limit their value.
Commercial assays such as the FilmArray Gastrointestinal Panel
and Eurofins Diatherix Panel rapidly detect genetic markers for EPEC,
EAEC, ETEC, STEC, and EIEC, among other pathogen genes, directly
from a fecal sample in several hours and have been shown to reduce
hospitalizations and treatment costs. Although some STEC (O157:H7
strains) can be detected in routine microbiology laboratories using
selective media and appropriate antisera, the diagnosis of other diarrheagenic E. coli infection is traditionally made based on tissue culture
assays (e.g., HEp-­2-­cells assay for EPEC, EAEC, and DAEC) or identification of specific virulence factors of the bacteria by phenotype (e.g.,
toxins) or genotype. Multiplex, real-­time, or conventional polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) can be used for presumptive diagnosis of isolated
E. coli colonies. The genes commonly used for diagnostic PCR are lt
and st for ETEC; IpaH or iaL for EIEC; eae and bfpA for EPEC; eae,
Stx1, and Stx2 for STEC; AggR or the AA plasmid for EAEC; and daaC
or daaD for DAEC.
Serotyping does not provide definitive identification of pathotypes
(except for selected cases such as O157:H7) because each pathotype

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1784 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
contains many serotypes and some serotypes can belong to more than
one pathotype. Consequently, serotyping should not be used routinely
for diarrheagenic E. coli identification in clinical laboratories (e.g.,
to diagnose EPEC in infantile diarrhea), except during an outbreak
investigation.
Other laboratory data are, at best, nonspecific indicators of etiology.
Fecal leukocyte examination of the stool is often positive with EIEC or
occasionally positive with other diarrheagenic E. coli. With EIEC and
STEC there may be an elevated peripheral blood PMN count with a left
shift. Determination of Stx2 blood levels in the early, post-­bloody diarrhea period may be useful to identify children at risk of HUS; however,
a validated clinical test is not readily available. Fecal lactoferrin, IL-­8,
and IL-­1β can be used as inflammatory markers. Electrolyte changes
are nonspecific, reflecting only fluid loss.

TREATMENT

The cornerstone of management is appropriate fluid and electrolyte therapy (Fig. 246.1). In general, this therapy should include oral
replacement and maintenance with rehydration solutions such as those
specified by the World Health Organization (WHO). Early volume
expansion during STEC infection may reduce renal injury and improve
patient outcomes. Upon refeeding, continued supplementation with
oral rehydration fluids is appropriate to prevent recurrence of dehydration. Early refeeding (within 6-­8 hours of initiating rehydration) with
breast milk or infant formula or solid foods should be encouraged. Prolonged withholding of feeding can lead to chronic diarrhea and malnutrition. If the child is malnourished, oral zinc should be given to speed
recovery and decrease the risk of future diarrheal episodes.

Watery diarrhea

Bloody diarrhea

Rehydration
• Oral fluids, if tolerated
• IV fluids if oral fluids are not tolerated

Rehydration
• Oral fluids, if tolerated
• IV fluids if oral fluids are not tolerated or
severe clinical presentation

Antimotility agents
• Loperamide
Adults: 4 mg then 2 mg following
each unformed stool (max 16 mg per
day by prescription; 8 mg per day
over the counter). Use for 2 days
maximum
Children: Not recommended
• Bismuth salicylate
Adults: 524 mg every 30 min for up to
8 doses
Children : Not recommended due to
risk of Rye syndrome

Antimotility agents
• Not recommended for presumed or
possible STEC/EHEC
• Adults:
° Fluoroquinolones
• Ciprofloxacin: 750 mg once or 500
mg twice per day for 3 days
• Levofloxacin: 500 mg once or 500
mg daily for 3 days
Azithromycin: 1,000 mg once or 500
mg daily for 3 days
Rifaximin: 400 mg twice per day or
200 mg three times per day for 3
days
• Children:
Azithromycin: 10 mg/kg on day 1 and
then 5 mg/kg on days 2 and 3

Antibiotics
• May not be necessary for mild illness
• Consider when >2 unformed stools per
day
• Adults:
° Fluoroquinolones
• Ciprofloxacin: 750 mg once or 500
mg twice per day for 3 days
• Levofloxacin : 500 mg once or 500
mg daily for 3 days
Azithromycin: 1,000 mg once or 500
mg daily for 3 days
Rifaximin: 400 mg twice per day or
200 mg three times per day for 3
days
• Children:
Azithromycin: 10 mg/kg on day 1 and
then 5 mg/kg on days 2 and 3

STEC/EHEC identified and < 12 yrs old?
Yes
• Hospitalize
• IV hydration (0.9% NaCl or Lactated
Ringer's)
• Avoid antibiotics and antimotility agents
to reduce risk for HUS
• Avoid nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
agents (NSAIDS) to reduce kidney
injury
• Do not use blood or platelet transfusions
unless hemodynamically unstable,
severe thrombocytopenia, or bleeding
due to increased risk of HUS

Fig. 246.1 Algorithmic treatment summary for presumed and possible E. coli diarrheal illness.

In children, validated criteria for antimicrobial therapy of diarrheal
disease do not exist. The routine use of antimicrobials to treat childhood diarrhea is not recommended by the WHO except in severe
cases. Nonbloody diarrhea rarely requires antimicrobial therapy. Antimicrobials should be reserved for dysenteric presentations, when host
immunity is compromised by specific disorders, malnutrition, and
chronic disease (Table 246.2). Antimicrobials should also be considered for severe traveler’s diarrhea and diarrhea accompanied by fever
and bloody stools. In settings of good healthcare resources, rapid
molecular testing for STEC should be performed before initiating antibiotics, which can increase the risk for HUS.
Emerging antimicrobial resistance among diarrheal E. coli and other
bacterial pathogens complicates treatment. Multiple studies in developing countries have found that diarrheagenic E. coli strains typically
are resistant to antibiotics such as trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-­SMX) and ampicillin (60–70%). Most data come from case
series or clinical trials in adults with traveler’s diarrhea. ETEC responds
to antimicrobial agents such as TMP-­SMX when the E. coli strains are
susceptible. ETEC cases from traveler’s diarrhea trials respond to ciprofloxacin, azithromycin, and rifaximin. However, other than for a child
recently returning from travel in the developing world, empirical treatment of severe watery diarrhea with antibiotics is seldom appropriate.
In resource-­poor settings where rapid molecular panel tests are
not available, EIEC infections may be treated before culture results
are finalized because the clinician suspects shigellosis and has begun
empirical therapy. If the organisms prove to be susceptible, TMP-­SMX
is an appropriate choice. Although treatment of EPEC infection with
TMP-­SMX intravenously or orally for 5 days may be effective in speeding resolution, the lack of a rapid diagnostic test in the resource-­poor
setting makes treatment decisions difficult. Ciprofloxacin or rifaximin
is useful for EAEC traveler’s diarrhea, but pediatric data are sparse.
Specific therapy for DAEC has not been defined.
The STEC strains represent a particularly difficult therapeutic
dilemma; many antibiotics can induce bacterial stress, toxin production, and phage-­mediated bacterial lysis with toxin release. Antibiotics
should not be given for STEC infection because they can increase the
risk of HUS (see Chapter 560). In settings with rapid molecular diagnostics, a delay in providing antibiotics is rarely consequential and can
allow the clinician to more confidently recommend or exclude antibiotics from the therapeutic plan.

PREVENTION OF ILLNESS

In the developing world, prevention of disease caused by pediatric
diarrheagenic E. coli is probably best done by maintaining prolonged
breastfeeding, paying careful attention to personal hygiene, and following proper food-­and water-­handling procedures. People traveling

Table 246.2  Risk Factors Favoring Antibiotic Therapy in
Children with Acute Diarrhea
RISK FACTOR
CHILD FACTORS
Age <3 mo

EVIDENCE
Poor evidence in general; strong
indication for neonates

Severe clinical presentation

Poor evidence but strong
indications

Malnutrition

Strong evidence

Chronic disease and immune
deficiency

Strong evidence (IBD and HIV);
otherwise poor evidence;
strong indications

SETTING FACTORS
Daycare centers, closed
institutions, hospitals
Traveler’s diarrhea

Strong evidence if bacteria
spread is a potential
Evidence for adult is strong; poor
evidence in children

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 247 u Cholera 1785
to these places can be best protected by handwashing and consuming
only processed water, bottled beverages, breads, fruit juices, fruits that
can be peeled, or foods that are served steaming hot.
Prophylactic antibiotic therapy is effective in adult travelers but has
not been studied in children and is not recommended. Public health
measures, including sewage disposal and food-­handling practices, have
made pathogens that require a large inoculum to produce illness relatively uncommon in industrialized countries where food screening and
public health measures are robust. Food-­borne outbreaks of STEC are
a problem for which no adequate solution has been found. During the
occasional hospital outbreak of EPEC disease, attention to enteric isolation precautions and cohorting may be critical.
Protective immunity against diarrheagenic E. coli remains an active
area of research, and no vaccines are available for clinical use in children. Multiple vaccine candidates based on bacterial toxins and colonization factors have shown promise for prevention of ETEC in adult
travelers, but long-­term protection with these vaccines has not been
optimal, particularly in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 247

Cholera
James P. Nataro
Cholera is a dehydrating diarrheal disease that rapidly leads to death in
the absence of immediate initiation of appropriate treatment. Worldwide, 1.3 billion people are at risk for cholera, resulting in an estimated
1-­4 million cases and 95,000 deaths annually. Cholera is highly prone
to producing outbreaks, and the ongoing outbreaks in Yemen and Haiti
emphasize how cholera and potentially other infectious diseases can
easily reemerge in areas that have long been considered free of the disease after a natural disaster or war-­related conflicts.

ETIOLOGY

Cholera is caused by Vibrio cholerae, a gram-­negative, comma-­shaped
bacillus, subdivided into serogroups by its somatic O antigen. Of the
>200 serogroups, only serogroups O1 and O139 have been associated
with epidemics, although some non-­O1, non-­O139 V. cholerae strains
(e.g., O75, O141) are pathogenic and can cause small outbreaks. A flagellar H antigen is present but is not used for species identification. The
O1 serogroup is further divided into classical and El Tor biotypes based
on its biochemical characteristics. Since the turn of the 21st century,
only O1 El Tor has been reported; hybrids and variants of V. cholerae
O1 El Tor possessing classical genes have been reported worldwide.
These hybrid and variant strains have been associated with more severe
disease.
Each biotype of V. cholerae can be further subdivided into Inaba,
Ogawa, and Hikojima serotypes based on the antigenic determinants
on the O antigen. Inaba strains have A and C antigenic determinants,
whereas Ogawa strains have A and B antigenic determinants. Hikojima strains produce all three antigenic determinants but are unstable
and rare. Recent studies reveal that serotype switching results from a
selection process as yet unidentified.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The first six cholera pandemics originated in the Indian subcontinent
and were caused by classical O1 V. cholerae. The seventh pandemic
is the most extensive of all and is caused by V. cholerae O1 El Tor.
This pandemic began in 1961 in Sulawesi, Indonesia, and has spread
to the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia, Africa, Oceania, Southern Europe, and the Americas. In 1991, V. cholerae O1 El Tor first

appeared in Peru before rapidly spreading in the Americas. Cholera
becomes endemic in areas after outbreaks when a large segment of the
population develops immunity to the disease after recurrent exposure.
Although the Ganges River valley is the historical home of cholera, it
is estimated that >90% of global cases now occur in Africa, where the
disease remains highly endemic.
In 1992 the first non-­O1 V. cholerae that resulted in epidemics was
identified in India and Bangladesh and was designated V. cholerae
O139. From 1992 to 1994, this organism replaced O1 as the predominant cause of cholera in South Asia but has since been an uncommon
etiologic agent.
The hybrid El Tor strains were first identified sporadically in Bangladesh. In 2004, during routine surveillance in Mozambique, isolates
of V. cholerae O1 El Tor carrying classical genes were identified. Since
then, hybrid and variant El Tor strains have been reported in other
parts of Asia and Africa and have caused outbreaks in India and Vietnam. Although the classical biotype has virtually disappeared, its genes
remain within the El Tor biotype. The current circulating strain in Haiti
is closely related to the South Asian strain.
Humans are the only known hosts for V. cholerae, but free-­living and
plankton-­associated V. cholerae exist in the marine environment. The
organism thrives best in moderately salty water but can survive in rivers and freshwater if nutrient levels are high, as occurs when there is
organic pollution such as human feces. The formation of a biofilm on
abiotic surfaces and the ability to enter a viable but nonculturable state
have been hypothesized as factors that allow V. cholerae to persist in the
environment during interepidemic periods. Surface sea temperature,
pH, chlorophyll content, the presence of iron compounds and chitin,
and climatic conditions such as amount of rainfall and sea level rise are
all important environmental factors that influence the survival of V.
cholerae in the environment.
Consumption of contaminated water and ingestion of undercooked shellfish are the main modes of transmission, but additional
food sources are becoming increasingly common. In cholera-­endemic
areas, the incidence is highest among children <2 years old, probably
driven by the lack of previous exposure in young children. However,
during cholera epidemics, all age-­groups are usually affected, particularly in areas with no previous V. cholerae transmission. Persons with
blood group O, decreased gastric acidity, malnutrition, immunocompromised states, and absence of local intestinal immunity (i.e., prior
exposure) are at increased risk for developing severe disease. Household contacts of cholera-­infected patients are at high risk of infection,
because the stools of infected patients contain high concentrations
of the pathogen. Moreover, upon repeated cycles of passage through
humans, the organism becomes more virulent, demonstrating an
increased number of copies of the cholera toxin-­encoding genes.

PATHOGENESIS

Large inocula of bacteria (>108 colony-­forming units [CFUs]) are
required for severe cholera to occur; however, for persons whose gastric barrier is disrupted, a much lower dose (105 CFUs) is required, and
the infectious dose may be lower after serial propagation of the pathogen through humans. After ingestion of V. cholerae from the environment, several changes occur in the microorganisms as they traverse the
human intestine: increased expression of genes required for nutrient
acquisition, downregulation of chemotactic responses, and expression
of motility factors. Freshly excreted organisms (5-­24 hours after shedding) are maximally infectious and may represent the predominant
pathway for person-­to-­person transmission during epidemics.
The principal virulence factors of V. cholerae O1 are the cholera
toxin and the toxin-­coregulated pilus, a colonization factor that confers adherence to the epithelium of the small intestine (Fig. 247.1).
The cholera toxin consists of five binding B subunits and one active A
subunit. The B subunits are responsible for binding to the GM1 ganglioside receptors located in the small intestinal epithelial cells. After
binding, the A subunit is translocated into the cell, where it catalyzes
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) ribosylation of the alpha subunit of the
Gs signaling protein, which becomes constitutively active. Gs stimulates adenylate cyclase, leading to accumulation of cyclic adenosine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1786 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Fig. 247.1 Cholera pathogenesis and cholera toxin action. After ingestion, Vibrio cholerae colonize the small intestine and secrete cholera toxin,

which has a doughnut-­like structure with a central enzymatic toxic-­active A (CTA-­1 + CTA-­2) subunit associated with a pentameric B subunit (CTB).
After binding to GM1 ganglioside receptors on small intestinal epithelial cells, which are mainly localized in lipid rafts on the cell surface, the cholera
toxin is endocytosed and transported to the degradosome via the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by a retrograde pathway, which, dependent on cell
type, may or may not involve passage through the Golgi apparatus. In the ER, CTA dissociates from CTB, allowing CTA-­1 to reach the cytosol by being
translocated through the degradosome pathway. In the cytosol, CTA-­1 subunits rapidly refold and bind to the Gsα subunit of adenylate cyclase (AC) in
the cell membrane; on binding, CTA-­1 adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-­ribosylates the Gsα subunit, which stimulates AC activity, leading to an increase
in intracellular concentration of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), activation of protein kinase A (PKA), phosphorylation of the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a major chloride channel, and extracellular secretion of chloride ions (Cl−) and water. Cholera toxin–induced Cl− (and bicarbonate ion) secretion is particularly pronounced in intestinal crypt cells, whereas the increased intracellular cAMP concentrations
in villus cells mainly inhibit the uptake of sodium chloride (NaCl) and water. (Adapted from Clemens J, Shin S, Sur D, et al. New-­generation vaccines
against cholera. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;8:701–710; by permission of Nature Publishing Group.)

monophosphate and subsequent hyperactivation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) chloride channel.
Increased chloride and bicarbonate secretion by CFTR is accompanied
by sodium and water loss into the small bowel, greatly exceeding the
ability of the colon to reabsorb the fluid. These events eventually lead to
massive purging of electrolyte-­rich stool, potentially resulting in rapid
dehydration and depletion of electrolytes, including sodium, chloride,
bicarbonate, and potassium. Metabolic acidosis and hypokalemia then
ensue.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most cases of cholera are mild or inapparent. Among symptomatic
individuals, approximately 20% develop severe dehydration that can
rapidly lead to death. After a typical incubation period of 1-­2 days
(range: several hours to 5 days), acute watery diarrhea and vomiting
ensue. The onset may be sudden, with profuse watery diarrhea, but
some patients have a prodrome of anorexia and abdominal discomfort
and the stool may initially be brown. Diarrhea can progress to painless purging of profuse rice-­water stools (suspended flecks of mucus)
with a fishy smell, which is the hallmark of the disease (Figs. 247.2 and
247.3). Fever is infrequent and suggests a different diagnosis. Vomiting
with clear watery fluid is usually present at the onset of the disease.
Stool from cholera patients typically contains more sodium (along with
potassium and bicarbonate) compared with stool from diarrhea caused
by other pathogens; the high stool volume, coupled with the presence
of electrolytes, challenges clinicians to avoid dehydration and electrolyte imbalance. Muscle cramping and weakness commonly occur as a
result of potassium and calcium imbalance.
The term cholera gravis refers to the most severe form of the disease, characterized by rice water stools and fecal purging at rates of
up to 500-­1,000 mL/hr. This condition inevitably leads to dehydration,
manifested by decreased urine output, a sunken fontanel (in infants),
sunken eyes, absence of tears, dry oral mucosa, shriveled hands and
feet (“washerwoman’s hands”), poor skin turgor, thready pulse, and
tachycardia. If left untreated, hypotension and vascular collapse are
inevitable (see Fig. 247.3). Patients with metabolic acidosis can present with typical Kussmaul breathing. Although patients may be initially
thirsty and awake, they rapidly progress to obtundation and coma. If
fluid losses are not rapidly corrected, death can occur within hours.

Cholera sicca is an unusual manifestation of severe cholera in which
very rapid fluid loss is confined to the intestinal lumen; such patients
may succumb to dehydration without frank diarrhea.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Findings associated with dehydration such as elevated urine specific
gravity and hemoconcentration are evident. Hypoglycemia is a common finding that is caused by decreased food intake during the acute
illness. Serum potassium may be initially normal or even high in the
presence of metabolic acidosis; however, as the acidosis is corrected,
hypokalemia may become evident. Metabolic acidosis caused by
bicarbonate loss and tissue hypoperfusion is a prominent finding in
severe cholera. Serum sodium and chloride levels may be normal or
decreased, depending on the severity of the disease. Serum calcium
may be elevated because of hemoconcentration.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

In children who have acute watery diarrhea with severe dehydration
residing in a cholera-­endemic area or who have recently traveled to
an area known to have cholera, the disease may be suspected pending laboratory confirmation. Cholera differs from other diarrheal diseases in that it often occurs in large outbreaks affecting both adults and
children. Treatment of dehydration should begin as soon as possible.
Diarrhea caused by other etiologies (e.g., enterotoxigenic Escherichia
coli or rotavirus) may be difficult to distinguish from cholera clinically.
Microbiologic isolation of V. cholerae remains the gold standard for
diagnosis. Although definitive diagnosis is not required for treatment
to be initiated, laboratory confirmation is necessary for epidemiologic
surveillance. V. cholerae may be isolated from stools, vomitus, or rectal swabs. Specimens may be transported on Cary-­Blair media if they
cannot be processed immediately. Selective media, such as thiosulfate-­
citrate–bile salts sucrose (TCBS) agar, should be used; V. cholerae
exhibits a distinctive morphology on this medium, with confirmation
made by serotyping. Because most laboratories in industrialized countries do not routinely culture for V. cholerae, clinicians should request
appropriate cultures for clinically suspected cases.
Rapid diagnostic tests are currently available and show high sensitivity and specificity. These tests may be especially useful in areas with
limited laboratory capacity, allowing early identification of cases at the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 247 u Cholera 1787
delayed or inadequate rehydration therapy. Renal failure from prolonged hypotension can occur. Unless potassium supplementation is
provided, hypokalemia can lead to nephropathy and focal myocardial
necrosis. Hypoglycemia is common among children and can lead to
seizures unless it is appropriately corrected. Pneumonia is a frequent
complication in young children and may be the result of aspiration
during vomiting.

TREATMENT

Fig. 247.2 Rice-­water stool in a patient with cholera. (Modified from

Harris JB, LaRocque RC, Qadri F. Cholera. Lancet. 2012;379:2466–
2474.)

Fig. 247.3 A child lying on a cholera cot showing typical signs of
severe dehydration from cholera. The patient has sunken eyes, lethargic appearance, and poor skin turgor, but within 2 hours was sitting
up, alert, and eating normally. (From Sack DA, Sack RB, Nair GB, et al.
Cholera. Lancet. 2004;363:223–233.)

onset of an outbreak and facilitating a timely response. Molecular identification with the use of polymerase chain reaction and DNA probes
is available but often not feasible in areas where cholera exists. Stool
examination reveals few fecal leukocytes and erythrocytes because
cholera does not cause inflammation. Dark-­field microscopy may be
used for rapid identification of typical darting motility in wet mounts
of rice-­water stools, a finding that disappears once specific antibodies
against V. cholerae O1 or O139 are added.

COMPLICATIONS

When optimally treated, patients with cholera typically recover fully
without complications. Most adverse outcomes occur as a result of

Rehydration is the mainstay of therapy (see Chapter 74). Appropriate
case management substantially decreases case fatalities to <1%. Application of World Health Organization (WHO) recommendations for
diarrheal rehydration is recommended for all patients with diarrhea,
but particularly when cholera is in the differential diagnosis. Children
with mild or moderate dehydration may be treated with oral rehydration solution (ORS) unless the patient is in shock, is obtunded, or has
intestinal ileus. Careful monitoring should occur during ORS, with
attention to progression to more severe dehydration. Vomiting is not
a contraindication to ORS. Severely dehydrated patients (>10% body
weight) require intravenous fluid, ideally with lactated Ringer solution.
When available, rice-­based ORS should be used when oral rehydration
is attempted, because this fluid has been shown to be superior to standard ORS in children and adults with cholera. The aim of rehydration
should be replacement of the entire fluid deficit within 4 hours, if possible. Careful monitoring of ongoing losses is essential. If stool volumes
cannot be measured, losses may be roughly estimated at 10-­20 mL/kg
of body weight for each episode of diarrhea or vomiting. After initial
rehydration, patients should be reassessed every 1-­2 hours, or more
frequently if profuse diarrhea is ongoing; diarrhea typically begins to
remit after 24 hours. Feeding should not be withheld during diarrhea.
Frequent, small feedings are better tolerated than less frequent, large
feedings.
Antibiotics should only be given in patients with moderately
severe to severe dehydration. As soon as vomiting stops (usually
within 4-­6 hours after initiation of rehydration therapy), an antibiotic to which local V. cholerae strains are sensitive must be administered. Antibiotics shorten the duration of illness, decrease fecal
excretion of Vibrio, decrease the volume of diarrhea, and reduce
the fluid requirement during rehydration. Single-­
dose antibiotics increase compliance and are generally recommended; doxycycline, ciprofloxacin, and azithromycin are effective against cholera.
The most clinical evidence for efficacy exists for tetracycline antibiotics (especially a single 300-­mg dose of doxycycline). However,
there are increasing reports of resistance to tetracyclines and to
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole and other drugs. Because of these
multidrug-­resistant strains, antibiotic treatment must be tailored
based on available susceptibility results from the area. Recommendations for single-­dose therapy for children include doxycycline
2-4 mg/kg PO as a single dose up to 300 mg; 300 mg PO should be
given to children 12 years of age and older. Alternative single dose
regimens include azithromycin 20 mg/kg (max 1 g) PO, or ciprofloxacin 20 mg/kg (max 1 g) PO. Children >12 years of age should
receive the adult doses. Cephalosporins and aminoglycosides are not
clinically effective against cholera and therefore should not be used,
even if in vitro tests show strains to be sensitive.
Zinc should be given as soon as vomiting stops. Zinc deficiency is
common among children in many developing countries. Zinc supplementation in children <5 years old shortens the duration of diarrhea
and reduces subsequent diarrhea episodes when given daily for 14 days
at the time of the illness. Children <6 months old should receive 10 mg
of oral zinc daily for 2 weeks, and children >6 months should receive 20
mg of oral zinc daily for 2 weeks.

PREVENTION

Improved personal hygiene, access to clean water, and sanitation are the
mainstays of cholera control. Travelers from developed countries often
have no prior exposure to cholera and are therefore at risk of developing the disease. Children traveling to cholera-­affected areas should
avoid drinking potentially contaminated water and eating high-­risk

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1788 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 247.1  Available Oral Cholera Vaccines*
VACCINE TRADE NAME

CONTENTS

DOSING SCHEDULE

Dukoral (Crucell)

1 mg of recombinant B subunit of cholera toxin plus 2.5 × 1010
colony-­forming units of the following strains of V. cholerae:
Formalin-­killed El Tor Inaba (Phil 6973)
Heat-­killed classical Inaba (Cairo 48)
Heat-­killed classical Ogawa (Cairo 50)
Formalin-­killed classical Ogawa (Cairo 50)

Children 2-­6 yr old: 3 doses, 1-­6 wk apart
Adults and children >6 yr old: 2 doses, 1-­6 wk
apart

Shanchol (Shantha Biotech)
Euvichol (Eubiologics)

V. cholerae O1:
600 EU Formalin-­killed El Tor Inaba (Phil 6973)
300 EU Heat-­killed classical Inaba (Cairo 48)
300 EU Heat-­killed classical Ogawa (Cairo 50)
300 EU Formalin-­killed classical Ogawa (Cairo 50)
V. cholerae O139-­600 EU of formalin-­killed strain 4260B

Adults and children ≥1 yr old: 2 doses, 2 wk
apart

*WHO-­prequalified vaccines.

foods such as raw or undercooked fish and shellfish. No country or
territory requires vaccination against cholera as a condition for entry.
Alarmed by the increasing prevalence of cholera, in 2011 the World
Health Assembly recommended the use of oral cholera vaccines to
complement existing water, sanitation, and hygiene initiatives for cholera control. In 2016, a live oral cholera vaccine, CVD 103-Hg-R (Vaxchora, PaxVax), was licensed in the United States for use in adults age
18-­64 years traveling to cholera-­affected areas.
Older-­generation parenteral cholera vaccines have not been recommended by the WHO because of the limited protection they confer
and their high reactogenicity. Oral cholera vaccines are safe, are protective for approximately 2-­5 years and confer moderate herd protection. Three oral cholera vaccines are currently available internationally
and recognized by the WHO (Table 247.1). An internationally licensed
killed whole cell oral cholera vaccine with recombinant B subunit
(Dukoral, Crucell) has been available in >60 countries, including the
European Union, and provides protection against cholera in endemic
areas as well as cross-­protection against certain strains of enterotoxigenic E. coli. The two other vaccines (Shanchol, Shantha Biotech; and
Euvichol, Eubiologics) are variants of the first vaccine and contain the
V. cholerae O1 and O139 antigens but do not contain the B subunit.
Without the B subunit, these vaccines do not require buffer for administration, thereby reducing administration costs and resources, making
them easier to deploy.
Several countries are now using oral cholera vaccines in mass vaccination campaigns where cholera remains a substantial problem. A
cholera vaccine stockpile, established by the WHO, is now available
and can be accessed by countries at risk for cholera, supplementing
efforts to lessen the impact of this ongoing cholera scourge.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 248

Campylobacter
Ericka V. Hayes
Campylobacter, typically Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli,
are found globally and are among the most common causes of human
intestinal infections. Clinical presentation varies by age and underlying
conditions.

ETIOLOGY

More than 20 species of Campylobacter are recognized. Most of these
have been isolated from humans, and many are considered pathogenic.

The most significant of these are C. jejuni and C. coli, which are believed
to cause the majority of human enteritis. More than 100 serotypes of C.
jejuni have been identified. C. jejuni has been subspeciated into C. jejuni
subsp. jejuni and C. jejuni subsp. doylei. Although C. jejuni subsp. doylei
has been isolated from humans, it is much less common, less hardy, and
more difficult to isolate. Other species, including Campylobacter fetus,
Campylobacter lari, and Campylobacter upsaliensis, have been isolated
from patients with diarrhea, although much less frequently (Table 248.1).
Emerging Campylobacter spp. have been implicated in acute gastroenteritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and peritonitis, including C. concisus
and C. ureolyticus. Additional Campylobacter spp. have been isolated from
clinical specimens, but their roles as pathogens have not been established.
Campylobacter organisms are gram-­
negative, curved, thin (0.2-­
0.8 μm wide), non–spore-­forming rods (0.5-­5 μm long) that usually
have tapered ends. They are smaller than most other enteric bacterial
pathogens and have variable morphology, including short, comma-­
shaped or S-­shaped organisms and long, multispiraled, filamentous,
seagull-­shaped organisms. Individual organisms are usually motile
with a flagellum at one or both poles depending on the species. Such
morphology enables these bacteria to colonize the mucosal surfaces of
both the gastrointestinal (GI) and respiratory tracts and move through
them in a spiraling motion. Most Campylobacter organisms are microaerophilic, occasionally partially anaerobic, and oxidase positive. Most
can transform into coccoid forms under adverse conditions, especially
oxidation.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Worldwide, Campylobacter enteritis is a leading cause of acute diarrhea. Efforts to reduce Campylobacter contamination and use of safe
handling practices have led to decreased incidence. Campylobacter
infections can be both food-­borne and water-­borne and most frequently result from ingestion of contaminated poultry (chicken, turkey) or raw milk. Less often, the bacteria come from drinking water,
household pets (cats, dogs, hamsters), and farm animals. Infections are
more common in resource-­limited settings, are prevalent year-­round
in tropical areas, and can exhibit seasonal peaks in temperate regions
(late spring with a peak midsummer in most of the United States,
with a smaller secondary peak in late fall). In industrialized countries,
Campylobacter infections peak in early childhood and again in young
adulthood (15-­44 years). This second peak is not seen with Salmonella
and Shigella infections. In resource-limited countries, repeated infections are common in childhood, leading to increased immunity and
rare disease in adulthood. Each year in the United States, there are an
estimated 1.5 million cases of Campylobacter infection; in 2022 the
incidence of infections with Campylobacter was 19.2 infections per
100,000 population. Of these, death is rare, with 50-­150 reports annually. In The Netherlands, medical record review shows that, on average, each resident acquires asymptomatic Campylobacter colonization
every 2 years, progressing to symptomatic infection in approximately
1% of colonized people.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 248.1

 

Chapter 248 u Campylobacter 1789
Campylobacter Species Associated with Human Disease

SPECIES

DISEASES IN HUMANS

C. jejuni

Gastroenteritis, bacteremia, Guillain-­Barré syndrome

Poultry, raw milk, cats, dogs, cattle, swine,
monkeys, water

C. coli

Gastroenteritis, bacteremia

Poultry, raw milk, cats, dogs, cattle, swine,
monkeys, oysters, water

C. fetus

Bacteremia, meningitis, endocarditis, mycotic
aneurysm, diarrhea

Sheep, cattle, birds, dogs

C. hyointestinalis

Diarrhea, bacteremia, proctitis

Swine, cattle, deer, hamsters, raw milk, oysters

C. lari

Diarrhea, colitis, appendicitis, bacteremia, UTI

Seagulls, water, poultry, cattle, dogs, cats,
monkeys, oysters, mussels

C. upsaliensis

Diarrhea, bacteremia, abscesses, enteritis, colitis,
hemolytic-­uremic syndrome

Cats, dogs, other domestic pets

C. concisus

Diarrhea, gastritis, enteritis, periodontitis

Human oral cavity, dogs

C. sputorum

Diarrhea, bedsores, abscesses, periodontitis

Human oral cavity, cattle, swine, dogs

C. rectus

Periodontitis

C. mucosalis

Enteritis

Swine, dogs

C. jejuni subsp. doylei

Diarrhea, colitis, appendicitis, bacteremia, UTI

Swine

C. curvus

Gingivitis, alveolar abscess

Poultry, raw milk, cats, dogs, cattle, swine,
monkeys, water, human oral cavity

C. gracilis

Head and neck abscesses, abdominal abscesses,
empyema

Dogs

C. cryaerophila

Diarrhea

Swine

Food-­borne infection is most common and can be seen with the consumption of raw or undercooked meat and by cross-­contamination of
other foods. Although chickens are the classic source of Campylobacter,
many animal sources of human food can also harbor Campylobacter,
including seafood. C. coli has been linked to swine. Poultry is more
likely to be heavily contaminated, whereas red meats often have fewer
organisms. Unpasteurized milk products are also a documented source.
Additionally, many pets can carry Campylobacter, and flies inhabiting
contaminated environments can acquire the organism. Shedding from
animals can contaminate water sources. Humans can acquire infection
from water, although much less frequently than from contaminated food.
Airborne (droplet) transmission of Campylobacter has occurred in
poultry workers. Use of antimicrobials in animal foods may increase the
prevalence of antibiotic-­resistant Campylobacter isolated from humans.
Human infection can result from exposure to as few as 500 bacteria, although a higher dose (>9,000 bacteria) is often needed to cause
illness reproducibly. Inoculum effectiveness is dependent on host factors, including immune status and stomach acidification. C. jejuni and
C. coli spread person to person, perinatally, and at childcare centers
where diapered toddlers are present. People infected with C. jejuni usually shed the organism for weeks, but some can shed for months, with
children tending toward longer shedding. Handwashing is critical to
preventing spread in these environments.

PATHOGENESIS

Most Campylobacter isolates are acid sensitive and should, in theory,
be eradicated in the stomach. Therefore models for the pathogenesis of
C. jejuni enteritis include mechanisms to transit the stomach, adhere to
intestinal mucosal cells, and initiate intestinal lumen fluid accumulation.
Host conditions associated with reduced gastric acidity, such as proton
pump inhibitor use, and foods capable of shielding organisms in transit
through the stomach may help allow Campylobacter to reach the intestine. Once there, Campylobacter is able to adhere to and invade intestinal
mucosal cells through motility, including use of flagellae, and by the use
of surface proteins (e.g., PEB1, CadF), large plasmids (e.g., pVir), surface

COMMON SOURCES

adhesins (e.g., JIpA), and chemotactic factors. Lumen fluid accumulation
is associated with direct damage to mucosal cells resulting from bacterial invasion and potentially from an enterotoxin and other cytotoxins.
Additionally, C. jejuni has mechanisms that enable transit away from the
mucosal surface. The factors used depend on the species involved.
Campylobacter spp. differ from other enteric bacterial pathogens
in that they have both N-­ and O-­linked glycosylation capacities. N-­
linked glycosylation is associated with molecules expressed on the
bacterial surface, and O-­linked glycosylation appears limited to flagellae. Slipped-­strand mispairing in glycosylation loci results in modified,
antigenically distinct surface structures. It is hypothesized that antigenic variation provides a mechanism for immune evasion.
C. fetus possesses a high molecular weight S-­layer protein that mediates high-­level resistance to serum-­mediated killing and phagocytosis
and is therefore thought to be responsible for the propensity to produce bacteremia. C. jejuni and C. coli are generally sensitive to serum-­
mediated killing, but serum-­resistant variants exist. Some suggest these
serum-­resistant variants may be more capable of systemic dissemination.
Campylobacter infections can be followed by Guillain-­Barré syndrome (GBS), reactive arthritis, and erythema nodosum. Such complications are thought to be from molecular mimicry between nerve,
joint, and dermal tissue and Campylobacter surface antigens. Most
Campylobacter infections are not followed by immunoreactive complications, indicating that host conditions along with other factors, in
addition to molecular mimicry, are required for these complications.
It is proposed that low-­grade inflammation caused by Campylobacter,
below the threshold that can be detected by endoscopy, results in cross-­
talk with gut nerves, leading to symptoms.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

There are a variety of clinical presentations of Campylobacter infections, depending on host factors such as age, immune competence, and
underlying conditions. Infection presents most often as gastroenteritis,
but also as bacteremia, neonatal infections, and, less often, extraintestinal infections.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1790 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Acute Gastroenteritis

Acute gastroenteritis with diarrhea is usually caused by C. jejuni
(90–95%) or C. coli and, rarely, by C. lari, C. hyointestinalis, or C.
upsaliensis. Infections with C. jejuni and C. coli are indistinguishable by clinical presentation. The average incubation period is 3
days (range: 1-­7 days). One third of symptomatic patients can have
a prodrome with fever, headache, dizziness, and myalgias; 1-­3 days
later, they develop cramping abdominal pain and loose, watery stools
or, less frequently, mucus-­containing bloody stools. In severe cases
(approximately 15%), blood appears in the stools 2-­4 days after the
onset of symptoms. In younger children, >50% may develop blood
in their stools. Some patients do not develop diarrhea at all, most
often children who are 6-­15 years old. Fever may be the only manifestation initially and is most pronounced in patients >1 year old. A
reported 60–90% of older children also complain of abdominal pain.
The abdominal pain is most frequently periumbilical and sometimes
persists after the stools return to normal. The abdominal pain can
mimic appendicitis, colitis, or intussusception. Nausea is common,
with up to 25% of adults developing vomiting. Vomiting tends to
be more common the younger the patient and is most frequent in
infants. Infection with species other than C. jejuni and C. coli may
have milder symptoms.
Diarrhea lasts approximately 7 days and will resolve spontaneously.
More mild disease can last 1-­2 days; 20–30% of patients will have
symptoms for 2 weeks, and 5–10% are symptomatic for >2 weeks.
Relapse can occur in 5–10% of patients. Persistent or recurrent Campylobacter gastroenteritis has been reported in immunocompetent
patients, in patients with hypogammaglobulinemia (both congenital
and acquired), and in patients with AIDS. Persistent infection can
mimic chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD); therefore Campylobacter infection should also be considered when evaluating for IBD.
Some evidence supports that Campylobacter infection may also be
the trigger for development of IBD. Fecal shedding of the organisms
in untreated patients usually lasts for 2-­3 weeks, with a range from a
few days to several months. Shedding tends to occur longer in young
children. Acute appendicitis, mesenteric lymphadenitis, and ileocolitis
have been reported in patients who have had appendectomy during C.
jejuni infection.

Bacteremia

Transient bacteremia has been shown in early acute infection in 0.1–
1% of patients. With the exception of bacteremia caused by C. fetus,
bacteremia with Campylobacter occurs most often among patients
with chronic illnesses or immunodeficiency (e.g., HIV), severe malnutrition, and in extremes of age. However, bacteremia is also well
described in patients without underlying disease. The majority of
cases of bacteremia are asymptomatic. C. fetus causes bacteremia
in adults with or without identifiable focal infection, usually in the
setting of underlying conditions such as malignancy, immunodeficiency, or diabetes mellitus. When symptomatic, C. jejuni bacteremia is associated with fever, headache, malaise, and abdominal pain.
Relapsing or intermittent fever is associated with night sweats, chills,
and weight loss when the illness is prolonged. Lethargy and confusion
can occur, but focal neurologic signs are unusual without cerebrovascular disease or meningitis. Moderate leukocytosis with left shift
may be found. Variable presentations have been described, including
transient asymptomatic bacteremia, rapidly fatal septicemia, and prolonged bacteremia of 8-­13 weeks.

Focal Extraintestinal Infections

Focal infections caused by C. jejuni are rare and occur mainly among
neonates and immunocompromised patients. Multiple sites have been
reported, including meningitis, pneumonia, thrombophlebitis, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, ileocecitis, urinary tract infection, arthritis,
peritonitis, pericarditis, and endocarditis. C. fetus shows a predilection for vascular endothelium, leading to endocarditis, pericarditis,
thrombophlebitis, and mycotic aneurysms. C. hyointestinalis has been

associated with proctitis, C. upsaliensis with breast abscesses, and C.
rectus with periodontitis.

Perinatal Infections

Perinatal infections are most often acquired at birth from a mother
infected with or shedding Campylobacter. Maternal C. fetus and C.
jejuni infections may be asymptomatic and can result in abortion,
stillbirth, premature delivery, or neonatal infection with sepsis and
meningitis. Severe perinatal infections are uncommon and are caused
most often by C. fetus and, rarely, by C. jejuni. Neonatal infection with
C. jejuni is associated with diarrhea that may be bloody. Nosocomial
infections in nurseries have also been described.

DIAGNOSIS

The clinical presentation of Campylobacter enteritis can be similar
to that of enteritis caused by other bacterial pathogens. The differential diagnosis includes Shigella, Salmonella, Escherichia coli, Yersinia
enterocolitica, Aeromonas, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, and amebiasis.
Fecal leukocytes are found in as many as 75% of cases, and fecal blood
is present in 50% of cases (higher in pediatric patients). Campylobacter should be considered in patients with bloody stools, fever, and
abdominal pain.
The diagnosis of Campylobacter enteritis is usually confirmed by
identification of the organism in cultures of stool or rectal swabs. Isolation is most likely from selective media such as CAMPY-­agar grown
in microaerophilic conditions (5–10% oxygen), 1–10% carbon dioxide, with some hydrogen. Some C. jejuni grow best at 42°C (107.6°F).
Growth on solid media results in small (0.5-­1.0 mm), slightly raised,
smooth colonies. Organisms can be identified from stool microscopically in approximately 50% of known Campylobacter cases. Gram stain
is even less sensitive. Stool culture is >90% sensitive and is the standard
method of diagnosis. Visible growth on stool culture is most often present in 1-­2 days. Visible growth in blood cultures is often not apparent
until 5-­14 days after inoculation.
Routine culture may be adequate for isolation of C. jejuni because
of the large numbers of bacteria that are often present. However,
because Campylobacter organisms grow more slowly under routine
conditions than do other enteric bacteria, routine culture can result
in failure because of overgrowth of other enteric bacteria. Campylobacter culture can be enhanced, when necessary, with selective media.
However, selective culture media developed to enhance isolation of C.
jejuni may inhibit the growth of other Campylobacter spp. Filtration
methods are available and can preferentially enrich for Campylobacter
by selecting for their small size. These methods allow subsequent culture of the enriched sample on antibiotic-­free media, enhancing rates
of isolation of Campylobacter organisms inhibited by the antibiotics
included in standard selective media. Isolation of Campylobacter from
normally sterile sites does not require enhancement procedures. Clinically, it is not necessary to speciate Campylobacter because the disease
is the same. Speciation can be done, when needed, and specialized laboratories can perform strain typing when required for epidemiologic
purposes.
For rapid diagnosis of Campylobacter enteritis, direct carbolfuchsin stain of fecal smear, indirect fluorescence antibody test, dark-­field
microscopy, or latex agglutination were used historically. Polymerase
chain reaction testing is more specific and sensitive and has become
more widely available for rapid testing, often grouped with testing
for other bacterial, viral, and parasitic stool pathogens in a multiplex assay. At this time, the recommendation remains to confirm all
positive rapid tests with culture, which also allows for susceptibility testing and epidemiologic investigations. Antigen tests are also
available, although false-­positive results have been reported. Serologic diagnosis is also possible and is most helpful in patients with
late-­onset reactive arthritis or GBS, because these patients may have
negative stool cultures by the time of presentation with these late
complications.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 248 u Campylobacter 1791
COMPLICATIONS

Severe, prolonged C. jejuni infection can occur in patients with immunodeficiencies, including hypogammaglobulinemia, malnutrition, and
AIDS. In patients with AIDS, increased frequency and severity of C.
jejuni infection occurs; severity correlates inversely with CD4 count.
Complications can include acute complications, as described earlier,
and late-­onset complications that may present after the acute infection
has resolved. The most common late-­onset complications include reactive arthritis and GBS.

Reactive Arthritis

Reactive arthritis can accompany Campylobacter enteritis in adolescents and adults, especially in patients who are positive for HLA-­B27
(see Chapter 198). Reactive arthritis occurs in up to 3% of patients,
although up to 13% may have joint symptoms. This manifestation
usually appears 1-­2 weeks after the onset of diarrhea (range 5-40
days). It involves mainly large joints and resolves without sequelae.
The arthritis is typically migratory and occurs without fever. Synovial fluid lacks bacteria. The arthritis responds well to nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs and typically resolves after 1 week, though
cases are reported with symptoms lasting for several months. Reactive arthritis with conjunctivitis, urethritis, and rash (including erythema nodosum) also occurs but is less common.

Guillain-­Barré Syndrome

GBS is an acute demyelinating disease of the peripheral nervous system characterized clinically by acute flaccid paralysis and is the
most common cause of neuromuscular paralysis worldwide (see
Chapter 656). GBS carries a mortality rate of approximately 2%, and
approximately 20% of patients develop major neurologic sequelae.
C. jejuni has been identified as the trigger in up to 40% of patients
with GBS and is most closely linked to the serotypes Penner O19
and O41. It has been reported 1-­12 weeks after C. jejuni gastroenteritis in 1 of every 1,000 C. jejuni infections. Stool cultures obtained
from patients with GBS at the onset of neurologic symptoms have
yielded C. jejuni in >25% of the cases. Serologic studies suggest
that 20–45% of patients with GBS have evidence of recent C. jejuni
infection. Molecular mimicry between nerve tissue GM1 ganglioside
and Campylobacter surface antigens may be the triggering factor in
Campylobacter-­associated GBS. The Miller Fisher variant, which
more often affects cranial nerves, is characterized by ataxia, areflexia,
and ophthalmoplegia and is linked to cross-­reacting antibodies to
the GQ1b ganglioside found in cranial nerve myelin; the most common serotype for this variant is Penner O2. When associated with
Campylobacter, GBS is more likely to be the axonal form and has a
worse prognosis with slower recovery and more neurologic disability. The management of GBS includes supportive care, intravenous
immunoglobulin, and plasma exchange.

Other Complications

Immunoglobulin A nephropathy and immune complex glomerulonephritis with C. jejuni antigens in the kidneys have been reported. Campylobacter infection has also been associated with hemolytic anemia
and hemolytic-­uremic syndrome.

Treatment

Fluid replacement, correction of electrolyte imbalance, and supportive care are the mainstays of treatment of children with Campylobacter gastroenteritis. Antimotility agents are contraindicated
because they can cause prolonged or fatal disease. The need for antibiotic therapy in healthy patients with uncomplicated gastroenteritis is controversial. Most healthy children do not require antibiotic
therapy. Data suggest a shortened duration of symptoms (by an average of 1.3 days) and intestinal shedding of organisms if antibiotics
are initiated early in the disease. Antibiotics are recommended for
patients with bloody stools, high fever, or a severe course and for

children who are immunosuppressed or have underlying diseases
and individuals at high risk of developing severe disease (e.g., pregnancy). Extraintestinal infections (e.g., bacteremia) should also be
treated with antibiotics.
Most Campylobacter isolates are susceptible to macrolides, fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, and
clindamycin (though there is no clinical efficacy data for these last
three agents, only in vitro data) and are resistant to cephalosporins,
penicillins, and trimethoprim. Resistance to tetracyclines, macrolides, and more often, fluoroquinolones has been increasingly
reported. Antibiotic resistance among C. jejuni has become a serious worldwide problem. Macrolide resistance is increased in areas
such as Thailand and Ireland, whereas fluoroquinolone resistance
has been reported in Spain, Hungary, and multiple low and middle
income countries in >50% of cultured Campylobacter. Fluoroquinolone resistance continues to increase in the United States and is
related to the use of quinolones in veterinary medicine and food
products along with acquisition from travelers and antibiotic overuse. Erythromycin-­resistant Campylobacter isolates are less common
in the United States; therefore azithromycin is the drug of choice if
therapy is required, particularly in pediatric patients. For treatment
of gastroenteritis, the duration is 3-­5 days. Drug sensitivities should
be determined for patients who do not respond to therapy or any
patient with invasive or extraintestinal infection. Sepsis is treated
with parenteral antibiotics such as meropenem or imipenem, with
or without an aminoglycoside. For extraintestinal infection caused
by C. fetus, prolonged therapy is advised. C. fetus isolates resistant
to erythromycin and fluoroquinolones have been reported; therefore
empirical therapy for serious C. fetus infection should avoid these
agents pending susceptibilities.

PROGNOSIS

Although Campylobacter gastroenteritis is usually self-­limited, immunosuppressed children (including children with AIDS) can experience
a protracted or severe course. Septicemia in newborns and immunocompromised hosts has a poor prognosis, with an estimated mortality rate of 30–40%. Additional prognosis is based on the secondary
sequelae that may develop.

PREVENTION

Most human Campylobacter infections are sporadic and are acquired
from infected animals or contaminated foods or water. Interventions to minimize transmission include good hand hygiene; cooking
meats thoroughly; preventing recontamination after cooking by not
using the same surfaces, utensils, or containers for both uncooked
and cooked food; and avoiding unpasteurized dairy products. Also,
it is important to ensure that water sources are not contaminated and
that water is kept in clean containers. Persons infected with Campylobacter should avoid recreational water for at least 1 week after
resolution of symptoms or as guided by local public health authorities. Contact with infected animals should be avoided. No specific
isolation is required; standard precautions are sufficient, although in
a hospital or clinic setting with an incontinent child, contact precautions are indicated. Outbreaks can occur in childcare settings. Infants
and children should be excluded from childcare centers until stools
are able to be contained in the diaper or for continent children when
they no longer have fecal accidents and stool frequency is no more
than two stools above that child’s baseline (stools may remain loose).
Breastfeeding appears to decrease symptomatic Campylobacter disease but does not reduce colonization. All cases of Campylopbacter
should be reported to local health departments, as it is a nationally
notifiable condition.
Several approaches at immunization have been studied, including
the use of live-­attenuated organisms, subunit vaccines, and killed–
whole cell vaccines. No vaccine is currently available.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1792 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 249

Yersinia
Ericka V. Hayes
The genus Yersinia is a member of the order Enterobacterales, family
Yersiniaceace and comprises more than 14 named species, 3 of which
are established as human pathogens. Yersinia enterocolitica is by far the
most common Yersinia species causing human disease and produces
fever, abdominal pain that can mimic appendicitis, and diarrhea. Y.
pseudotuberculosis is most often associated with mesenteric lymphadenitis. Y. pestis is the agent of plague and typically causes an acute febrile
lymphadenitis (bubonic plague) and less often occurs as septicemic,
pneumonic, pharyngeal, or meningeal plague. Other Yersinia species
are uncommon causes of infections in humans, and their identification
is often an indicator of immunodeficiency.
Yersinia is enzootic and can colonize pets. Infections in humans are
incidental and most often result from contact with infected animals
or their tissues; ingestion of contaminated water, milk, or meat; or for
Y. pestis, the bite of infected fleas or inhalation of respiratory droplets
(human, dog, cat). Association with human disease is less clear for Y.
frederiksenii, Y. intermedia, Y. kristensenii, Y. aldovae, Y. bercovieri, Y.
mollaretii, Y. rohdei, and Y. ruckeri. Some Yersinia isolates replicate at
low temperatures (1–4°C [33.8–39.2°F]) or survive at high temperatures (50–60°C [122–140°F]). Thus common food preparation and
storage and common pasteurization methods might not limit the number of bacteria. Most are sensitive to oxidizing agents.

249.1 Yersinia enterocolitica
Ericka V. Hayes

ETIOLOGY

Yersinia enterocolitica is a large, gram-­
negative coccobacillus that
exhibits little or no bipolarity when stained with methylene blue and
carbolfuchsin. It ferments glucose and sucrose but not lactose, is oxidase negative, and reduces nitrate to nitrite. These facultative anaerobes
grow well on common culture media and are motile at 22°C (71.6°F)
but not 37°C (98.6°F). Optimal growth temperature is 25–28°C (77–
82.4°F); however, the organism can grow at refrigerator temperature. Y.
enterocolitica includes pathogenic and nonpathogenic members. It has
six different biotypes (1A, 1B, and 2-­5). Y. enterocolitica relies on other
bacteria for iron uptake, and conditions associated with iron overload
increase the risk of infection.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Y. enterocolitica is transmitted to humans through food, water, animal
contact, and contaminated blood products. Transmission can occur
from mother to newborn. Y. enterocolitica appears to have a global
distribution but is seldom a cause of tropical diarrhea. In 2022, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet) reported an incidence
of culture-­confirmed Y. enterocolitica infection in the United States of
1.97 per 100,000 population (635% increase compared to 2015, and
an increase of 216% since 2020). Infection may be more common in
Northern Europe. Most infections occur among children <5 years old
(incidence: 1.6-­1.9 per 100,000 population), with the majority among
children <1 year old. It is estimated that Y. enterocolitica accounts for
5% of illnesses secondary to major bacterial enteric pathogens in children <5 years old in the United States. Cases are more common in
colder months and among males.
Natural reservoirs of Y. enterocolitica include pigs, rodents, rabbits,
sheep, cattle, horses, dogs, and cats, with pigs being the major animal

reservoir. Direct or indirect contact with animals, including pets, other
domesticated animals, and wild animals, may be responsible for <1%
of cases of enteric illnesses caused by Y. enterocolitica. Culture and
molecular techniques have found the organism in a variety of foods
and beverages, including vegetable juice, pasteurized milk, carrots,
and water. Consumption of contaminated water or food, particularly
undercooked pork, is the most common form of transmission to
humans. A source of sporadic Y. enterocolitica infections is chitterlings
(pig intestines, “chitlins”), a traditional dish in the southeastern United
States and in Latin America, often in celebration of winter holidays.
The infection is often seen in young infants in the household because
of contamination of bottle and food preparation when chitterlings are
prepared. In one study, 71% of human isolates were indistinguishable
from the strains isolated from pigs. Y. enterocolitica is an occupational
threat to butchers.
In part because of its capacity to multiply at refrigerator temperatures, Y. enterocolitica can be transmitted by intravenous injection of
contaminated fluids, including blood products.
Patients with conditions leading to iron overload are at higher risk of
developing Yersinia infections.

PATHOGENESIS

The Yersinia organisms most often enter by the gastrointestinal tract
and cause mucosal ulcerations in the ileum. Necrotic lesions of Peyer
patches and mesenteric lymphadenitis occur. If septicemia develops,
suppurative lesions can be found in infected organs. Infection can trigger reactive arthritis and erythema nodosum, particularly in HLA-­
B27–positive individuals.
Virulence traits of pathogenic biotypes (1B and 2-­5) are encoded
by chromosomal genes and a highly conserved 70-­kb virulence plasmid (pYV/pCD). The chromosomal genes control the production of
heat-­stable enterotoxins, and the plasmid allows penetration through
the intestinal wall. Adherence, invasion, and toxin production are the
essential mechanisms of pathogenesis. The bacteria mainly invade
the intestinal epithelium in the Peyer patches of the ileum. After
invasion, plasmid-­encoded type III secretion of three antiphagocytic proteins protects Yersinia against the immunologic response of
local macrophages. From Peyer patches, bacteria can disseminate to
cause local or systemic disease. Motility appears to be required for Y.
enterocolitica pathogenesis. Bioserotypes most associated with clinical illness in humans are 1B/O:8, 2/O:5,27, 2/O:9, 3/O:3, and 4/O:3,
with bioserotype 4/O:3 being the most common type in the United
States. Yersinia does not produce siderophores and uses analogous
siderophores from other bacteria or host-­chelated iron stores to
thrive, placing patients with iron overload, as in hemochromatosis,
thalassemia, and sickle cell disease, at higher risk for infection.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Disease occurs most often as enterocolitis with diarrhea, fever, and
abdominal pain. Acute enteritis is more common among younger
children, and mesenteric lymphadenitis that can mimic appendicitis
may be found in older children and adolescents. The incubation period
is usually 4-­6 days after exposure (range: 1-­14 days). Stools may be
watery and contain leukocytes and, less often, frank blood and mucus.
Duration of diarrhea is often longer for Y. enterocolitica than for other
causes of acute gastroenteritis, ranging from 12 to 22 days in several
studies. Fever is common. Notably, prominent pharyngitis may be
seen in 20% of patients at presentation, which may help distinguish
it from other causes of gastroenteritis. Y. enterocolitica is excreted in
stool for 1-­4 weeks. Family contacts of a patient are often found to be
asymptomatically colonized with Y. enterocolitica. Y. enterocolitica septicemia is less common and is most often found in very young children
(<3 months old) and immunocompromised persons. Systemic infection can be associated with splenic and hepatic abscesses, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, meningitis, endocarditis, and mycotic aneurysms.
Exudative pharyngitis, pneumonia, empyema, lung abscess, and acute
respiratory distress syndrome occur infrequently.
Reactive complications include erythema nodosum, reactive
arthritis, and rarely uveitis. These manifestations may be more

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 249 u Yersinia

1793

common in select populations (Northern Europeans), in association
with HLA-­B27, and in females.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

DIAGNOSIS

249.2 Yersinia pseudotuberculosis

Diagnosis is made typically through isolation of the organism, usually from the stool. Y. enterocolitica is easily cultured from normally
sterile sites but requires special procedures for isolation from stool,
where other bacteria can outgrow it. Yersinia should be cultured on
selective agar (cefsulodin-­
irgasan-­
novobiocin [CIN]) at 25–28°C
(77–82.4°F) to increase yield. If O:3 serogroup is suspected, MacConkey agar should be used at 25–28°C (77–82.4°F). Multiplex
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for Y. enterocolitica is also
available, including on commercially available multiplex stool panels. Many laboratories do not routinely perform the tests required
to detect Y. enterocolitica; procedures targeted to this organism must
be specifically requested. A history indicating contact with environmental sources of Yersinia and detection of fecal leukocytes are helpful indicators of a need to test for Y. enterocolitica. The isolation of
Yersinia from stool should be followed by tests to confirm that the
isolate is a pathogen. Serodiagnosis is not readily available, and utility
is limited by cross-­reactivity.

Differential Diagnosis

The clinical presentation is similar to other forms of bacterial enterocolitis. The most common considerations include Shigella, Salmonella,
Campylobacter, Clostridioides difficile, enteroinvasive Escherichia coli,
Y. pseudotuberculosis, and occasionally Vibrio-­related diarrheal disease.
Amebiasis, appendicitis, Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, diverticulitis,
and pseudomembranous colitis should also be considered.

TREATMENT

Enterocolitis in an immunocompetent patient is a self-­limited disease,
and no benefit from antibiotic therapy is established. Patients with
systemic infection and very young children (in whom septicemia is
common) should be treated. Y. enterocolitica organisms are typically
susceptible to trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­SMX), aminoglycosides, third-­generation cephalosporins, and quinolones, although
strains resistant to quinolones have been reported. Y. enterocolitica produces β-­lactamases, which are responsible for resistance to penicillins
and first-­generation cephalosporins. TMP-­SMX is the recommended
empirical treatment for enterocolitis in children (generally a 5-­day
course) because it has activity against most strains and is well tolerated. In severe infections such as bacteremia, third-­generation
cephalosporins, with or without aminoglycosides, are effective, and
usually a 3-­week course of therapy is administered, with possible
transition to oral therapy. Patients on deferoxamine should discontinue iron chelation therapy during treatment for Y. enterocolitica,
especially if they have complicated gastrointestinal (GI) infection or
extraintestinal infection.

COMPLICATIONS

Reactive arthritis, erythema nodosum, erythema multiforme, hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and systemic dissemination of bacteria have been reported in association with Y. enterocolitica infection.
Septicemia is more common in younger children, and reactive arthritis
is more common in older patients. Arthritis appears to be mediated by
immune complexes, which form as a result of antigenic mimicry, and
viable organisms are not present in involved joints.

PREVENTION

Prevention centers on reducing contact with environmental sources
of Yersinia. Families should be warned of the high risk of chitterling
preparation, especially with young infants and children in the household. The CDC has developed guidance for the public regarding safe
practices for chitterling preparation found here: https://www.cdc.gov/
yersinia/chitlins.html. Breaking the chain of transmission from animal
reservoirs to humans holds the greatest potential to reduce infections,
and the techniques applied must be tailored to the reservoirs in each
geographic area. There is no licensed vaccine.

Ericka V. Hayes
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis has a worldwide distribution; Y. pseudotuberculosis disease is less common than Y. enterocolitica disease. The
most common form of disease is a mesenteric lymphadenitis that
produces an appendicitis-­like syndrome. Y. pseudotuberculosis is associated with a Kawasaki syndrome–like illness in approximately 8% of
cases.

ETIOLOGY

Y. pseudotuberculosis is a small, gram-­negative, aerobic, and facultative
anaerobic coccobacillus. As with Y. enterocolitica, it ferments glucose
and does not ferment lactose, is oxidase negative, catalase producing,
urea splitting, and shares a number of morphologic and culture characteristics. It is differentiated biochemically from Y. enterocolitica on
the basis of ornithine decarboxylase activity; fermentation of sucrose,
sorbitol, and cellobiose; and other tests, although some overlap
between species occurs. Antisera to somatic O antigens and sensitivity to Yersinia phages can also be used to differentiate the two species. Subspecies-­specific DNA sequences that allow direct probe-­and
primer-­specific differentiation of Y. pestis, Y. pseudotuberculosis, and Y.
enterocolitica have been described. Y. pseudotuberculosis is more closely
related phylogenetically to Y. pestis than to Y. enterocolitica.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Y. pseudotuberculosis is zoonotic, with reservoirs in wild rodents, rabbits, deer, farm animals, various birds, and domestic animals, including
cats and canaries. Transmission to humans is by consumption of or
contact with contaminated animals or contact with an environmental
source contaminated by animals, often water. Direct evidence of transmission of Y. pseudotuberculosis to humans by consumption of lettuce
and raw carrots has been reported. The organism has a worldwide distribution; however, infections are more commonly reported in Europe,
in boys, and in the winter. During 1996–2014, FoodNet reported 224
cases of infections secondary to Y. pseudotuberculosis in the United
States, with an annual average incidence of 0.03 per 100,000 persons.
Compared with Y. enterocolitica infections, those caused by Y. pseudotuberculosis are more likely to be invasive and occur in adolescents and
adults. Iron-­overloading conditions, AIDS, other immunodeficiencies,
and other debilitating diseases (including liver cirrhosis) may predispose to invasive Y. pseudotuberculosis infection.

PATHOGENESIS

Ileal and colonic mucosal ulceration and mesenteric lymphadenitis are
hallmarks of the infection. Necrotizing epithelioid granulomas may be
seen in the mesenteric lymph nodes, but the appendix is often grossly
and microscopically normal. The mesenteric nodes are often the only
source of isolation of the organism. Y. pseudotuberculosis antigens bind
directly to human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II molecules and can
function as superantigens, which might account for the clinical illness
resembling Kawasaki syndrome.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Pseudoappendicitis and mesenteric lymphadenitis with abdominal
pain (often right lower quadrant tenderness), fever, and leukocytosis
constitute the most common clinical presentation. Enterocolitis and
extraintestinal spread are uncommon. Iron overload, diabetes mellitus,
and chronic liver disease are often found concomitantly with extraintestinal Y. pseudotuberculosis infection. Renal involvement with tubulointerstitial nephritis, azotemia, pyuria, and glucosuria can occur. Y.
pseudotuberculosis can present as a Kawasaki syndrome–like illness
with fever of 1-­6 days’ duration, strawberry tongue, pharyngeal erythema, scarlatiniform rash, cracked, red, and swollen lips, conjunctivitis, sterile pyuria, periungual desquamation, and thrombocytosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1794 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Some of these children have had coronary changes. Other uncommon
manifestations include septic arthritis, massive lower GI bleeding, postaneurysmal prosthetic vascular infection, and acute encephalopathy.

DIAGNOSIS

PCR of involved tissue can be used to identify Y. pseudotuberculosis; isolation by culture can require an extended interval. Involved
mesenteric lymph nodes removed at appendectomy can yield the
organism by culture. Abdominal CT scan or ultrasound examination
of children with unexplained fever and abdominal pain can reveal
a characteristic picture of enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes and
thickening of the terminal ileum with or without peritoneal findings,
including appendiceal inflammation and periappendiceal fluid. Y.
pseudotuberculosis is rarely recovered from stool. Serologic testing is
available in specialized labs.

Differential Diagnosis

Appendicitis (most common), inflammatory bowel disease, and other
intraabdominal infections should be considered. Kawasaki syndrome,
staphylococcal or streptococcal disease, leptospirosis, Stevens-­Johnson
syndrome, and collagen vascular diseases, including acute-­onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis, can mimic the syndrome with prolonged
fever and rash. C. difficile colitis, meningitis, encephalitis, enteropathic
arthropathies, acute pancreatitis, sarcoidosis, toxic shock syndrome,
typhoid fever, and ulcerative colitis may also be considered.

TREATMENT

Uncomplicated mesenteric lymphadenitis caused by Y. pseudotuberculosis is a self-­limited disease, and antimicrobial therapy is
not required. Few data exist on optimal treatment and duration of
therapy. Infections with Y. pseudotuberculosis can generally be managed the same as those caused by Y. enterocolitica. Culture-­confirmed
bacteremia should be treated with a third-­generation cephalosporin
with or without an aminoglycoside, TMP-­SMX, fluoroquinolones, or
chloramphenicol.

COMPLICATIONS

Erythema nodosum and reactive arthritis can follow infection. Coronary aneurysm formation has been described with disease presenting
as Kawasaki syndrome–like illness. Rare local complications of GI disease include perforation, obstruction, and intussusception.

PREVENTION

Avoiding exposure to potentially infected animals and good food-­
handling practices can prevent infection. The sporadic nature of the
disease makes application of targeted prevention measures difficult.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

249.3 Plague (Yersinia pestis)
Ericka V. Hayes

ETIOLOGY

Y. pestis is a gram-­negative, facultative anaerobe that is a pleomorphic, nonmotile, non–spore-­forming coccobacillus and a potential
agent of bioterrorism. It evolved from Y. pseudotuberculosis through
acquisition of chromosomal changes and plasmid-­associated factors that are essential to its virulence and survival in mammalian
hosts and fleas. Y. pestis shares bipolar staining appearance with
Y. pseudotuberculosis and can be differentiated by biochemical
reactions, serology, phage sensitivity, and molecular techniques.
Y. pestis exists in four biovars: Antigua (Africa), Medievalis (Central Asia), Orientalis (widespread), and Microtus (Asia). Of note,
Microtus, while highly virulent in mice, does not cause disease in
humans.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Plague is endemic in at least 24 countries, with Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Madagascar, and Peru accounting for the highest numbers
of cases. Approximately 3,000 cases are reported worldwide per year,
with 100-­200 deaths. Plague is uncommon in the United States (0-­40
reported cases/yr); most of these cases occur west of a line from east
Texas to east Montana, with 80% of cases in California, New Mexico,
Arizona, and Colorado. In 2015, there was a cluster of 11 cases (with 3
deaths) in 4 months related to exposure at Yosemite National Park in
California’s Sierra Nevada Mountains. The epidemic form of disease
killed approximately 25% of the population of Europe in the Middle
Ages in a series of several epidemics and pandemics. The epidemiology
of epidemic plague involves extension of infection from the zoonotic
reservoirs to urban rats, Rattus rattus and Rattus norvegicus, and from
fleas of urban rats to humans. Epidemics are no longer seen. Selective
pressure exerted by plague pandemics in medieval Europe is hypothesized for enrichment of a pathogenic deletion variant in the gene
encoding CCR5 (CCR5-­Δ32). The enhanced frequency of this mutation in European populations endows approximately 10% of European
descendants with relative resistance to acquiring HIV-­1.
The most common mode of transmission of Y. pestis to humans is
through flea bites. Historically, most human infections are thought to
have resulted from bites of fleas that acquired infection from feeding
on infected urban rats. Less frequently, infection is caused by contact with infectious body fluids or tissues or inhalation of respiratory secretions of infected animals. Currently, most cases of plague
secondary to direct animal contact or inhalation of animal secretions
are related to domestic cats or dogs. Direct transmission from human
to human through droplet inhalation is possible but extremely rare.
Laboratory transmission of Y. pestis has been described as well. Sylvatic plague can exist as a stable enzootic infection or as an epizootic
disease with high host mortality. Ground squirrels, rock squirrels,
prairie dogs, rats, mice, bobcats, cats, rabbits, and chipmunks may
be infected. Transmission among animals is usually by flea bite or by
ingestion of contaminated tissue. Xenopsylla cheopis is the flea usually associated with transmission to humans, but >30 species of fleas
have been demonstrated as vector competent, and Pulex irritans, the
human flea, can transmit plague and might have been an important
vector in some historical epidemics. Both sexes are similarly affected
by plague, and transmission is more common in colder regions and
seasons, possibly because of temperature effects on Y. pestis infections
in vector fleas.

PATHOGENESIS

In the most common form of plague, infected fleas regurgitate organisms into a patient’s skin during feeding. The bacteria translocate via
lymphatics to regional lymph nodes, where Y. pestis replicates, resulting in bubonic plague. In the absence of rapidly implemented specific
therapy, bacteremia can occur, resulting in purulent, necrotic, and
hemorrhagic lesions in many organs. Both plasmid and chromosomal
genes are required for full virulence. Pneumonic plague can be secondary to bacteremia or primary when infected material is inhaled. The
organism is highly transmissible from persons with pneumonic plague
and from domestic cats with pneumonic infection. This high transmissibility and high morbidity and mortality have provided an impetus for
attempts to use Y. pestis as a biologic weapon.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Y. pestis infection can manifest as several clinical syndromes; infection
can also be subclinical. The three principal clinical presentations of
plague are bubonic plague, septicemic plague, and pneumonic plague.
Bubonic plague is the most common form and accounts for 80–90% of
cases in the United States. From 2 to 8 days after a flea bite, lymphadenitis develops in lymph nodes closest to the inoculation site, including
the inguinal (most common), axillary, or cervical regions. These buboes
are very tender. Fever, chills, weakness, prostration, headache, and the
development of septicemia are common. The skin might show insect
bites or scratch marks. Purpura and gangrene of the extremities can

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 249 u Yersinia
develop as a result of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
These lesions may be the origin of the name Black Death. Untreated
plague results in death in >50% of symptomatic patients. Death can
occur within 2-­4 days after onset of symptoms.
Occasionally, Y. pestis establishes systemic infection and induces the
systemic symptoms seen with bubonic plague without causing a bubo
(primary septicemic plague). Because of the delay in diagnosis linked
to the lack of the bubo, septicemic plague carries an even higher case
fatality rate than bubonic plague. In some regions, bubo-­free septicemic plague accounts for 25% of cases.
Pneumonic plague is the least common but most dangerous and
lethal form of the disease. Incubation for primary pneumonic plague
is 1-­6 days. Pneumonic plague can result from hematogenous dissemination or, rarely, as primary pneumonic plague after inhalation of the
organism from a human or animal with plague pneumonia or potentially from a biologic attack. Signs of pneumonic plague include severe
pneumonia with high fever, dyspnea, and hemoptysis.
Meningitis, tonsillitis, and gastroenteritis can occur. Meningitis
tends to be a late complication after inadequate treatment. Tonsillitis
and gastroenteritis can occur with or without apparent bubo formation
or lymphadenopathy.

DIAGNOSIS

Plague should be suspected in patients with fever and history of exposure to small animals in endemic areas. Bubonic plague should be
suspected in a patient with a painful swollen lymph node, fever, and
prostration who has been potentially exposed to fleas or rodents in the
western United States. A history of camping or the presence of flea bites
increases the index of suspicion.
Y. pestis is readily transmitted to humans by some routine laboratory
manipulations. Thus it is imperative to clearly notify a laboratory
when submitting a sample suspected of containing Y. pestis. Laboratory diagnosis is based on bacteriologic culture or direct visualization using Gram, Giemsa, or Wayson stain of lymph node aspirates,
blood, sputum, or exudates. Y. pestis grows slowly under routine culture conditions and best at temperatures that differ from those used for
routine cultures in many clinical laboratories. Colonies are described
as having a classic “fried egg appearance” and grow on sheep blood
and chocolate agars, typically growing after 48-­72 hours of incubation.
Note some automated biochemical bacteria identification systems may
misidentify Y. pestis. Suspected isolates of Y. pestis should be forwarded
to a reference laboratory for confirmation. Special containment shipping precautions are required. A rapid antigen test detecting Y. pestis F1 antigen in sputum and serum samples exists. PCR testing and
immunohistochemical staining for rapid identification are available in
some reference and public health laboratories. Cases of plague should
be reported to local and state health departments and the CDC. Serologic testing is also available. A single positive serologic test confirms
the diagnosis, but in early illness seroconversion may not yet have
occurred; negative tests should be interpreted with caution, particularly if there is high clinical suspicion for the diagnosis, and patients
should continue to be treated.

Differential Diagnosis

The Gram stain of Y. pestis may be confused with Enterobacter
agglomerans. Mild and subacute forms of bubonic plague may be
confused with other disorders causing localized lymphadenitis and
lymphadenopathy, including bacterial lymphadenitis, tularemia,
and Bartonella henselae (cat scratch) lymphadenitis. Septicemic
plague may be indistinguishable from other forms of overwhelming
bacterial sepsis.
Pulmonary manifestations of plague are similar to those of anthrax,
Q fever, and tularemia, all agents with bioterrorism and biologic

1795

warfare potential. Thus the presentation of a suspected case, and especially any cluster of cases, requires immediate reporting. Additional
information on this aspect of plague and procedures can be found at
https://emergency.cdc.gov/agent/plague/index.asp.

TREATMENT

Patients with suspected plague should be placed on droplet isolation
until pneumonia is ruled out, sputum cultures are negative, and antibiotic treatment has been administered for 48 hours. The treatment
of choice for bubonic plague historically has been streptomycin (30
mg/kg/day, maximum 2 g/day, divided every 12 hours intramuscularly
[IM] for 10 days). Intramuscular streptomycin is inappropriate for septicemia because absorption may be erratic when perfusion is poor. The
poor central nervous system penetration of streptomycin also makes
this an inappropriate drug for meningitis. Furthermore, streptomycin
might not be widely and immediately available. Gentamicin (children,
7.5 mg/kg IM or intravenously [IV] every 24 hours; adults, 5 mg/
kg IM or IV every 24 hours) has been shown to be as efficacious as
streptomycin; in patients with abscesses, an additional agent may
be needed in addition to an aminoglycoside because of poor abscess
penetration (typically a fluoroquinolone). Dual therapy is recommended for moderate to severe septicemic or pneumonic plague as
well as bubonic plague with large buboes or any suspected case of
bioterrorism-­related plague. Ciprofloxacin 10 mg/kg every 8 or 12
hr IV or 15 mg/kg every 8 or 12 hr PO (maximum 400 mg/dose IV,
500 mg/dose every 8 hr PO or 750 mg/dose every 12 hr PO) and levofloxacin are also effective. Meningitis is usually treated with chloramphenicol or a fluoroquinolone. Resistance to these agents and relapses
are rare. Y. pestis is susceptible in vitro to fluoroquinolones, which are
effective in treating experimental plague in animals. Y. pestis is susceptible
in vitro to penicillin, but penicillin is ineffective in treatment of human
disease. Mild bubonic disease may be treated with oral chloramphenicol or doxycycline in children >8 years old. Clinical improvement is
usually noted within 48 hours of initiating treatment. Recommended
duration of therapy is 10-­14 days, with a switch to oral therapy 2 days
after defervescence and clinical improvement. Drainage of suppurative
buboes may be needed; material is infectious, and appropriate precautions should be taken intraoperatively.
Postexposure prophylaxis should be given to close contacts of
patients with pneumonic plague. Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended within 7 days of exposure for persons with direct, close
contact with a patient with pneumonic plague or those exposed to an
accidental or bioterrorist aerosol. Recommended regimens for postexposure prophylaxis for children regardless of age include doxycycline,
ciprofloxacin, or levofloxacin for a 7-­day course at the treatment doses.
Contacts of cases of uncomplicated bubonic plague do not require prophylaxis. Y. pestis is a potential agent of bioterrorism that can require
mass casualty prophylaxis.

PREVENTION

Avoidance of exposure to infected animals and fleas is the best method
of prevention of infection. In the United States, special care is required
in environments inhabited by rodent reservoirs of Y. pestis and their
ectoparasites. Patients with plague should be isolated if they have pulmonary symptoms, and infected materials should be handled with
extreme care. There is currently no available licensed vaccine for Y. pestis in the United States. Several vaccine development trials are underway, and recombinant subunit vaccines based on rF1 and rV antigens
seem to be the most promising. Using baits containing live vaccines
for oral immunization of wild animals may be a helpful alternative for
control of epidemics.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1796 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

Chapter 250

Aeromonas and
Plesiomonas
Ameneh Khatami and Adam J. Ratner
Aeromonas and Plesiomonas are gram-­negative bacilli that include species capable of causing enteritis and, less frequently, skin and soft tissue
infections and invasive disease. They are common in freshwater and
brackish water and colonize animals and plants in these environments.

250.1 Aeromonas
Ameneh Khatami and Adam J. Ratner

ETIOLOGY

Aeromonas is a member of the Aeromonadaceae family and includes
two major groups of isolates: the nonmotile psychrophilic organisms
that infect cold-­blooded animals, most often fish, and the motile mesophilic organisms that infect humans and other warm-­blooded animals.
Aeromonas species are oxidase-­and catalase-­
positive, facultatively
anaerobic, gram-­negative bacilli that ferment glucose. Aeromonas is
a diverse genus with difficult taxonomy and species differentiation
because of high nucleotide variability and has undergone multiple
reclassifications of species and taxa in recent years. Sixteen species are
recognized as clinically significant human pathogens, with Aeromonas
hydrophila, Aeromonas veronii biotype sobria, and Aeromonas caviae
most frequently associated with human infection. Aeromonas dhakensis, which was first isolated from children with diarrhea in Dhaka,
Bangladesh, and was initially classified as a subspecies of A. hydrophila,
has been recognized as a distinct species and an important cause of
human infection.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Aeromonas organisms are found in fresh and brackish aquatic environments, including rivers and streams, well water, both treated and
bottled drinking water, and sewage. These organisms are most often
detected in aquatic environments during warm-­weather months, when
they reach greater population densities. Rates of human infection may
also exhibit seasonality depending on local conditions. For example,
Aeromonas is isolated with increased frequency from May to October in the Northern Hemisphere. Some species resist chlorination of
water and exhibit tolerance to high salt concentrations. Aeromonas has
been isolated from meats, milk, seafood, seaweed, and vegetables consumed by humans. Asymptomatic colonization occurs in humans and
is more common in inhabitants of tropical regions. Most human infections with Aeromonas are associated with exposure to contaminated
water but may also be contracted via other routes, including ingestion
of contaminated food. A systematic review of cases of traveler’s diarrhea worldwide implicated Aeromonas in 0.8–3.3% of infections, with
highest frequencies in travelers to Southeast Asia and Africa. A study
in Bangladesh of >56,000 stool samples from patients with diarrhea
found that approximately 25% had a bacterial etiology detected, 13% of
which were Aeromonas. Aeromonas infections have also been acquired
at various sites of natural disasters. For example, after the 2004 Thailand tsunami, Aeromonas was the leading cause of skin and soft tissue
infection among survivors.

PATHOGENESIS

Clinical and epidemiologic data seem to support that Aeromonas
organisms are enteric pathogens, although this point is not universally

accepted. Reasons for uncertainty include a lack of outbreaks with
clonally distinct isolates, infrequent person-­
to-­
person transmission, absence of a robust animal model, and overlapping prevalence
in symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals. In addition, there are
conflicting data when comparing the human challenge model with
characteristics of suspected outbreaks of Aeromonas enteritis, further
complicating interpretation.
Aeromonas isolates possess a variety of potential virulence factors,
including constitutive polar and inducible lateral flagella, fimbriae,
outer membrane proteins, endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide), and capsule. The mechanistic role of many of these factors in human pathogenicity remains unclear. Polar flagella provide motility in liquid
media, and lateral flagella may act as adhesins. There are numerous
hemolysins, proteases, and heat-­labile and heat-­stable enterotoxins.
Aeromonas cytotoxic enterotoxin (Act/aerolysin) is secreted by a type
II secretion system and is able to lyse erythrocytes, inhibit phagocytosis, and induce cytotoxicity in eukaryotic cells. Aeromonas also has
a type III secretion system with an effector protein that causes actin
reorganization and eventual apoptosis in vitro. A type VI secretion system has been described and functions analogously to a phage tail, with
antimicrobial activity.
Aeromonas sobria is the most enterotoxic among clinical isolates,
and cytotoxic activity with cytopathic and intracellular effects is found
in 89% of isolates. A few strains produce Shiga toxin. Some clinically
important species have also been shown to harbor a cholera-­like toxin
(Asao toxin). Aeromonas has serine proteases that can cause a cascade
of inflammatory mediators, leading to vascular leakage, and in vitro
studies show induction of apoptosis in murine macrophages by human
isolates of Aeromonas. There are limited data on quorum-­sensing molecules, which coordinate gene expression according to local density and
may be involved in biofilm production or population control.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Aeromonas may colonize humans asymptomatically or cause illness,
including enteritis, focal invasive infections, and septicemia. Although
apparently immunologically normal individuals may present with
any of these manifestations, invasive disease is more common among
immunocompromised persons.

Enteritis

The most common clinical manifestation of infection with Aeromonas is enteritis, which occurs primarily among children <3 years old.
Aeromonas is the third or fourth most common cause of childhood
bacterial diarrhea and has been isolated from 2% to 10% of patients
with diarrhea and 1–5% of asymptomatic controls. One study demonstrated isolation from hospitalized neonates with diarrhea at rates
of 0–19% depending on the season. Isolation from human feces also
varies geographically based on food habits, level of sanitation, population demographics, aquaculture and farming practices, and laboratory
isolation methods used. Aeromonas diarrhea is often watery and self-­
limited, although a dysentery-­like syndrome with blood and mucus in
the stool has also been described. Fever, abdominal pain, and vomiting
are common in children. Choleric diarrhea with “rice-­water” stools can
also occur. Enteritis caused by A. hydrophila and A. sobria tends to be
acute and self-­limited, whereas 30% of patients with A. caviae enteritis
have chronic or intermittent diarrhea that may last 4-­6 weeks. A. sobria
and A. caviae are most frequently associated with traveler’s diarrhea.
Complications of Aeromonas enteritis include intussusception, failure
to thrive, hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, bacteremia, and postinfectious
chronic colitis. Aeromonas infection may also present as acute segmental colitis, mimicking inflammatory bowel disease or ischemic colitis.

Skin and Soft Tissue Infections

Skin and soft tissue infections are the second most common presentation of Aeromonas, most commonly associated with A. hydrophila, A.
veronii, and A. schubertii. Predisposing factors include local trauma
and exposure to contaminated fresh water. Aeromonas soft tissue
infections have been reported after bites from a number of animal
species, including alligators, tigers, bears, and snakes, and from tick

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 250 u Aeromonas and Plesiomonas 1797
bites. These infections have also been reported after sports injuries
and medicinal leech therapy. Antibiotic prophylaxis is generally
used in conjunction with leech therapy because of the presence of
A. hydrophila in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract of leeches, where they
aid in the breakdown of ingested red blood cells. However, emerging reports of ciprofloxacin-­resistant strains of Aeromonas isolated
from leeches may affect this practice. The spectrum of skin and soft
tissue infections is broad, ranging from a localized skin nodule to
life-­threatening necrotizing fasciitis, myonecrosis, and gas gangrene.
Soft tissue infections are most frequently found on the extremities,
are often polymicrobial, and are 3 times more likely in men than in
women. Aeromonas cellulitis, the most common skin manifestation, clinically presents similar to other forms of bacterial cellulitis
but should be suspected in wounds after contact with a water source,
especially during the summer.

Septicemia

Aeromonas septicemia, strongly associated with A. veronii biovar sobria
and A. dhakensis infection, is the third most common presentation of
infection and is associated with a mortality rate of 27–73%. Higher
incidence occurs during summer months or during the wet season in
the tropics. Patients present with the classic signs and symptoms of
gram-­negative sepsis and may have GI symptoms, including abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. From 2% to 4% of patients
may present with ecthyma gangrenosum–like lesions. Aeromonas may
be the only organism isolated or may be part of a polymicrobial bacteremic illness. Most cases (approximately 80%) occur in immunocompromised adults or those with hepatobiliary disease and in young
children in whom the source of infection is probably Aeromonas in
the GI tract. Less frequently, bacteremia can be secondary to trauma-­
related myonecrosis or infected burns. In such patients, mortality is
often higher than in those with primary bacteremia because of the
underlying trauma. Rarely, Aeromonas bacteremia occurs in otherwise
healthy adults exposed to fresh water.

Other Infections

Aeromonas is a rare cause of GI infections such as necrotizing gastroenteritis, peritonitis, cholecystitis, appendicitis, and liver and
pancreas abscess formation; cardiovascular infections, including
endocarditis and septic embolism; and pulmonary infections, including tracheobronchitis, pneumonia, empyema, and lung abscess
formation. Aeromonas is also associated with musculoskeletal infections, including osteomyelitis, pyogenic arthritis, pyomyositis, and
necrotizing fasciitis, as well as ocular and ear, nose, and throat infections, including endophthalmitis, keratitis, orbital cellulitis, otitis
media, and epiglottitis. Other rare infections include meningitis,
urinary tract infection, pelvic inflammatory disease, lymphadenitis, hot tub folliculitis, and surgical wound infections. Aeromonas is
associated with tracheobronchitis and aspiration pneumonia after
near-­drowning.

DIAGNOSIS

16S rRNA gene. Sequencing of housekeeping genes, such as gyrB
and rpoD, and multilocus sequence typing are accurate for species
identification but are time-­, cost-­and labor-­intensive. Increasingly,
laboratories use matrix-­assisted laser desorption/ionization time of
flight (MALDI-­TOF) mass spectrometry to rapidly identify organisms because this method is accurate for Aeromonas as a genus and
for many of the clinically important species. Because stool culture–
based diagnosis is time-­consuming, labor-­intensive, and costly on
per positive culture basis, molecular tests for various enteric bacterial pathogens, including multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
assays that include targets for detection of Aeromonas, have been
developed and are commercially available in some areas.

TREATMENT

Aeromonas enteritis is usually self-­limited, and antimicrobial therapy
may not be indicated, although some studies suggest that antimicrobial therapy may shorten the course of the illness. Antimicrobial
therapy is reasonable to consider in patients with protracted diarrhea,
dysentery-­like illness, or underlying conditions such as hepatobiliary
disease or an immunocompromised state. Antibiotic sensitivity varies among species and also by geography; therefore it is important
to perform susceptibility testing. Chromosomally mediated class B,
C, and D β-­lactamases are found in most species and can be difficult
to identify because many are inducible. These include metallo-­and
AmpC β-­lactamases, which can lead to clinical failure if carbapenems or third-­generation cephalosporins are used as monotherapy in
high-­organism-­load infections. There is near-­uniform resistance to
penicillins. Surgical intervention is the primary therapeutic modality
in cases of necrotizing fasciitis, with most patients requiring more
than one debridement in the first 48 hours. Septicemia can be treated
with a fourth-­generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefepime) or ciprofloxacin, with or without an aminoglycoside, although specific therapy
should be guided by susceptibility data. Another option for less severe
infections includes trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-­
SMX).
Evidence-­based recommendations for duration of treatment are lacking, and thus treatment is typically guided by clinical response. In general, diarrhea is treated for 3 days, wound infections for 7-­10 days, and
bacteremia for 14-­21 days, depending on clinical response and host
characteristics.

PREVENTION

Reducing contact with contaminated environmental fresh and
brackish water and contaminated foods should reduce the risk for
Aeromonas infections. Some Aeromonas outer membrane proteins
are immunogenic and are candidate antigens for preclinical vaccine
development.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

250.2 Plesiomonas shigelloides

Diagnosis is established by isolation of Aeromonas in culture. The
organism is generally grown on standard media when the source
material is normally sterile. Often, Aeromonas is not identified
by typical laboratory protocols for examining stool specimens. If
Aeromonas is suspected, the yield may increase if the laboratory is
notified before testing, because overnight enrichment in alkaline
peptone water and culture on selective agars may be useful. Most
strains (approximately 90%) produce β-­hemolysis on blood agar.
Lactose-­fermenting strains of Aeromonas like A. caviae may not
be identified if the clinical laboratory does not routinely perform
oxidase tests on lactose fermenters isolated on MacConkey agar.
Aeromonads are resistant to vibriostatic agent O129; however, differentiation of Aeromonas from Vibrio spp. and identification of
Aeromonas spp. and subspp. is not reliable using biochemical testing. Similarly, classification of Aeromonas strains at the species and
subspecies level is difficult to achieve by sequencing regions of the

Ameneh Khatami and Adam J. Ratner

ETIOLOGY

Plesiomonas shigelloides is a facultatively anaerobic, gram-­negative,
non–spore-­forming bacillus that ferments glucose. It is a catalase-­,
oxidase-­, and indole-­positive motile organism with polar flagella. A
high level of genetic diversity has been recognized among P. shigelloides
strains, reflecting frequent homologous recombination.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

P. shigelloides is ubiquitous in freshwater and, because it can tolerate
salinity of up to 4%, can be found in estuarine or brackish water, as
well as animal inhabitants of these ecosystems, including fish, shellfish, crustaceans, water mammals, amphibians, reptiles, and other vertebrates. P. shigelloides has been recovered from healthy (colonized)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1798 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
and diseased animals, including cats. It can cause both sporadic infections and outbreaks in a range of animals. As a mesophile with optimal growth temperature of 35–39°C (95–102.2°F), P. shigelloides has
been found most often in tropical waters or during warmer months,
although there are increasing reports of isolation from surface water
in colder climates. Similarly, most cases of infection occur during the
warmer months of the year. P. shigelloides is not a usual commensal
organism in the human GI tract, and infection of humans is thought
to be the result of consumption of contaminated water or raw seafood
or possibly through contact with colonized animals. The frequency of
isolation of P. shigelloides from diarrheal stools in these circumstances
has been reported to range from 2% to >10%. Mixed infection with Salmonella, Aeromonas, rotavirus, or other enteric pathogens may occur
in almost one third of patients. The majority of symptomatic patients
in North America have a known exposure to potentially contaminated
water or seafood (notably oysters) or have traveled abroad. Plesiomonas
has been reported to be associated with 1.3–5.4% of episodes of traveler’s diarrhea, with the highest rates associated with travel to South
and Southeast Asia. Other risk factors include immune compromise
(in particular HIV infection), blood dyscrasias (including sickle cell
disease), and young age. The highest rates of Plesiomonas enteritis
occur in children <2 years old. Although P. shigelloides has a worldwide
distribution, there is unexplained geographic variability in the incidence of enteritis that may be related to water temperatures and a lack
of hygiene and sanitation.

PATHOGENESIS

Epidemiologic and microbiologic evidence in the form of a series of
food-­borne outbreaks attributable to P. shigelloides indicates that this
organism is an enteropathogen. However, the pathogenic capacity
of P. shigelloides has not been confirmed through oral challenge studies, and these organisms have been isolated from the stools of healthy
individuals at a low rate. The mechanism of enteritis is not known, but
putative virulence factors have been described, including cholera-­like
toxin, heat-­labile and heat-­stable enterotoxins, and lipopolysaccharide. Most strains of P. shigelloides also secrete a β-­hemolysin, which is
thought to be a major virulence factor. In vitro studies show that isolates of P. shigelloides can invade and induce apoptosis in cells of enteric
origin, as well as exhibiting evidence of modulation of host defenses
through inhibition of cathepsins involved in antigen processing and
presentation.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Clinical disease in humans generally begins 24-­48 hours after exposure to the organism, although incubation periods in excess of 4 days
have been reported. Diarrhea can occur in all age-­groups, including
neonates, is typically secretory, and less often presents as invasive
dysentery. Secretory enteritis usually presents as a mild self-­limiting
disease with watery diarrhea and abdominal pain, but in 13% of cases
diarrhea can persist for >2 weeks. Dehydration, hypokalemia, and
peritonitis are uncommon complications; however, there have been
several reports of a cholera-­like presentation with severe secretory
diarrhea. The frequency of secretory vs dysenteric presentation seems
to cluster by individual outbreak, suggesting that either the human
populations or the bacterial populations involved are associated with
each particular presentation. Dysentery presents with macroscopic
blood and/or mucus in the stool, significant abdominal pain, and
vomiting, with more severe cases also associated with fever. Fatal
outcomes have been reported with severe cases of Plesiomonas dysentery, although in most of these cases the exact role of P. shigelloides
is unclear.
Extraintestinal infections, usually bacteremia, are rare and usually
occur in patients with underlying immunodeficiency. About 90% of
these cases are monomicrobial, and in almost half, P. shigelloides is also

isolated from a site other than blood. Rarely, bacteremia accompanying
enteritis has been documented in apparently otherwise normal children. Septicemia also appears to result from ingestion of contaminated
water or seafood and has a high mortality rate in adults. Other extraintestinal diseases include pneumonia, meningitis, osteomyelitis, septic
arthritis, reactive arthritis, abscesses, and focal infections of the GI or
reproductive tracts. Almost one third of all bacteremias occur in neonates who present with early-­onset sepsis and meningitis, and although
rare, these make up most of the reported cases of P. shigelloides meningitis and have a very high mortality rate (80%). In several cases of
neonatal disease, Plesiomonas has also been isolated from maternal
feces, suggesting intrapartum vertical transmission. Compared with
Aeromonas and Vibrio spp., traumatic wounds sustained in aquatic
environments less often contain P. shigelloides.

DIAGNOSIS

P. shigelloides is a non–lactose-­fermenting organism and grows well
on traditional enteric media with optimal growth at 30°C (86°F),
although selective techniques may be required to isolate the organism
from mixed cultures and to differentiate P. shigelloides from Shigella
spp. If enrichment is necessary, alkaline peptone water or bile peptone broth may be used. Colonies are nonhemolytic on 5% blood agar.
Many strains cross-­react with Shigella on serologic testing but can be
differentiated easily as oxidase-­positive organisms. P. shigelloides has a
unique biochemical profile and can generally be identified using commercial kits. Rapid identification systems, including MALDI-­TOF, can
also be used to identify P. shigelloides. P. shigelloides is included in at
least one U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved commercial panel that detects a range of enteropathogens directly from
diarrheal stools (culture independent) by PCR.

TREATMENT

Enteritis caused by P. shigelloides is usually mild and self-­limited.
In cases associated with dehydration or with a cholera-­like disease,
patients usually respond favorably to oral rehydration solution.
Consideration of antimicrobial therapy is reserved for patients with
prolonged or bloody diarrhea, those who are immunocompromised,
the elderly, and the very young. Data from uncontrolled studies suggest that antimicrobial therapy may decrease the duration of symptoms, although no difference was found in an exclusively pediatric
study.
P. shigelloides produces a chromosomally encoded, noninducible
β-­lactamase, which generally renders strains resistant to the penicillins, including broad-­spectrum penicillins. P. shigelloides is also usually
resistant to aminoglycosides and tetracyclines. Most strains of P. shigelloides are susceptible to β-­lactam/β-­lactamase inhibitor combinations
and to TMP-­SMX, some cephalosporins, carbapenems, and fluoroquinolones; however, therapy should be guided by antimicrobial susceptibility testing because resistance to TMP-­SMX, fluoroquinolones, and
other agents has been reported.
Severe cases of P. shigelloides dysentery should be treated similarly to
shigellosis (with empirical azithromycin or a third-­generation cephalosporin for children and ciprofloxacin or azithromycin for adults).
Antibiotics are essential for therapy of extraintestinal disease. Empirical therapy with a third-­generation cephalosporin is often first-­line
management, because most isolates are susceptible in vitro. Alternatives include carbapenems, aztreonam, β-­lactam/β-­lactamase inhibitor
combinations, and quinolones. Definitive therapy should be guided by
the susceptibility of the individual isolate. Duration of therapy ranges
from 1 to 2 weeks but may be extended depending on underlying
chronic conditions and clinical response.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 251 u Pseudomonas, Burkholderia, and Stenotrophomonas 1799

Chapter 251

Pseudomonas,
Burkholderia, and
Stenotrophomonas
251.1 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Thomas S. Murray and Ashley C. Howard

ETIOLOGY

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an aerobic, gram-­negative rod. It can multiply in a great variety of environments that contain minimal amounts
of organic compounds. Strains from clinical specimens do not ferment lactose, are oxidase positive, and may produce β-­hemolysis on
blood agar. Many strains produce pigments, including pyocyanin,
pyoverdine, and pyorubrin, that diffuse into and color the surrounding
medium. Strains of P. aeruginosa are differentiated for epidemiologic
purposes by a variety of genotyping methods, including restriction
fragment length polymorphisms using pulsed-­field gel electrophoresis, multilocus sequence typing, and more recently, whole genome
sequencing.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

P. aeruginosa is a classic “opportunist.” It rarely causes disease in
people who do not have a predisposing risk factor. Compromised
host defense mechanisms resulting from trauma, neutropenia,
mucositis, immunosuppression, or impaired mucociliary transport explain the predominant role of this organism in producing
opportunistic infections. In pediatric settings, it is frequently seen
in the respiratory secretions of children with cystic fibrosis (CF).
In a pediatric review of 2,545 facilities from 2015 to 2017 by the
National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN), P. aeruginosa ranked
among the top 10 organisms to cause central line–associated
bloodstream infections in all units: 2.8% neonatal intensive care
unit (NICU), 5% pediatric intensive care unit (PICU), 5% pediatric
oncology units, and 3.1% pediatric wards. P. aeruginosa was also the
second most common cause of catheter-­associated urinary tract
infections (UTIs) (18.4%) and ventilator-­associated pneumonia
(16.1%) and the third most common cause of postoperative surgical site infections (8.3%). In a multicenter U.S. prospective study
of 33 sites from 2014 to 2018, P. aeruginosa was isolated in 2.7% of
bacteremic episodes in children ≤1 year old and 3.7 % in children
≤17 years of age.
P. aeruginosa and other pseudomonads frequently enter the hospital
environment on the clothes, skin, or shoes of patients or hospital personnel, with plants or vegetables brought into the hospital, and in the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract of patients. Colonization of any moist or liquid substance may ensue; the organisms may be found growing in any
water reservoir, including distilled water, and in hospital kitchen sinks
and laundries, some antiseptic solutions, and equipment used for respiratory therapy and urinary procedures. Colonization of skin, throat,
stool, and nasal mucosa of patients is low at admission to the hospital
but increases to as high as 50–70% with prolonged hospitalization and
with the use of broad-­spectrum antibiotics, chemotherapy, mechanical
ventilation, and urinary catheters. Patients’ intestinal microbial flora
may be altered by the broad-­spectrum antibiotics, reducing resistance
to colonization and permitting P. aeruginosa in the environment to
populate the GI tract. Intestinal mucosal breakdown associated with
medications, especially cytotoxic agents, and nosocomial enteritis may
provide a pathway by which P. aeruginosa spreads to the lymphatics or
bloodstream.

PATHOLOGY

The pathologic manifestations of P. aeruginosa infections depend on
the site and type of infection. Because of its elaboration of toxins and
invasive factors, the organism can often be seen invading blood vessels and causing vascular necrosis. In some infections there is spread
through tissues with necrosis and microabscess formation. In patients
with CF, focal and diffuse bronchitis/bronchiolitis leading to bronchiolitis obliterans has been reported.

Pathogenesis

Invasiveness of P. aeruginosa is mediated by a host of virulence factors. Bacterial attachment is facilitated by pili that adhere to epithelium
damaged by prior injury or infection. Extracellular proteins, proteases,
elastases, and cytotoxins disrupt cell membranes, and in response,
host-­produced cytokines cause capillary vascular permeability and
induce an inflammatory response. Dissemination and bloodstream
invasion follow extension of local tissue damage and are facilitated by
the antiphagocytic properties of endotoxin, the exopolysaccharide, and
protease cleavage of immunoglobulin G. P. aeruginosa also produces
numerous exotoxins, including exotoxin A, which causes local necrosis and facilitates systemic bacterial invasion. P. aeruginosa possesses a
type III secretion system composed of a needle structure that inserts
into host cell membranes and allows secretion of exotoxins directly
into host cells. The host responds to infection with a robust inflammatory response, recruiting neutrophils to the infection site and producing antibodies to P. aeruginosa proteins. There is a lack of convincing
data that these antibodies are protective against the establishment of
infection.
In addition to acute infection, P. aeruginosa is also capable of chronic
persistence because of the formation of biofilms, organized communities of bacteria encased in an extracellular matrix. Biofilm formation requires attachment to a surface, proliferation of the organism,
and production of exopolysaccharide as the main bacterial component
of the extracellular matrix. A mature biofilm can persist despite an
intense host immune response and is resistant to many antimicrobials.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most clinical patterns are related to opportunistic infections in immunocompromised hosts (see Chapter 223) or are associated with shunts
and indwelling catheters (see Chapter 224). P. aeruginosa may be introduced into a minor wound of a healthy person as a secondary invader,
and cellulitis and a localized abscess that exudes green or blue pus may
follow. The characteristic skin lesions of P. aeruginosa, ecthyma gangrenosum, whether caused by direct inoculation or a metastatic focus
secondary to septicemia, begin as pink macules and progress to hemorrhagic nodules and eventually to ulcers with ecchymotic and gangrenous centers with eschar formation, surrounded by an intense red
areola (Table 251.1 and Fig. 251.1).
Outbreaks of dermatitis and UTIs caused by P. aeruginosa have been
reported in healthy persons after use of pools or hot tubs. Skin lesions
of folliculitis develop several hours to 2 days after contact with these
water sources. Skin lesions may be erythematous, macular, papular,
or pustular. Illness may vary from a few scattered lesions to extensive
truncal involvement. In some children, malaise, fever, vomiting, sore
throat, conjunctivitis, rhinitis, and swollen breasts may be associated
with dermal lesions. UTIs caused by P. aeruginosa are most often nosocomial and are often associated with the presence of an indwelling
urinary catheter, urinary tract malformations, and previous antibiotic
use. UTIs may be minimized or prevented by prompt removal of the
catheter and by early identification and corrective surgery of obstructive lesions when present.

Burns and Wound Infection

The surfaces of burns or wounds are frequently populated by P. aeruginosa and other gram-­negative organisms; this initial colonization with a
low number of adherent organisms is a prerequisite to invasive disease.
P. aeruginosa colonization of a burn site may develop into burn wound
sepsis, which has a high mortality rate when the density of organisms
reaches a critical concentration. Administration of antibiotics may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1800 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
Table 251.1

Pseudomonas aeruginosa Infections

 

INFECTION

COMMON CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS

Endocarditis

Native right-­sided (tricuspid) valve disease with intravenous drug abuse

Pneumonia

Compromised local (lung) or systemic host defense mechanisms; nosocomial (respiratory),
bacteremic (malignancy), or abnormal mucociliary clearance (cystic fibrosis) may be
pathogenetic; cystic fibrosis is associated with mucoid P. aeruginosa organisms producing
capsular slime

Central nervous system infection

Meningitis, brain abscess; contiguous spread (mastoiditis, dermal sinus tracts, sinusitis);
bacteremia or direct inoculation (trauma, surgery)

External otitis

Swimmer’s ear; humid warm climates, swimming pool contamination

Malignant otitis externa

Invasive, indolent, febrile, toxic, destructive, necrotizing lesion in young infants,
immunosuppressed neutropenic patients, or diabetic patients; associated with seventh nerve
palsy and mastoiditis

Chronic mastoiditis

Ear drainage, swelling, erythema; perforated tympanic membrane

Keratitis

Corneal ulceration; contact lens keratitis

Endophthalmitis

Penetrating trauma, surgery, penetrating corneal ulceration; fulminant progression

Osteomyelitis/septic arthritis

Puncture wounds of foot and osteochondritis; intravenous drug abuse; fibrocartilaginous joints,
sternum, vertebrae, pelvis; open fracture osteomyelitis; indolent pyelonephritis and vertebral
osteomyelitis

Urinary tract infection

Iatrogenic, nosocomial; recurrent UTIs in children, instrumented patients, and those with
obstruction or stones

Intestinal tract infection

Immunocompromised, neutropenia, typhlitis, rectal abscess, ulceration, rarely diarrhea;
peritonitis in peritoneal dialysis

Ecthyma gangrenosum

Metastatic dissemination; hemorrhage, necrosis, erythema, eschar, discrete lesions with bacterial
invasion of blood vessels; also subcutaneous nodules, cellulitis, pustules, deep abscesses

Primary and secondary skin infections

Local infection; burns, trauma, decubitus ulcers, toe web infection, green nail (paronychia);
whirlpool dermatitis; diffuse, pruritic folliculitis; vesiculopustular or maculopapular,
erythematous lesions

P. aeruginosa from the sputum is associated with increased morbidity
and mortality. The infection begins insidiously or even asymptomatically, and the progression has a highly variable pace. In children with
CF, antibody does not eradicate the organism, and antibiotics are only
partially effective; thus after infection becomes chronic, it cannot be
completely eradicated. Repeated courses of antibiotics select for P.
aeruginosa strains that are resistant to multiple antibiotics.

Immunocompromised Persons

Fig. 251.1 Round, nontender skin lesion on 2-­yr-­old female’s buttock.

Note the black ulcerated center of the lesion and its red margin. (From
Ghanaiem H, Engelhard D. A healthy 2-­year-­old child with a round black
skin lesion. J Pediatr. 2013;163:1225.)

diminish the susceptible microbiologic flora, permitting strains of relatively resistant P. aeruginosa to flourish. Multiplication of organisms in
devitalized tissues or associated with prolonged use of intravenous or
urinary catheters increases the risk for septicemia with P. aeruginosa, a
major problem in burned patients (see Chapter 89).

Cystic Fibrosis

P. aeruginosa is common in patients with CF, with increasing prevalence as children get older (see Chapter 454). Initial infection is caused
by nonmucoid environmental strains of P. aeruginosa, but after a
variable period, mucoid strains of P. aeruginosa that produce the
antiphagocytic exopolysaccharide alginate, which are rarely encountered in other conditions, predominate. Repeated isolation of mucoid

Children with leukemia or other malignancies, particularly those who
are receiving immunosuppressive therapy and who are neutropenic,
typically with intravascular catheters, are extremely susceptible to septicemia caused by invasion of the bloodstream by P. aeruginosa that is
colonizing the respiratory or GI tract. Signs of sepsis are often accompanied by a generalized vasculitis, and hemorrhagic necrotic lesions
may be found in all organs, including the skin (ecthyma gangrenosum)
(see Fig. 251.1). Hemorrhagic or gangrenous perirectal cellulitis or
abscesses may occur, associated with ileus and profound hypotension.

Nosocomial Pneumonia

Although not a frequent cause of community-­acquired pneumonia in
children, P. aeruginosa does cause nosocomial pneumonia, especially
ventilator-­associated pneumonia, in patients of all ages. P. aeruginosa
has historically been found to contaminate ventilators, tubing, and
humidifiers. Such contamination is uncommon now because of disinfection practices and routine changing of equipment. Nevertheless,
colonization of the upper respiratory tract and the GI tract may be followed by aspiration of P. aeruginosa–contaminated secretions, resulting in severe pneumonia. Prior use of broad-­spectrum antibiotics is a
risk factor for colonization with antibiotic-­resistant strains of P. aeruginosa. One of the most challenging situations is distinguishing between
colonization and pneumonia in intubated patients. This distinction can

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 251 u Pseudomonas, Burkholderia, and Stenotrophomonas 1801
often only be definitively resolved by using invasive culture techniques
such as quantitative bronchoalveolar lavage.

Infants

P. aeruginosa is an occasional cause of nosocomial bacteremia in
newborns and accounts for 2–5% of positive blood culture results
in NICUs. A frequent focus preceding bacteremia is conjunctivitis.
Older infants rarely present with community-­acquired sepsis caused
by P. aeruginosa. In the few reports describing community-­acquired
sepsis, preceding conditions included ecthyma-­like skin lesions, virus-­
associated transient neutropenia, and prolonged contact with contaminated bath water or a hot tub.

DIAGNOSIS

P. aeruginosa infection is rarely clinically distinctive. Diagnosis
depends on recovery of the organism from the blood, cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF), urine, or needle aspirate of the lung or from purulent material obtained by aspiration of subcutaneous abscesses or areas of cellulitis. In the appropriate clinical setting, recovery of P. aeruginosa from a
coughed or suctioned sputum may represent infection; but it also may
only represent colonization, and clinical judgment is required. Rarely,
skin lesions that resemble P. aeruginosa infection may follow septicemia caused by Aeromonas hydrophila, other gram-­negative bacilli, and
Aspergillus. When P. aeruginosa is recovered from nonsterile sites such
as skin, mucous membranes, or voided urine, quantitative cultures may
be useful to differentiate colonization from invasive infection. In general, ≥100,000 colony-­forming units/mL of fluid or gram of tissue is
evidence suggestive of invasive infection. Quantitative cultures of tissue and skin are not routine and require consultation with the clinical
microbiology laboratory.

TREATMENT

Systemic infections with P. aeruginosa should be treated promptly with
an antibiotic to which the organism is susceptible in vitro. Response to
treatment may be limited, and prolonged treatment may be necessary
for systemic infection in immunocompromised hosts.
Septicemia and other aggressive infections should be treated with
either one or two bactericidal agents. Although the number of agents
required is controversial, the evidence continues to suggest that the
benefit of adding a second agent is questionable, even when studies have
included immunosuppressed patients. Appropriate antibiotics for single-­
agent therapy include ceftazidime, cefepime, ticarcillin-­clavulanate, and
piperacillin-­tazobactam. Gentamicin or another aminoglycoside may be
used concomitantly for synergistic effect.
Ceftazidime has proved to be extremely effective in patients with
CF, at 150-­400 mg/kg/day divided every 6-­8 hours intravenously (IV)
to a maximum of 6 g/day. Piperacillin or piperacillin-­tazobactam 240-­
400 mg/kg/day divided every 6-­8 hours IV to a maximum of 12 g/day
also has proved to be effective therapy for susceptible strains of P. aeruginosa. Continuous infusions of β-­lactam antibiotics are more effective
than the same daily dose given as pulse infusions.
Additional effective antibiotics include imipenem-­
cilastatin,
meropenem, and aztreonam. Ciprofloxacin (20-­30 mg/kg/day orally
every 8-­12 hours up to 500 mg/dose) is the only available effective oral
P. aeruginosa therapy, and although commonly used in children with
CF, it is not approved in the United States for persons <18 years old,
except for oral treatment of UTIs or when treating multidrug-­resistant
(MDR) P. aeruginosa. Inhaled therapy with either tobramycin or aztreonam is also used for chronic pulmonary infection, with inhaled colistin reserved for the treatment of resistant pseudomonads. Macrolide
therapy decreases pulmonary exacerbations in patients with chronic
lung disease and P. aeruginosa infection. The mechanism relates to
altering the virulence properties of P. aeruginosa rather than direct
bacterial killing.
It is important to base continued treatment on antimicrobial susceptibility tests because antibiotic resistance of P. aeruginosa is increasing.
P. aeruginosa has many mechanisms for resistance to multiple classes
of antibiotics, including but not limited to pathogenic variants, production of β-­lactamases, and drug efflux pumps. Throughout the United

States there has been an alarming increase in MDR P. aeruginosa isolates resistant to at least three antibiotic classes recovered from children. NHSN data from 2015 to 2017 show 2.8% NICU, 12% PICU, 6%
pediatric oncology, and 5.5% pediatric ward P. aeruginosa isolates were
MDR, with increasing rates of carbapenem and piperacillin/tazobactam resistance as well.
Several newer agents demonstrate efficacy against MDR P. aeruginosa. Ceftazidime-­
avibactam and ceftolozane-­
tazobactam combine
cephalosporins with a β-­lactamase inhibitor. Ceftolozane-­tazobactam
inhibits AmpC and other extended-­spectrum β-­lactamases but lacks
activity against carbapenemases. Ceftazidime-­avibactam inhibits class
A carbapenemases but not metallo-­β-­lactamases. Cefiderocol, a siderophore cephalosporin, has enhanced stability to β-­lactamases, including metallo-­β-­lactamases, Amp C, and carbapenemases.
Meningitis can occur by spread from a contiguous focus, as a secondary focus when there is bacteremia, or after invasive procedures. P.
aeruginosa meningitis is best treated with ceftazidime or meropenem
in combination with an aminoglycoside such as gentamicin, both given
IV. Concomitant intraventricular or intrathecal treatment with gentamicin may be required when IV therapy fails but is not recommended
for routine use.

SUPPORTIVE CARE

P. aeruginosa infections vary in severity from superficial to intense
septic presentations. With severe infections there is often multisystem
involvement and a systemic inflammatory response. Supportive care is
similar to care for severe sepsis caused by other gram-­negative bacilli
and requires support of blood pressure, oxygenation, and appropriate
fluid management.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis is dependent primarily on the nature of the underlying factors that predisposed the patient to P. aeruginosa infection. In
severely immunocompromised patients, the prognosis for patients
with P. aeruginosa sepsis is poor unless susceptibility factors such as
neutropenia or hypogammaglobulinemia can be reversed. The overall
mortality rate was 12.3% in one series of 232 children with P. aeruginosa bacteremia, with 3% dying within 48 hours of admission. Resistance of the organism to first-­line antibiotics also decreases the chance
of survival. The outcome may be improved when there is a urinary
tract portal of entry, absence of neutropenia or recovery from neutropenia, and drainage of local sites of infection.
P. aeruginosa is recovered from the lungs of most children who die
of CF and adds to the slow deterioration of these patients. The prognosis for normal development is poor in the few infants who survive P.
aeruginosa meningitis.

PREVENTION

Prevention of infections is dependent on limiting contamination of
the healthcare environment and preventing transmission to patients.
Effective hospital infection control programs are necessary to identify
and eradicate sources of the organism as quickly as possible. In hospitals, infection can be transmitted to children by the hands of personnel,
from washbasin surfaces, from catheters and other hospital equipment,
and from solutions used to rinse suction catheters.
Strict attention to hand hygiene before and between contacts with
patients may prevent or interdict epidemic disease. Meticulous care
and sterile procedures in the suctioning of endotracheal tubes, insertion and maintenance of indwelling catheters, and removal of catheters
as soon as medically reasonable greatly reduce the hazard of extrinsic
contamination by P. aeruginosa and other gram-­negative organisms.
Prevention of follicular dermatitis caused by P. aeruginosa contamination of whirlpools or hot tubs is possible by maintaining pool water
at a pH of 7.2-­7.8. Antimicrobial stewardship programs that promote
the appropriate use of antibiotics in the hospital setting are critical for
reducing the rates of MDR P. aeruginosa.
Infections in burned patients may be minimized by protective isolation, debridement of devitalized tissue, and topical applications of
bactericidal cream. Administration of intravenous immunoglobulin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1802 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
may be used. Approaches under investigation to prevent infection
include development of a P. aeruginosa vaccine. No vaccine is currently
licensed in the United States.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

251.2 Burkholderia cepacia Complex
Ashley C. Howard and Thomas S. Murray
Burkholderia cepacia is a filamentous gram-­negative rod now recognized to be a group of related species or genomovars (B. cepacia, B.
cenocepacia, B. multivorans). It is ubiquitous in the environment but
may be difficult to isolate from respiratory specimens in the laboratory,
requiring an enriched, selective media oxidation-­fermentation base
supplemented with polymyxin B–bacitracin-­lactose agar (OFPBL) and
as long as 3 days of incubation.
B. cepacia is a classic opportunist that rarely infects normal tissue but can be a pathogen for individuals with preexisting damage to
respiratory epithelium, especially persons with CF or with immune
dysfunction such as chronic granulomatous disease. B. cepacia has
multiple virulence factors, including lipopolysaccharide, flagella, and
a type III secretion system that promotes invasion of respiratory epithelial cells. Resistance to many antibiotics and disinfectants appears
to be a factor in the emergence of B. cepacia as a nosocomial pathogen. In critical care units it may colonize the tubing used to ventilate
patients with respiratory failure. In some patients this colonization may
lead to invasive pneumonia and septic shock. Although B. cepacia is
found throughout the environment, human-­to-­human spread among
CF patients occurs either directly by inhalation of aerosols or indirectly
from contaminated equipment or surfaces, accounting for the strict
infection control measures for children with CF who are colonized with
B. cepacia. For example, CF patients colonized with B. cepacia are asked
not to attend events where other persons with CF will be present. B.
cepacia infections in persons with CF may represent chronic infection
in some patients, but others, especially those with Burkholderia cenocepacia, genomovar III, can develop an acute respiratory syndrome of
fever, leukocytosis, and progressive respiratory failure, with more rapid
decline in pulmonary function and lower survival rate. In 2016-­2017,
two healthcare-­associated B. cepacia outbreaks among non-­CF patients
occurred as a result of contaminated liquid docusate that infected 63
persons from 12 states and prefilled saline flushes that infected 163 persons with 7 deaths. In August 2021, a healthcare-­associated outbreak of
B. stabilis was linked to ultrasound gel used in 59 persons in six states,
with 48 cases of bloodstream infection.
Treatment in hospitals should include standard precautions and
avoidance of placing colonized and uncolonized patients in the same
room. The use of antibiotics is guided by susceptibility studies of a patient’s
isolates, because the susceptibility pattern of this species is quite variable and resistant strains are common. Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-­SMX) and doxycycline or minocycline are potential oral therapies
for B. cepacia complex. For IV therapy without meningitis, meropenem
(20-­40 mg/kg/dose every 8 hours with a maximum dose of 6 g/day) with a
second agent such as TMP-­SMX, doxycycline, minocycline, ceftazidime, or
amikacin is recommended. Extended infusions should be considered for
difficult-­to-­treat infections. Even though there is primary resistance to
aminoglycosides, these agents may be useful in combination with other
antibiotics. Treatment with two or more agents may be necessary to control the infection and avoid the development of resistance. Cefiderocol,
because of its increased stability against β-­lactamases, has activity against
some MDR B. cepacia complex.

BURKHOLDERIA MALLEI (GLANDERS)

Glanders is a severe infectious disease of horses and other domestic
and farm animals that is caused by Burkholderia mallei, a nonmotile,
gram-­negative bacillus that is occasionally transmitted to humans. It is
acquired by inoculation into the skin, usually at the site of a previous

Fig. 251.2 Thigh abscesses at the sites of mosquito bites in a

15-­yr-­old Pennsylvania resident who had recently returned from Thailand, July 2016. Photo was taken 7 wk after onset. (From Mitchell PK,
Campbell C, Montgomery MP, et al. Notes from the field: travel–associated melioidosis and resulting laboratory exposures—United States,
2016. MMWR. 2017;66[37]:1001–1002.)

abrasion, or by inhalation of aerosols. Laboratory workers may acquire
it from clinical specimens. The disease is relatively common in Asia,
Africa, and the Middle East. The clinical manifestations include septicemia, acute or chronic pneumonitis, and hemorrhagic necrotic lesions
of the skin, nasal mucous membranes, and lymph nodes. The diagnosis
is usually made by recovery of the organism in cultures of affected tissue. Glanders is treated with sulfadiazine, tetracyclines, or chloramphenicol and streptomycin over many months. The disease has been
eliminated from the United States, but interest in this organism has
increased because of the possibility of its use as a bioterrorism agent
(see Chapter 763). Although standard precautions are appropriate
when caring for hospitalized infected patients, biosafety level 3 precautions are required for laboratory staff working with B. mallei. No
vaccine is available.

BURKHOLDERIA PSEUDOMALLEI (MELIOIDOSIS)

Melioidosis is an important disease of Southeast Asia and northern
Australia and occurs in the United States mainly in persons returning
from endemic areas. The causative agent is Burkholderia pseudomallei, an inhabitant of soil and water in the tropics. It is ubiquitous in
endemic areas, and infection follows inhalation of dust, ingestion, or
direct contamination of abrasions or wounds. Human-­to-­human transmission has only rarely been reported. Serologic surveys demonstrate
that asymptomatic infection occurs in endemic areas. The disease may
remain latent and appear when host resistance is reduced, sometimes
years after the initial exposure. Diabetes mellitus is a risk factor for
severe melioidosis. In 2021, four cases of melioidosis with two deaths
occurred in Kansas, Minnesota, Texas, and Georgia in persons, including children, with no known travel. The exposure is unknown but
thought to be from a single source, such as a contaminated imported
product or animal.
Melioidosis may present as a primary skin lesion (vesicle, bulla,
or urticaria) (Fig. 251.2). Pulmonary infection may be subacute and
mimic tuberculosis or may present as an acute necrotizing pneumonia. Occasionally, septicemia occurs and numerous abscesses are noted
in various organs of the body. Myocarditis, pericarditis, endocarditis, intestinal abscess, cholecystitis, acute gastroenteritis, UTIs, septic
arthritis, paraspinal abscess, osteomyelitis, mycotic aneurysm, and
generalized lymphadenopathy all have been observed. Melioidosis may
also present as an encephalitic illness with fever and seizures. It is also
an agent of severe wound infections after contact with contaminated
water after a tsunami. Diagnosis is based on visualization of characteristic small, gram-­negative rods in exudates or growth on laboratory
media such as eosin–methylene blue or MacConkey agar. Serologic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 252 u Tularemia (Francisella tularensis)
tests are available, and diagnosis can be established by a fourfold or
greater increase in antibody titer in an individual with an appropriate syndrome. It is recognized as a possible agent of bioterrorism, and
if suspected, the clinical microbiology laboratory should be notified
immediately (see Chapter 763).
B. pseudomallei is susceptible to many antimicrobial agents, and the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends
meropenem or ceftazidime as IV therapies and TMP-­SMX or doxycycline as oral therapy. Other choices include aminoglycosides, tetracycline, chloramphenicol, and amoxicillin-­clavulanate. Therapy should
be guided by antimicrobial susceptibility tests; two or three agents such
as ceftazidime or meropenem plus TMP-­SMX, sulfisoxazole, or an
aminoglycoside are usually chosen for severe or septicemic disease. For
severe disease, prolonged treatment for 2-­6 months is recommended
to prevent relapses. Appropriate antibiotic therapy generally results in
recovery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1803

Chapter 252

Tularemia (Francisella
tularensis)
Kevin J. Downes
Tularemia is a zoonosis caused by the gram-­negative bacterium Francisella tularensis. Tularemia is primarily a disease of wild animals;
human disease is incidental and usually results from tick or deer fly
bites or from contact with infected live or dead wild animals. The illness caused by F. tularensis is manifest by multiple clinical syndromes,
the most common consisting of an ulcerative lesion at the site of inoculation with regional lymphadenopathy or lymphadenitis. F. tularensis
is also a potential agent of bioterrorism (see Chapter 763).

ETIOLOGY

251.3 Stenotrophomonas
Ashley C. Howard and Thomas S. Murray
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (formerly Xanthomonas maltophilia
or Pseudomonas maltophilia) is a short to medium-­sized, straight,
gram-­negative bacillus. It is ubiquitous in nature and can be found
in the hospital environment, especially in tap water or standing
water, and may contaminate sinks and hospital equipment such as
nebulizers. Strains isolated in the laboratory may be contaminants,
may be a commensal from the colonized surface of a patient, or may
represent an invasive pathogen. The species is an opportunist and is
often recovered from immunosuppressed patients and patients with
CF after multiple courses of antimicrobial therapy. Serious infections usually occur among those requiring intensive care, including
neonatal intensive care, typically patients with ventilator-­associated
pneumonia or catheter-­associated infections. Prolonged antibiotic
exposure appears to be a frequent factor in nosocomial S. maltophilia infections, probably because of its endogenous antibiotic-­
resistance pattern. Common types of infection include pneumonia
after airway colonization and aspiration, bacteremia, soft tissue
infections, endocarditis, and osteomyelitis. S. maltophilia bacteremia is a nosocomial infection associated with the presence of a
central venous catheter.
Strains vary as to antibiotic susceptibility, and the treatment of S.
maltophilia can be difficult because of inherent antimicrobial resistance. Data are lacking on whether there is clinical benefit to treat S.
maltophilia recovered from the respiratory tract of a patient with CF.
For invasive infections, TMP-­SMX (20 mg/kg/day TMP component
every 6-­8 hours) is the treatment of choice and is the only antimicrobial
for which susceptibility is routinely reported. Minocycline monotherapy
has recently been shown to be a viable alternative to TMP-­SMX and is
reported for TMP-­SMX resistance strains with fewer adverse effects
and similar clinical outcomes. Mean inhibitory concentration testing is
available for other antibiotics, such as ticarcillin-­clavulanate, and also
reserved for TMP-­SMX–resistant isolates. For resistant organisms or for
patients who cannot tolerate sulfa drugs, other options based on clinical
outcome include ciprofloxacin and ceftazidime alone or in combination
with other agents such as aminoglycosides.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to acknowledge Dr. Robert S. Baltimore for his contribution to this chapter and Dr. Michelle R. Rychalsky for antibiotic dosing
regimens.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Francisella tularensis is a small, nonmotile, pleomorphic, catalase-­
positive, gram-­negative coccobacillus. It can be classified into four main
subspecies: F. tularensis subsp. tularensis (type A), F. tularensis subsp. holarctica (type B), F. tularensis subsp. mediasiatica, and F. tularensis subsp.
novicida. Type A can be further subdivided into four distinct genotypes
designated A1a, A1b, A2a, and A2b, with A1b appearing to produce more
serious disease in humans. Although all subspecies of F. tularensis can
cause human infections, types A and B are most common, and type A is
the most virulent. F. tularensis is an intracellular organism than can infect
various host cell types, including macrophages, hepatocytes, and epithelial cells. It is one of the most virulent bacterial pathogens known, with
as few as 10 microorganisms causing infections in humans and animals.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Tularemia is primarily found in the Northern Hemisphere. Type A
is found predominantly in North America, whereas type B is found
throughout North America, Europe, and Asia. Human infections with
type B are usually milder and have lower mortality rates compared to
infections with type A. F. tularensis subsp. mediasiatica appears to be
restricted to Central Asia, whereas F. tularensis subsp. novicida has
been isolated in North America, Australia, and Southeast Asia.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
the number of annual reported cases of tularemia in the United States
from 2010 to 2019 ranged from 124 to 314 per year. In 2015 the number of cases reported in the United States was the highest it had been
over the previous 50 years. Tularemia occurs all over the Unites States,
with the majority of cases reported from central states (Fig. 252.1). The
U.S. incidence of tularemia from 2010 to 2019 was 0.10 per 100,000
residents; Arkansas (3.1/100,000), South Dakota (1.9/100,000), and
Nebraska (0.9/100,000) were the states with the highest incidence.
Although cases of tularemia occur all year, most cases and outbreaks
occur in warm summer months (May-­September). Tularemia is more
common in males, although this is less true in children compared
with adults. There is a bimodal distribution based on age with peaks
in childhood (5-­9 years) and later adulthood (50-­69 years), potentially
because of greater opportunities for environmental and animal exposures at these ages (Fig. 252.2).

PATHOGENESIS

Of all the zoonotic diseases, tularemia is unusual because of the different modes of transmission of disease. A large number of animals serve
as a reservoir for this organism. In the United States, rabbits and ticks
are the principal reservoirs. Dogs may be an intermediate vector. In the
United States, Amblyomma americanum (lone star tick), Dermacentor
variabilis (dog tick), and Dermacentor andersoni (wood tick) are the
most common tick vectors. These ticks usually feed on infected small

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1804 Part XV u Infectious Diseases

* One dot is placed randomly within county of residence for each reported case.

200
180
160

Cases

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
5 year age group
Male

Female

Fig. 252.2 Incidence of reported cases of tularemia by age and sex—

United States, 2001–2020. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Tularemia—Statistics, https://www.cdc.gov/tularemia/statistics/index.html, Accessed: August 25, 2021.)

rodents and later feed on humans. Deer flies (Chrysops spp.) can also
transmit tularemia and are present in the western United States. F. tularensis subsp. tularensis is carried by rabbits, ticks, and tabanid flies (e.g.,
deer flies), whereas subsp. holarctica is associated with aquatic habitats and transmitted primarily by mosquitoes, but also aquatic rodents
(beavers, muskrats), hares, voles, ticks, tabanid flies, and ingestion of
contaminated water (e.g., ponds, rivers).
The organism can penetrate both intact skin and mucous membranes (eyes, mouth, gastrointestinal [GI] tract, or lungs), which are
the most common portals of entry. Transmission can occur through
the bite of infected ticks or other biting insects, by contact with
infected animals or their carcasses, by consumption of contaminated
foods or water, or through inhalation, as might occur in a laboratory setting or if a machine (e.g., lawn mower) runs over an infected
animal carcass. Hunting or skinning infected wild rodents, such as
rabbits or prairie dogs, has been the source of infection in numerous reports. Domesticated animals such as cats and hamsters can also

Fig. 252.1 Map of reported cases of tularemia—United States, 2020. (From Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention: Tularemia—Statistics, https://www.cdc.gov/
tularemia/statistics/index.html, Accessed: August 25,
2021.)

transmit tularemia. Importantly, this organism is not transmitted
from person to person.
Usually >108 organisms are required to produce infection if F. tularensis bacteria are ingested, but as few as 10 organisms may cause
disease if they are inhaled or injected into the skin (i.e., via an insect
bite). Infection with F. tularensis stimulates the host to produce antibodies, which have been recognized as important in the immune
response to this organism. The F. tularensis envelope is largely
responsible for virulence and plays major roles in the ability of the
organism to evade the immune system, attach to and invade cells, and
cause severe disease. The body is most dependent on cell-­mediated
immunity to contain and eradicate F. tularensis. Tularemia is usually followed by specific protection; chronic infection or reinfection
is therefore unlikely.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms of tularemia vary based on the mode of transmission.
The average incubation period from infection until clinical symptoms is 3 days (range: 1-­21 days). Early symptoms of infection are
generally nonspecific: fever, chills, myalgias, arthralgias, headache,
and fatigue. Bacteremia may be common in the early stages of infection. Acute infections often present with sudden onset of fever, and
a pulse-­temperature dissociation may be present. Findings on physical examination may include lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, or skin lesions. Table 252.1 shows the frequency of various
symptoms and examination findings.
The clinical manifestations of tularemia have been divided into
six major clinical syndromes (Table 252.2). Ulceroglandular and
glandular disease are the two most common forms of tularemia in
children. Infections after the bites of ticks or deer flies take these
forms. Within 48-­72 hours after inoculation of the skin, an erythematous, tender, or pruritic papule may appear at the portal of
entry. This papule may enlarge and form an ulcer with a black base.
Ulcers are generally erythematous and painful with raised borders and may last several weeks, especially if untreated. Various
other skin lesions have been described, including erythema multiforme and erythema nodosum. Approximately 20% of patients
may develop a generalized maculopapular rash that occasionally
becomes pustular. The unifying manifestation of glandular and
ulceroglandular forms of tularemia is painful regional lymphadenopathy. Adenopathy may develop before, concurrent with, or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 252 u Tularemia (Francisella tularensis)
Table 252.1  Common Clinical Manifestations of
Tularemia in Children
SIGN OR SYMPTOM

APPROXIMATE FREQUENCY
(%)

Lymphadenopathy

90

Fever (>38.3°C [100.9°F])

85

Ulcer/eschar/papule

45

Pharyngitis

40

Myalgias/arthralgias

40

Nausea/vomiting

35

Hepatosplenomegaly

35

Table 252.2  Clinical Syndromes of Tularemia in Children
CLINICAL SYNDROME

CHARACTERISTICS OF
SYNDROME

Ulceroglandular

Skin ulcer/eschar at site of
inoculation; painful regional
adenopathy

Glandular

Painful regional adenopathy without
detectable skin ulceration

Pneumonia

Nonproductive cough, dyspnea,
pleuritic chest pain; multilobar/
diffuse infiltrates > lobar infiltrates
on chest radiography

Oropharyngeal

Pharyngitis, mucosal ulcers, cervical
adenopathy

Oculoglandular

Unilateral, painful, and often
purulent conjunctivitis; chemosis;
conjunctival ulcers; preauricular
adenopathy

Typhoidal

Severe systemic disease (sepsis-­like
syndrome): high fever, headaches,
myalgias, arthralgias, neurologic
symptoms

after skin ulceration in ulceroglandular disease. Cervical or posterior auricular nodes are involved after bites on the head or neck,
whereas enlarged axillary or epitrochlear nodes signal exposure on
the arms. Nodes may vary in size from 0.5 to 10 cm and appear singly or in clusters. These affected nodes may become fluctuant and
drain spontaneously and are often associated with overlying skin
changes. Late suppuration of the involved nodes has been described
in 25–30% of patients despite effective therapy. Examination of this
material from such lymph nodes usually reveals sterile necrotic
material. Mortality with these forms of tularemia is rare, especially
with implementation of effective treatment.
Oropharyngeal tularemia results from consumption of poorly
cooked meats or contaminated water. This syndrome is characterized
by acute pharyngitis, with or without tonsillitis, and cervical lymphadenitis. Infected tonsils may become large and develop a yellowish-­
white membrane that may resemble the membranes associated with
diphtheria. GI disease may also occur and usually presents with mild,
unexplained diarrhea or emesis but may progress to rapidly fulminant
and fatal disease. GI bleeding can develop in more severe forms associated with intestinal ulcers.

1805

Oculoglandular disease is uncommon, but when it does occur,
the portal of entry is the conjunctiva. Contact with contaminated
fingers or debris is the most common mechanism of this form of
tularemia. Disease is generally unilateral. The conjunctiva is painful and inflamed with yellowish nodules and pinpoint ulcerations.
Purulent conjunctivitis with ipsilateral preauricular or submandibular lymphadenopathy can develop and is referred to as Parinaud
oculoglandular syndrome, although this term is not specific to
tularemia. Corneal ulceration and perforation are uncommon but
serious complications of this form of disease.
The typhoidal form is usually associated with a large inoculum of organisms and is a term used to describe nonlocalizing disease, regardless of the mode of transmission or portal of
entry. Patients are often critically ill and bacteremic, and symptoms mimic those with other forms of sepsis: high fevers, confusion, rigors, myalgias, vomiting, and diarrhea. Clinicians
practicing in tularemia-­
endemic regions must always consider
this diagnosis in critically ill children. Complications of bacteremia with F. tularensis can include the development of meningitis,
pericarditis, hepatitis, peritonitis, endocarditis, skin/soft tissue
abscesses, and osteomyelitis. Because of its increased virulence,
F. tularensis subsp. tularensis (type A disease) is more often associated with typhoidal tularemia. Patients with tularemia meningitis
usually develop a marked cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis with
a monocytic predominance. As with other causes of bacterial meningitis, CSF glucose is low and protein is high.
Pneumonia caused by F. tularensis (pneumonic form) can
develop after inhalation (primary pulmonary infection) or secondary to hematogenous spread. Inhalation-­related infection has been
described in laboratory workers who are working with the organism
and results in a relatively high mortality rate. Aerosols from farming activities involving rodent contamination (haying, threshing) or
animal carcass destruction with lawn mowers have been reported to
cause pneumonia as well. Patients generally complain of a nonproductive cough, dyspnea, or pleuritic chest pain. Chest radiographs
of patients with pneumonic tularemia most often reveal diffuse,
patchy infiltrates rather than focal areas of consolidation. Pleural
effusions can also be present. In pulmonary infections, hilar or
mediastinal adenopathy can develop, and in severe forms, necrotizing or hemorrhagic pneumonitis can occur. Mortality with pneumonic tularemia is high if untreated.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis can be delayed because symptoms are often similar to
other, more common infections. The history and physical examination of the patient may suggest the diagnosis, especially if the patient
has a history of animal or tick exposure. Routine hematologic blood
tests are nondiagnostic. Definitive diagnosis is made by growth of F.
tularensis in culture. F. tularensis can be isolated in culture of lymph
node biopsies or aspirates, blood, wounds, pharyngeal swabs, pleural fluid, or sputum specimens, although cultures are positive in only
approximately 10% of cases. The organism can be identified on culture
from skin lesions and lymph nodes for as long as a month after onset
of disease. Polymerase chain reaction of tissue specimens may be more
sensitive than culture but is currently used to make a presumptive diagnosis only.
F. tularensis can be cultured in the microbiology laboratory on
cysteine–glucose–blood agar, but care should be taken to alert the
personnel in the laboratory if this is attempted so that they can
take the proper precautions to protect themselves from acquiring infection; biosafety level 3 containment is necessary to avoid
occupational exposure. Histopathologic findings of involved lymph
nodes demonstrate granulomas with central necrosis (early) and
caseation (late). Unfortunately, these findings cannot distinguish
tularemia from other causes of granulomatous lymphadenitis, such
as tuberculosis, cat-scratch disease (Bartonella henselae infection),
or sarcoidosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1806 Part XV u Infectious Diseases
The diagnosis of tularemia is most often established via serology. In the standard tube agglutination (TA) test, a single titer of
≥1:160 in a patient with a compatible history and physical findings
can establish the diagnosis. A microagglutination (MA) test is also
available, and ≥1:128 is considered positive. Patients often do not
produce detectable antibodies until the second week of illness, so
negative testing in the acute phase does not rule out infection. A
fourfold increase in titer from paired serum samples collected >2
weeks apart (i.e., acute and convalescent titers) can also be considered diagnostic. False-­negative serologic responses can be obtained
early in the infection or if paired sera are collected too close
together. False-­positive serologic tests can also result from cross-­
reactivity with other gram-­negative organisms, such as Brucella or
Legionella species, particularly at low titers. Once infected, patients
may have a positive agglutination test result (1:20-­1:80) that persists
for life. Other testing techniques available include enzyme-­linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), analysis of urine for tularemia antigen, indirect immunofluorescent assay, and immunohistochemical
staining; these studies have less well-­established roles in the diagnosis of tularemia.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of ulceroglandular or glandular tularemia is broad and includes infection with pathogens that cause
acute or subacute lymphadenitis: cat-scratch disease (B. henselae),
infectious mononucleosis, typical bacterial pathogens (Staphylococcus aureus, group A streptococcus), Mycobacterium tuberculosis, nontuberculous mycobacteria, Toxoplasma gondii, Sporothrix
schenckii, plague (Yersinia pestis), anthrax (Bacillus anthracis),
melioidosis (Burkholderia pseudomallei), and rat-­bite fever (Streptobacillus moniliformis, Spirillum minus). Noninfectious processes
such as sarcoidosis and Kawasaki disease can also present similarly. Oculoglandular disease may also occur with other infectious agents, such as B. henselae, Treponema pallidum, Coccidioides
immitis, herpes simplex virus (HSV), adenoviruses, and the bacterial agents responsible for purulent conjunctivitis. Oropharyngeal
tularemia must be differentiated from the same diseases that cause
ulceroglandular/glandular disease and from cytomegalovirus, HSV,
adenovirus, and other viral or bacterial etiologies. Pneumonic
tularemia must be differentiated from the other atypical pathogens
that cause community-­acquired pneumonia, such as Mycoplasma
and Chlamydophila, as well as mycobacteria, fungi, and rickettsiae.
Inhalation plague, anthrax, and Q fever could also present similarly.
Typhoidal tularemia must be differentiated from other forms of
sepsis and from enteric fever (typhoid and paratyphoid fever) and
brucellosis.

TREATMENT

Aminoglycosides are the mainstay of treatment of tularemia: gentamicin is the drug of choice for the treatment of tularemia in
children, and streptomycin is the drug of choice in adults. Table
252.3 displays therapeutic options for treatment of tularemia and
for postexposure prophylaxis. Ciprofloxacin is often used for mild
(localized) cases, especially those caused by subsp. holarctica, but
is less commonly prescribed in children. Doxycycline has been used
successfully, but the relapse rate is higher than with aminoglycosides, and so it is not generally recommended. Ciprofloxacin and
doxycycline are often used as adjunctive therapy for treatment of
tularemia meningitis because of the poor penetration of aminoglycosides in the CSF. Ciprofloxacin can also be considered in cases
of moderate/severe disease after initial treatment with an aminoglycoside, if an IV-­to-­PO switch is warranted based on clinical
improvement. β-­lactam agents demonstrate poor activity against F.
tularensis and should not be used.
Therapy with aminoglycosides is typically continued for 7-­10
days, but a longer course is needed in more severe disease; 5-­7 days
may be sufficient for mild cases. Ciprofloxacin treatment is typically
10-­14 days, although there is no FDA-­approved regimen for tularemia
specifically. Treatment with doxycycline should be continued for 14-­21
days because of an increased risk of relapse, likely because of its bacteriostatic nature.

PROGNOSIS

Poor outcomes are associated with a delay in appropriate treatment,
but with rapid recognition and treatment, fatalities are exceedingly
rare. The mortality rate for severe untreated disease (e.g., pneumonia, typhoidal disease) can be as high as 30%. Otherwise, the overall
mortality rate is <1%. Subspecies tularensis is associated with more
aggressive disease and worse outcomes than subsp. holarctica.
Relapses are uncommon if aminoglycoside therapy is used.
Patients typically defervesce within 24-­
48 hours after starting
therapy, although lymphadenopathy can take several weeks to
resolve fully. Late suppuration of involved lymph nodes may occur
despite adequate therapy. Patients who have not started on appropriate therapy early may respond more slowly to antimicrobial
therapy.

PREVENTION

Prevention of tularemia is based on avoiding exposure. Children living in tick-­endemic regions should be taught to avoid tick-­infested
areas. Families should have a tick control plan for their immediate
environment and for their pets. Protective clothing should be worn
when entering a tick-­infested area. Insect repellents can be used safely

Table 252.3  Recommended Treatment for Children with Tularemia
INDICATION

DRUG AND DOSAGE

DURATION

Moderate-­severe disease

Gentamicin 5-­7.5 mg/kg/day IV or IM divided every 8-­12 hr* or
Streptomycin 30-40 mg/kg/day IM divided every 12 hr (max 1 g/dose)

≥10 days

Mild disease

Gentamicin 5-­7.5 mg/kg/day IV or IM divided every 8-­12 hr* or
Ciprofloxacin 20-­40 mg/kg/day PO divided every 12 hr (max 500 mg/dose)

5-­7 days
10-­14 days

Meningitis

Streptomycin or gentamicin (in doses given for moderate-­severe disease)
PLUS
Ciprofloxacin (20-­40 mg/kg/day IV divided every 12 hr) or
Doxycycline 4.4 mg/kg/day IV divided every 12 hr (max 100 mg/dose)

≥10 days

Postexposure prophylaxis

Doxycycline 4.4 mg/kg/day PO divided twice daily (max 100 mg/dose) or
Ciprofloxacin 20-­40 mg/kg/day PO divided twice daily (max 500 mg/dose)

14 days

*Once-­daily dosing of gentamicin could be considered, although it has not specifically been studied for this indication.
IM, Intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; PO, per os (i.e., by mouth).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

