Chapter 458 u Pulmonary Embolism, Infarction, and Hemorrhage

2699

Syndromes associated with vasculitic, autoimmune, and idiopathic
disorders may be associated with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (see Chapter 457).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The frequency with which pulmonary hemorrhage occurs in the pediatric population is difficult to define. The difficulties in timely diagnosis
are primarily related to the variability in disease presentation. As such,
the incidence of pulmonary hemorrhage may be significantly underestimated. Chronic bronchiectasis as seen in CF (see Chapter 454) or
ciliary dyskinesia (see Chapter 455) can cause hemoptysis, but usually
occurs in children older than 10 years of age.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The vascular supply of the lung has two components. The pulmonary
artery provides blood to the bronchi to the level of the terminal bronchioles and to the alveolar capillary bed. The pulmonary circulation is
characterized by low pressure and high volume. Conversely, the bronchial circulation originates from the aorta or intercostal arteries. The
pressure in the bronchial artery circulation is systemic. This circulation provides blood the conducting airways. Hemoptysis may occur
from either the pulmonary or bronchial circulation. Bleeding from the
pulmonary circulation is expected to be insidious; slow bleeding in the
lower airways typically manifests with anemia, fatigue, and dyspnea,
and hemoptysis may be absent. Syndromes associated with diffuse
alveolar hemorrhage are discussed in Chapter 457. Bleeding from the
bronchial circulation may be massive and associated with rapid exsanguination. Blood that comes from the lung is frequently difficult to differentiate from blood that originates at the nasopharynx, mouth, or
gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The blood that originates from the airway is
classically bright red or rust colored. Alveolar blood may have a frothy
appearance. Blood originating from the GI tract is typically brownish
in color. The pH of pulmonary blood is alkaline, whereas blood from
the GI tract is expected to be acidic.
In patients with CF, chronic endobronchial infection, inflammation,
mucus plugging, and thickening of the airway surface layer predispose to
growth and dilation of the bronchial arteries. Blood in the airway is highly
irritative and initiates an influx of neutrophils and inflammatory mediators that serve to exacerbate the already vibrant inflammatory response.
As such, pulmonary hemorrhage may be recurrent in late-­stage CF. Massive and life-­threatening hemorrhage may occur. With repeated or chronic
hemorrhage, pulmonary fibrosis can become a prominent pathologic
finding.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The presenting symptoms and signs of pulmonary hemorrhage are highly
variable in the pediatric population. Older children and young adults
experiencing focal hemorrhage may be able to localize the bleeding by a
sensation of “warmth” or “bubbling” in the chest. This can occasionally aid
the clinician in locating the area involved. Rapid and large-­volume blood
loss manifests as hypoxemic and hypercarbic respiratory failure and hypovolemic shock. Chronic, insidious blood loss may manifest as anemia,
fatigue, dyspnea, or poor exercise tolerance. Severely anemic individuals
may present with syncope. Radiographic infiltrates may be seen in a focal
or diffuse distribution on chest radiograph. The presence of a cavitary
lesion or radiopaque foreign body suggests tubercular or fungal infection
and foreign body aspiration, respectively.

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS

A patient with suspected hemorrhage should have a laboratory evaluation with complete blood count and coagulation studies. The complete
blood count result may demonstrate a microcytic, hypochromic anemia but may be normal in acute blood loss. The diagnosis of pulmonary
hemorrhage is best confirmed by bronchoscopy with direct visualization of bleeding and/or a bronchoalveolar lavage specimen that confirms the presence of hemosiderin-­laden macrophages on Prussian
blue staining. Within 48-­72 hours of an episode of bleeding, alveolar
macrophages convert the iron from erythrocytes into hemosiderin.
It may take weeks to clear these hemosiderin-­laden macrophages

Fig. 458.3 Radiographic appearance of acute idiopathic pulmonary

hemorrhage in infancy. (From Brown CM, Redd SC, Damon SA, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. Acute idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage among infants: recommendations from the Working Group for
Investigation and Surveillance. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2004;53:1–12.)

Fig. 458.4 Diffuse pulmonary hemorrhage that was thought to be the
result of idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis in a 3-­yr-­old child. Frontal radiograph reveals bilateral air space consolidation that is patchy.
Tracheal washing contained large numbers of macrophages filled with
hemosiderin. Ten days later, most of the consolidative changes in the
lungs had cleared. The patient’s anemia was successfully treated with
blood transfusion. (Courtesy Bertram Girdany, MD, Pittsburgh, PA; from
Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008.)

completely from the alveolar spaces, thereby allowing differentiation
between acute and chronic hemorrhage.
Chest radiographs may demonstrate fluffy bilateral densities, as seen
in acute idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage of infancy (Fig. 458.3) or
the patchy consolidation seen in idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (Fig. 458.4). Alveolar infiltrates seen on chest radiograph may be
regarded as a representation of recent bleeding, but their absence does
not rule out the occurrence of pulmonary hemorrhage. Infiltrates,
when present, are often symmetric and diffuse and may be preferentially located in the perihilar regions and lower lobes. The costophrenic
angles and lung apices are frequently spared. CT may be indicated to
assess for underlying disease processes.
Lung biopsy is rarely necessary unless bleeding is chronic or an etiology cannot be determined with other methods. Pulmonary function
testing, including a determination of gas exchange, is important to assess
the severity of the ventilatory defect. In older children, spirometry may
demonstrate evidence of predominantly obstructive disease in the acute

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2700 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
period. Restrictive disease secondary to fibrosis is typically seen with more
chronic disease. Diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide measurements are
typically elevated in the setting of pulmonary hemorrhage because of the
strong affinity of the intraalveolar hemoglobin for carbon monoxide.

TREATMENT

In mild to moderate hemoptysis (>5 mL blood), potential irritants to
the lung (hypertonic saline, DNase, chest physiotherapy, and inhaled
antibiotics) are typically held. In patients with CF, vitamin K may be
given empirically, given a predilection toward vitamin K deficiency
with comorbid pancreatic insufficiency.
In the setting of massive hemorrhage (>240 mL), emergent circulatory and ventilatory support is provided and a requirement for volume
resuscitation and transfusion of blood products should be anticipated. If
respiratory failure ensues, mechanical ventilatory support with high positive end-­expiratory pressure (PEEP) may tamponade a bleeding vessel and
improve oxygenation. If bleeding is unilateral, selective ventilation of the
unaffected lung may be recommended. Rigid bronchoscopy may be used
for localization of bleeding and for removal of debris, but active bleeding
may be exacerbated by airway manipulation. In patients with CF who are
unstable with massive hemorrhage, proceeding directly to bronchial artery
embolization (BAE) has been advocated. Improved outcomes of BAE have
been seen when the bleeding vessel is identified by multidetector CT imaging. Cessation of bleeding is achieved in approximately 80% of patients,
but bleeding may be recurrent, and more than one BAE may be required.
Rare complications include inadvertent embolization of spinal and mesenteric arteries, leading to paralysis and ischemic bowel, respectively. If
embolization fails, total or partial lobectomy may be required.
Antifibrinolytic therapy with tranexamic acid (TXA) has been used to
control bleeding in patients with hemophilia and in patients with CF, as well
as in other conditions (bronchiectasis, tuberculosis, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis). This medication may be administered by inhaled, oral,
or parenteral routes. Inhaled TXA may be as effective as intravenous dosing;
the inhaled route has fewer systemic effects. The use of this medication is
currently off label.
Depending on institutional capabilities, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and emergent listing for lung transplantation may also be
considered for patients with end-­stage disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 459

Atelectasis
Ranna A. Rozenfeld
Atelectasis is the incomplete expansion or complete collapse of air-­
bearing tissue, resulting from obstruction of air intake into the alveolar sacs. Segmental, lobar, or whole lung collapse is associated with
the absorption of air contained in the alveoli, which are no longer
ventilated.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The causes of atelectasis can be divided into five groups (Table 459.1).
Respiratory syncytial virus (see Chapter 307) and other viral infections, including influenza viruses in young children, can cause multiple
areas of atelectasis. Mucous plugs are a common predisposing factor to
atelectasis. Massive collapse of one or both lungs is most often a postoperative complication but occasionally results from other causes, such
as trauma, asthma, pneumonia, tension pneumothorax (see Chapter
461), aspiration of foreign material (see Chapters 435 and 446), paralysis, or after extubation. Massive atelectasis is usually produced by a
combination of factors, including immobilization or decreased use of
the diaphragm and the respiratory muscles, obstruction of the bronchial tree, and abolition of the cough reflex.

Table 459.1   Anatomic Causes of Atelectasis
CAUSE

CLINICAL EXAMPLES

External compression on the
pulmonary parenchyma

Pleural effusion, pneumothorax,
intrathoracic tumors,
diaphragmatic hernia

Endobronchial obstruction
completely obstructing the
ingress of air

Enlarged lymph node, tumor,
cardiac enlargement,
foreign body, mucoid plug,
broncholithiasis

Intraluminal obstruction of a
bronchus

Foreign body, asthma,
granulomatous tissue,
tumor, secretions including
mucous plugs, bronchiectasis,
pulmonary abscess,
chronic bronchitis, acute
laryngotracheobronchitis,
plastic bronchitis

Intrabronchiolar obstruction

Bronchiolitis, interstitial
pneumonitis, asthma

Respiratory compromise or
paralysis

Neuromuscular abnormalities,
osseous deformities, overly
restrictive casts and surgical
dressings, defective movement
of the diaphragm, or restriction
of respiratory effort

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms vary with the cause and extent of the atelectasis. A small
area is likely to be asymptomatic. When a large area of previously normal lung becomes atelectatic, especially when it does so suddenly, dyspnea accompanied by rapid shallow respiration, tachycardia, cough,
and often cyanosis occurs. If the obstruction is removed, the symptoms
disappear rapidly. Although it was once believed that atelectasis alone
can cause fever, studies have shown no association between atelectasis and fever. Physical findings include limitation of chest excursion,
decreased breath sound intensity, and coarse crackles. Breath sounds
are decreased or absent over extensive atelectatic areas.
Massive atelectasis usually presents with dyspnea, cyanosis, and
tachycardia. An affected child is extremely anxious and, if old enough,
complains of chest pain. The chest appears flat on the affected side,
where decreased respiratory excursion, dullness to percussion, and
feeble or absent breath sounds are also noted. Postoperative atelectasis
usually manifests within 24 hours of operation but may not occur for
several days.
Acute lobar collapse is a frequent occurrence in patients receiving
intensive care. If undetected, it can lead to impaired gas exchange, secondary infection, and subsequent pulmonary fibrosis. Initially, hypoxemia may result from ventilation-­perfusion mismatch. In contrast to
atelectasis in adult patients, in whom the lower lobes and, in particular, the left lower lobe is most often involved, 90% of cases in children
involve the upper lobes and 63% involve the right upper lobe. There
is also a high incidence of upper lobe atelectasis and, especially, right
upper lobe collapse in patients with atelectasis being treated in neonatal intensive care units. This high incidence may be a result of the
movement of the endotracheal tube into the right mainstem bronchus,
where it obstructs or causes inflammation of the bronchus to the right
upper lobe.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of atelectasis can usually be established by chest radiograph. Typical findings include volume loss and displacement of fissures. Atypical presentations include atelectasis manifesting as a
masslike opacity and atelectasis in an unusual location. Lobar atelectasis may be associated with pneumothorax. Several studies have shown

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 459 u Atelectasis

2701

Table 459.2  Treatment for Atelectasis

A

CAUSE OF ATELECTASIS

TREATMENT

Pleural effusion or pneumothorax

Relieve compression

Mucous plug

Tracheal or bronchoscopic
aspiration
Continuous positive airway
pressure

Foreign body

Bronchoscopic examination

Asthma

Bronchodilator and
corticosteroid treatment
Recombinant human
deoxyribonuclease (off-­label
use)
Hypertonic saline with or without
bronchodilator

Neuromuscular diseases

Intermittent positive pressure
breathing
Mechanical insufflator-­exsufflator
Noninvasive bilevel positive
pressure ventilation

Cystic fibrosis

Airway clearance therapies
Hypertonic saline with or without
bronchodilator
Recombinant human
deoxyribonuclease

B

Fig. 459.1 A, Massive atelectasis of the right lung. The patient has

asthma. The heart and other mediastinal structures shift to the right
during the atelectatic phase. B, Comparison study after reaeration subsequent to bronchoscopic removal of a mucous plug from the right
mainstem bronchus.

lung ultrasound to be a viable alternative to chest radiograph when
diagnosing atelectasis, especially in patients with neuromuscular disease, to avoid radiation exposure.
In children with asthma, chest radiography demonstrates an abnormality rate of 44%, compared with a thorax high-­resolution CT scan
abnormality rate of 75%. Children with asthma and atelectasis have
an increased incidence of right middle lobe syndrome, acute asthma
exacerbations, pneumonia, and upper airway infections.
In foreign-­body aspiration, atelectasis is one of the most common
radiographic findings. The site of atelectasis usually indicates the site
of the foreign body (see Chapter 426.1). Atelectasis is more common
when diagnosis of foreign-­body aspiration is delayed for greater than 2
weeks. Bronchoscopic examination reveals a collapsed main bronchus
when the obstruction is at the tracheobronchial junction and may also
disclose the nature of the obstruction.
Massive atelectasis is typically diagnosed on chest radiograph. Typical findings include elevation of the diaphragm, narrowing of the intercostal spaces, and displacement of the mediastinal structures and heart
toward the affected side (Fig. 459.1).

TREATMENT

Treatment depends on the cause of the collapse (Table 459.2). If effusion or pneumothorax is responsible, the external compression must
first be removed. Often vigorous efforts at cough, deep breathing, and
percussion will facilitate expansion. Aspiration with sterile tracheal
catheters may facilitate removal of mucous plugs. Continuous positive
airway pressure may improve atelectasis.
Bronchoscopic examination is immediately indicated if atelectasis is
the result of a foreign body or any other bronchial obstruction that can
be relieved. For bilateral atelectasis, bronchoscopic aspiration should also
be performed immediately. It is also indicated when an isolated area of
atelectasis persists for several weeks. If no anatomic basis for atelectasis
is found and no material can be obtained by suctioning, the introduction
of a small amount of saline followed by suctioning allows recovery of
bronchial secretions for culture and, possibly, for cytologic examination.
Frequent changes in the child’s position, deep breathing, and chest physiotherapy may be beneficial. Intrapulmonary percussive ventilation is a
chest physiotherapy technique that is safe and effective. Oxygen therapy
is indicated when there is dyspnea or desaturation. Intermittent positive
pressure breathing and incentive spirometry are recommended when
atelectasis does not improve after chest physiotherapy.
In some conditions, such as asthma, bronchodilator and corticosteroid treatment may accelerate atelectasis clearance. Recombinant
human deoxyribonuclease, which is approved only for the treatment of
cystic fibrosis, has been used off-­label for patients without cystic fibrosis who have persistent atelectasis. This product reduces the viscosity
of purulent bronchial debris. In patients with acute severe asthma, diffuse airway plugging with thick viscous secretions frequently occurs,
with the resulting atelectasis often refractory to conventional therapy.
Recombinant human deoxyribonuclease is used in the nebulized

form for nonintubated patients with acute asthma and intratracheally
for atelectasis in intubated asthmatics, with resolution of atelectasis
unresponsive to conventional asthma therapies. Recombinant human
deoxyribonuclease is also used in ventilated infants and children with
atelectasis not caused by asthma.
Hypertonic saline solution increases mucociliary clearance in
patients with asthma, bronchiectasis, and cystic fibrosis and infants
with acute bronchiolitis. It is delivered via nebulization either via face
mask or endotracheal tube. It can be delivered alone or in combination
with a bronchodilator. This therapy is being used in the outpatient and
inpatient setting and in both the neonatal intensive care unit and the
pediatric intensive care unit to help facilitate airway clearance, though
studies of its use in bronchiolitis have had mixed results (see Chapter
439.1). Lobar atelectasis in cystic fibrosis is discussed in Chapter 454.
Atelectasis can occur in patients with neuromuscular diseases. These
patients tend to have an ineffective cough and difficulty expelling respiratory tract secretions, which lead to pneumonia and atelectasis. Several
devices and treatments are available to assist these patients, including intermittent positive-­pressure breathing, a mechanical insufflator-­exsufflator,
and noninvasive bilevel positive-­pressure ventilation via nasal mask or
full-­face mask. Patients with neuromuscular disease who have undergone
surgery are at substantial risk for postoperative atelectasis and subsequent
pneumonia. Migrating atelectasis in the newborn infant, a rare and unique
presentation, may be secondary to neuromuscular disease.
There is an association between the development of lobar collapse
and the requirement for mechanical ventilation. Although lobar collapse is rarely a cause of long-­term morbidity, its occurrence may
necessitate the prolongation of mechanical ventilation or reintubation.
In ventilated patients, positive-­end expiratory pressure or continuous
positive airway pressure is generally indicated.
Airway clearance therapies used for adults are often recommended
and/or used in pediatric populations. However, given the differences
in respiratory physiology and anatomy between children and adults,
practices applicable to one may or may not apply to the other. Atelectasis caused by cystic fibrosis is the only pediatric entity that clearly
benefits from airway clearance therapy, although atelectasis caused by
neuromuscular disease, cerebral palsy, or mechanical ventilation probably benefits from such therapy. Thus far, no specific airway clearance
therapy has been demonstrated to be superior.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2702 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Chapter 460

Pulmonary Tumors
John Palla and Susanna A. McColley
See also Chapter 438.
Primary tumors of the lung are rare in children and adolescents
(Table 460.1). An accurate estimate of frequency is currently not possible because the literature is composed of case reports and case series.
A high incidence of “inflammatory pseudotumors” further clouds the
statistics. Bronchial adenomas (including bronchial carcinoid, adenoid
cystic carcinoma, and mucoepidermoid carcinomas) are the most
common primary malignant tumors; bronchial carcinoid tumors represent ∼80%. Pediatric carcinoid tumors are predominantly low-­grade
malignancies, but children with these tumors should be evaluated
and monitored by a pediatric oncologist. Carcinoid syndrome from a
bronchial carcinoid tumor is rare in children. Metastatic lesions are the
most common forms of pulmonary malignancy in children; primary
processes include Wilms tumor, osteogenic sarcoma, germ cell tumors,
and hepatoblastoma (see Part XX, Cancer and Benign Tumors). Adenocarcinoma and undifferentiated histology are the most common
pathologic findings in primary lung cancer; pulmonary blastoma is
rarer and frequently occurs in the setting of a primary cystic lesion or
is associated with a congenital pulmonary airway malformation (see
Chapter 444.3). Lymphoma is the most common cause of mediastinal
mass in children; other mediastinal tumors include thymoma, thyroid
cancer, and teratoma. Neuroblastoma may present as a posterior mediastinal mass.

Table 460.1   Pulmonary Tumors in Children
MALIGNANT
Bronchial adenomas (40–60%)
Carcinoid
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma
Adenoid cystic carcinoma
Pleuropulmonary blastoma (15%)
Bronchogenic carcinoma (10–15%)
Adenocarcinoma
Small-­cell carcinoma
Bronchoalveolar carcinoma
Squamous-­cell carcinoma
Undifferentiated carcinoma
Fetal-­lung adenocarcinoma
Pulmonary mesothelioma
Sarcomas (20–25%)
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Synovial sarcoma
Hemangiopericytoma (solitary fibrous tumor)
Leiomyosarcoma
Angiosarcoma
Bronchopulmonary fibrosarcoma
BENIGN
Hamartomas
Hemangiomas
Lymphangioma
Leiomyomas
Myofibroblastic tumors
Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor
Myofibromatosis
Congenital peribronchial myofibroblastic tumor
Neurogenic tumors
Mature teratoma
From Goldberg JM, Pappo AS, Bishop M. Rare tumors of childhood. In Orkin SH, Fisher
DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy
and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 65.4, p. 2130.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND EVALUATION

There is often a delay in the diagnosis of pediatric pulmonary
tumors given their rarity and nonspecific presenting symptoms.
Pulmonary tumors may manifest as fever, hemoptysis, wheezing,
cough, pleural effusion, chest pain, dyspnea, recurrent or persistent
pneumonia, and/or atelectasis. Localized wheezing, and wheezing
unresponsive to bronchodilators, can occur with bronchial tumors.
Tumors may be suspected from plain chest radiographs; however,
CT or MRI imaging of the chest is necessary for precise anatomic
definition (Table 460.2; Figs. 460.1 and 460.2). Depending on the
Table 460.2  Imaging Characteristics of Primary Malignant
Lung Tumors
NEOPLASM

IMAGING CHARACTERISTICS

Inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumor
(IMT)

Solitary (95%) or multiple (5%)
Usually sharply circumscribed, lobulated
mass
Typically located in the peripheral
portion of the lungs
Soft tissue mass with either
homogeneous or heterogeneous
attenuation may have both solid and
cystic and calcific components

Carcinoid or salivary gland
tumor

Centrally located lesion: intraluminal
soft tissue mass with distal atelectasis
or obstructive pneumonitis
Peripherally located lesion: oval or
lobulated intraluminal or exophytic
mass and occasionally calcify

Bronchogenic carcinoma

Central mass lesion with bronchial
obstruction or, less commonly, small
peripheral lesion

Pleuropulmonary
blastoma

Cystic or mixed cystic and solid lesion
adjacent to pleura; can be very large,
with mediastinal displacement

Epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma

Multiple well-­or ill-­defined nodular
opacities up to 3 cm in diameter; very
rare in childhood

From Chu WCW, Epelman M, Lee EY. Neoplasia. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Table 55.3, p. 531.

Fig. 460.1 Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor. An afebrile 13-­yr-­old

male who presented with increasing dyspnea and right-­
sided pleuritic
chest pain. Axial contrast-­enhanced CT of the chest shows a rounded
heterogeneously enhancing lesion (arrows) located adjacent to an area of
atelectatic lung. Pleural fluid at the same level demonstrates increased attenuation consistent with a hemothorax. (Modified from Chu WCW, Epelman M, Lee EY. Neoplasia. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic
Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 55.8A, p. 531.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 461 u Pneumothorax 2703

A

B

C

Fig. 460.2 Adenoid cystic carcinoma. A 14-yr-­old male with a progressively worsening chronic cough and respiratory difficulty for 1 yr who

presented with hoarseness and crepitus over the neck. A, Chest radiograph shows pneumomediastinum (arrowheads) and an apparent soft tissue
density projecting over the carina (arrows). B, Coronal contrast-­enhanced CT image shows a lobulated soft tissue mass (arrows) centered near the
carina, which results in the narrowing of the adjacent airway. C, Axial contrast-­enhanced T1-­weighted MRI demonstrates avid enhancement of the
mass (arrows). (From Chu WCW, Epelman M, Lee EY. Neoplasia. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019. Fig. 55.11: p. 532.)

tumor size and location, pulmonary function tests may be normal
or may show an obstructive, restrictive, or mixed pattern; there is
no responsiveness to bronchodilators. Bronchial tumors are occasionally diagnosed during fiberoptic bronchoscopy performed for
persistent or recurrent pulmonary infiltrates or hemoptysis (see
Chapter 438).
Patients with symptoms or with radiographic or other laboratory findings suggesting pulmonary malignancy should be evaluated carefully for a tumor at another site before surgical excision is
carried out. Isolated primary lesions and isolated metastatic lesions
discovered long after the primary tumor has been removed are
best treated by excision. The prognosis varies and depends on the
type of tumor involved; outcomes for inflammatory pseudotumors
and primary pulmonary carcinoid tumors treated with resection are
good.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 461

Pneumothorax
Suraiya K. Haider and Aarthi P. Vemana
Pneumothorax is the accumulation of extrapulmonary air within the
chest, most commonly from leakage of air from within the lung. Air
leaks can occur spontaneously and be classified as primary or secondary, or occur due to trauma or an iatrogenic cause (Table 461.1). Pneumothorax in the neonatal period is also discussed in Chapter 132.

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

A primary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs without trauma
or obvious underlying lung disease. Spontaneous pneumothorax with or without exertion occurs occasionally in teenagers and

young adults, most frequently in males who are tall and thin and
thought to have subpleural blebs. Smoking cigarettes, marijuana,
crack cocaine, e-­cigarette vaping, and ecstasy/MDMA (methylenedioxymethamphetamine) have been associated with developing a
pneumothorax.
A pneumothorax arising as a complication of an underlying lung
disorder but without trauma is a secondary spontaneous pneumothorax. Familial cases of spontaneous pneumothorax occur and
have been associated with pathogenic variants in the folliculin gene
(FCLN). Over 150 unique FCLN variants have been associated with
the Birt-­Hogg-­Dube syndrome (skin fibrofolliculomas, multiple
basal lung cysts, renal malignancies) or in patients with familial
or recurrent spontaneous pneumothoraces. Individuals with other
inherited disorders, such as α1-­antitrypsin (see Chapter 442) and
homocystinuria, are also predisposed to pneumothorax. Patients
with collagen synthesis defects such as vascular Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (see Chapter 700) and Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743)
are at increased risk for the development of pneumothorax.
Pneumothorax can occur in pneumonia, usually with empyema; it can also be secondary to a pulmonary abscess, gangrene,
infarct, rupture of a cyst or an emphysematous bleb (in asthma),
or foreign bodies in the lung. In infants with staphylococcal pneumonia, the incidence of pneumothorax is relatively high. It can be
found in children hospitalized with asthma exacerbations and usually resolves without treatment. Pneumothorax is a serious complication of cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454). Pneumothorax also
occurs in patients with lymphoma or other malignancies and in
graft-­versus-­host disease with bronchiolitis obliterans. Catamenial
pneumothorax, an unusual condition that is related to menses, is
associated with diaphragmatic defects and pleural blebs.
External chest or abdominal blunt or penetrating trauma can tear
a bronchus or abdominal viscus, with leakage of air into the pleural space. Iatrogenic pneumothorax can complicate transthoracic
needle aspiration, tracheotomy, subclavian line placement, thoracentesis, or transbronchial biopsy. It may occur during mechanical
or noninvasive ventilation, high-­flow nasal cannula therapy, acupuncture, and other diagnostic or therapeutic procedures.
Pneumothorax can be associated with a serous effusion (hydropneumothorax), a purulent effusion (pyopneumothorax), or blood
(hemopneumothorax). Bilateral pneumothorax is rare after the
neonatal period but has been reported after lung transplantation
and with Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection and tuberculosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2704 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 461.1   Causes of Pneumothorax in Children
SPONTANEOUS
Primary Idiopathic (no underlying lung disease)
Spontaneous rupture of subpleural blebs
Drug use (smoking cigarettes, marijuana, crack cocaine, use of
e-­cigarettes)
Valsalva maneuver
Secondary (underlying lung disease)
Congenital lung disease
• Congenital pulmonary airway malformation
• Bronchogenic cysts
• Pulmonary hypoplasia
• Birt-­Hogg-­Dube syndrome
Conditions associated with increased intrathoracic pressure
• Asthma
• Bronchiolitis
• Cystic fibrosis
• Airway foreign body
Infection
• Tuberculosis
• Pneumocystis jirovecii
• Echinococcosis
• Pneumatocele
• Lung abscess
• Bronchopleural fistula
• COVID-19 infection
Lung disease
• Langerhans cell histiocytosis
• Tuberous sclerosis
• Marfan syndrome
• Vascular Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
• Pulmonary fibrosis
• Sarcoidosis
• Rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, ankylosing spondylitis
• Metastatic neoplasm—usually osteosarcoma (rare)
• Pulmonary blastoma
• Catamenial
TRAUMATIC
Noniatrogenic
Penetrating trauma
Blunt trauma
Iatrogenic
Thoracotomy
Thoracoscopy, thoracentesis
Tracheostomy
Tube or needle puncture
Mechanical ventilation
High-­flow therapy (moved from noniatrogenic)
Adapted from Noppen M. Spontaneous pneumothorax: epidemiology, pathophysiology
and cause. Eur Respir Rev. 2010;19(117):217–219, 2010. Tables 1 & 2, p. 218.

PATHOGENESIS

The tendency of the lung to collapse, or elastic recoil, is balanced
in the normal resting state by the inherent tendency of the chest
wall to expand outward, creating negative pressure in the intrapleural space. When air enters the pleural space, the lung collapses.
Hypoxemia occurs because of alveolar hypoventilation, ventilation-­
perfusion mismatch, and intrapulmonary shunt. In simple pneumothorax, intrapleural pressure is atmospheric, and the lung collapses
up to 30%. In tension pneumothorax, a continuing leak causes
increasing positive pressure in the pleural space, with further compression of the lung, shift of mediastinal structures toward the contralateral side, and decreases in venous return and cardiac output
causing hemodynamic instability.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The onset of pneumothorax is usually abrupt, and the severity of symptoms depends on the extent of the lung collapse and the amount of
preexisting lung disease. Pneumothorax may cause dyspnea, chest
pain, and cyanosis. When it occurs in infancy, symptoms and physical
signs may be difficult to recognize. Moderate pneumothorax may cause
little displacement of the intrathoracic organs and few or no symptoms.
The severity of pain usually does not directly reflect the extent of the
collapse.
Usually, there is respiratory distress, with retractions; markedly
decreased breath sounds; and a tympanitic percussion note over the
involved hemithorax. The larynx, trachea, and heart may be shifted
toward the unaffected side. When fluid is present, there is usually
a sharply limited area of tympany above a level of flatness to percussion. The presence of bronchial breath sounds or, when fluid is
present in the pleural cavity, of gurgling sounds synchronous with
respirations suggests an open fistula connecting with air-­containing
tissues.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of pneumothorax is usually established by radiographic examination (Figs. 461.1-­461.6). The amount of air outside
the lung varies with time. A radiograph that is taken early shows
less lung collapse than one that was taken later if the leak continues.
Expiratory views accentuate the contrast between lung markings
and the clear area of the pneumothorax (see Fig. 461.1). Variations
exist in the measurement techniques defining the size of a pneumothorax. A large pneumothorax is measured by The American College of Chest Physicians as ≥3 cm from the lung apex to the thoracic
cupola, and by the British Thoracic Society as ≥2 cm from the lung
margin to the chest wall at the level of the hilum (Table 461.2).
It may be difficult to determine whether a pneumothorax is under
tension. Tension pneumothorax is present when there is a shift of
mediastinal structures away from the side of the air leak. A shift may
be absent in situations in which the other hemithorax resists the shift,
such as in the case of bilateral pneumothorax. On occasion, the diagnosis of tension pneumothorax is made only based on evidence of circulatory compromise or on hearing a “hiss” of rapid exit of air under
tension with the insertion of the thoracostomy tube. When the lungs
are both stiff, such as in cystic fibrosis or respiratory distress syndrome,
the unaffected lung may not collapse easily, and shift may not occur
(see Fig. 461.3).
Pneumothorax must be differentiated from localized or generalized emphysema, an extensive emphysematous bleb, large pulmonary cavities or other cystic formations, diaphragmatic hernia,
compensatory overexpansion with contralateral atelectasis, and
gaseous distention of the stomach. In most cases, chest radiography
or CT differentiates among these possibilities. In addition, CT may
identify underlying pathology such as blebs (Fig. 461.7). Further
evaluation to determine if a diaphragmatic hernia is present should
include a barium swallow with a small amount of barium to demonstrate that it is not free air but is a portion of the gastrointestinal
tract that is in the thoracic cavity (see Chapter 131). Ultrasound can
also be used to establish the diagnosis.

TREATMENT

Therapy varies with the extent of the collapse and the nature and
severity of the underlying disease. A small or even moderate-­sized
pneumothorax in an otherwise normal child may resolve without
specific treatment, usually within 1 week. A small pneumothorax-­
complicating asthma may also resolve spontaneously. Administering 100% oxygen may hasten resolution, but patients with chronic
hypoxemia should be monitored closely during the administration
of supplemental oxygen. Pleural pain deserves analgesic treatment.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 461 u Pneumothorax 2705

A

B

Fig. 461.1 Utility of an expiratory film in detection of a small pneumothorax. A, Teenager with stab wound and subtle radiolucency in the left apical

region (arrow) on inspiratory chest radiograph. The margin of the visceral pleura is very faintly visible. B, On an expiratory film, the pneumothorax
(arrow) is more obvious as the right lung has deflated and become more opaque, providing better contrast with the air in the pleural space.

Fig. 461.2 Right pneumothorax, with lung collapse of a compliant

Fig. 461.3 Right pneumothorax, with only limited collapse of a poorly

Needle aspiration into the second intercostal space in the midclavicular line may be required on an emergency basis for tension
pneumothorax and is as effective as tube thoracostomy in the emergency room management of primary spontaneous pneumothorax.
If the pneumothorax is recurrent, secondary, or under tension, or
there is more than a small collapse, catheter drainage or other invasive measures may be necessary. Pneumothorax in patients with
cystic fibrosis or Marfan syndrome frequently recurs, and definitive treatment may be justified with the first episode. Similarly, if

pneumothorax-­complicating malignancy does not improve rapidly
with observation, chemical pleurodesis or surgical thoracotomy is
often necessary. In cases with severe air leaks or bronchopleural fistula, occlusion with an endobronchial balloon has been successful.
Closed thoracotomy (simple insertion of a chest tube) and drainage
of the trapped air through a catheter, the external opening of which is
kept in a dependent position under water, is adequate to reexpand the
lung in most patients; pigtail catheters are frequently used. Consideration can be given to a sclerosing procedure to induce the formation of

lung. Shift of the mediastinum to the left (arrow) indicates that this is a
tension pneumothorax.

compliant lung.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2706 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

*

Fig. 461.4 Pneumothorax, with collapse of right lung (arrows), caused

by barotrauma in a 7-­mo-­old child who was intubated for respiratory
failure.

Fig. 461.6 Bronchopleural fistula following surgical resection of the
left upper lobe as a result of congenital lobar emphysema. Chest radiograph shows localized pneumothorax (asterisk) that persisted despite
prior insertion of a large-­bore chest tube (arrowhead).

strong adhesions between the lung and chest wall with the introduction of doxycycline or iodopovidone into the pleural space (chemical
pleurodesis).
Open thoracotomy through a limited incision, with plication of
blebs, closure of the fistula, stripping of the pleura (usually in the apical
lung, where the surgeon has direct vision), and basilar pleural abrasion
is also an effective treatment for recurrent pneumothorax. Stripping
and abrading the pleura leaves raw, inflamed surfaces that heal with
sealing adhesions. Video-­assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) is a
preferred therapy for blebectomy, pleural stripping, pleural brushing,
and instillation of sclerosing agents, with less morbidity than occurs
with traditional open thoracotomy. In cases with a persistent air leak
following thoracic surgery, an autologous blood patch pleurodesis may
also be considered.
There is a risk of recurrence after surgical treatment in the pediatric population, although this is often not related to surgical failure but rather associated with the formation of new or undetected
bullae. Clear benefit for treatment of asymptomatic blebs/bullae
in the contralateral lung has not been established in the pediatric
population.
Pleural adhesions help prevent recurrent pneumothorax, but
they also make subsequent thoracic surgery difficult. When lung
transplantation may be a future consideration (e.g., in cystic fibrosis), steps should be taken to avoid, if at all possible, chemical or
mechanical pleurodesis. It should also be kept in mind that the
longer a chest tube is in place, the greater the chance of pulmonary deterioration, particularly in a patient with cystic fibrosis in
whom strong coughing, deep breathing, and postural drainage are
important. These are all difficult to accomplish with a chest tube in
place.

*

A

*

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

B
Fig. 461.5 Teenager in whom a spontaneous right pneumothorax

developed because of a bleb. Patient had a persistent air leak despite
recent surgical resection of the causative apical bleb. Chest radiograph
(A) and CT scan (B) clearly show the persistent pneumothorax (asterisk).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 462 u Pneumomediastinum

2707

Table 461.2   Summary of the Main Features of the BTS, Belgian, and ACCP Guidelines for Spontaneous Pneumothorax
Management
BTS

BELGIAN

ACCP

Definition of large pneumothorax

>2 cm between lung margin and
chest wall (at level of the hilum)

≥20% using light index and/
or complete dehiscence from
lateral chest wall

≥3 cm apex-­to-­cupola distance

First line small PSP management

Observation if asymptomatic;
aspiration if symptomatic

Observation if asymptomatic;
aspiration if symptomatic

Observation for 3-­6 hr and
outpatient follow-­up
Aspirate or ICC if pneumothorax
enlarges
Presence of symptoms >24 hr
does not alter treatment

First line large PSP management

Observation if asymptomatic;
aspiration if symptomatic

Aspiration

Insertion of ICC

First line small SSP management

Admission and insertion of ICC;
aspiration can be considered as
an alternative

Admission and observation;
aspiration if symptomatic

Admission and observation;
insertion of ICC if symptomatic

First line large SSP management

Admission and insertion of ICC

Admission and insertion of ICC

Admission and insertion of ICC

BTS, British Thoracic Society; ACCP, American College of Chest Physicians; PSP, primary spontaneous pneumothorax; SSP, secondary spontaneous pneumothorax; ICC, intercostal
chest catheter.
From Lieu N, Ngo P, Chennapragada SM, et al. Update in management of paediatric primary spontaneous pneumothorax. Paediat Respir Rev. 2022;41:73–79. Table 1.

menses, and diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis. Traumatic causes
of pneumomediastinum include both iatrogenic (dental extractions,
adenotonsillectomy, high flow nasal cannula therapy, esophageal perforation, inhalation of helium gas, and flexible bronchoscopy) and
noniatrogenic (inhaled foreign body and penetrating chest trauma).

PATHOGENESIS

According to the Macklin effect, after an intrapulmonary alveolar rupture,
air dissects along the pressure gradient through the perivascular sheaths
and other soft tissue planes toward the hilum and enters the mediastinum.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Fig. 461.7 High-­resolution CT thorax showing multiple basal cysts.
(From Hopkins TG, Maher ER, Reid E, et al. Recurrent pneumothorax.
Lancet. 2011;377:1624. Fig. 1.)

Dyspnea and transient stabbing chest pain that may radiate to the
neck are the principal features of pneumomediastinum. Other symptoms may be present and may include globus pharyngeus, abdominal
pain, cough, chest tightness, facial swelling, choking, tachypnea, fever,
stridor, and sore throat. Pneumomediastinum is difficult to detect by
physical examination alone. Subcutaneous emphysema is present in
the majority of patients. When present, Hamman sign (a mediastinal
“crunch”) is nearly pathognomonic for pneumomediastinum. Cardiac
dullness to percussion may be decreased, but if the chest is chronically
overinflated, it is unlikely that the clinician can be sure of this finding.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Chapter 462

Pneumomediastinum
Aarthi P. Vemana and Suraiya K. Haider
Air or gas in the mediastinum is called pneumomediastinum and is
typically caused by alveolar rupture, which can be due to either a spontaneous or traumatic cause. A spontaneous pneumomediastinum can
either be primary without an underlying etiology or can occur secondary to an underlying cause. Primary pneumomediastinum can be due to
increases in intrathoracic pressure as is seen with a Valsalva maneuver,
vomiting, Boerhaave syndrome (esophageal perforation), weightlifting,
inhalation of recreational drugs, use of e-­cigarettes, recreational use of
MDMA, and choking events. Causes of secondary pneumomediastinum include lower respiratory tract infections including COVID-19,
asthma exacerbations, mechanical ventilation, anorexia nervosa, normal

Chest radiography reveals mediastinal air, with a more distinct cardiac border than normal (Figs. 462.1 and 462.2). A “spinnaker sail sign” or “angel
wing sign” occurs when air deviates the thymus upward and outward,
which is seen more often in pediatric patients. On the lateral projection, the
posterior mediastinal structures are clearly defined, there may be a lucent
ring (“ring sign”) around the right pulmonary artery, and retrosternal air
can usually be seen. Vertical streaks of air in the mediastinum and subcutaneous air are often observed (see Fig. 462.1). If a pneumomediastinum is
clinically suspected but is not visualized on a chest x-­ray, a chest CT can be
performed to confirm the diagnosis and identify tracheal injury, if present.

TREATMENT

Treatment is directed primarily at the underlying obstructive pulmonary
disease or other precipitating condition. Children who have had pneumomediastinum should be screened for asthma. Analgesics are occasionally needed for chest pain. Children can be observed in the emergency
room and discharged if stable. They should be cautioned to avoid heavy
lifting and the Valsalva maneuver. Hospital admission with supplemental oxygen administration is more common for patients with secondary
pneumomediastinum. In severe cases, consideration should be given to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2708 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
the use of more invasive interventions, including tracheotomy, surgical
repair, and skin incisions over the neck and anterior chest wall. The use
of prophylactic antibiotics to prevent deep neck space infections and
mediastinitis has not been shown to provide additional benefit.

COMPLICATIONS

Pneumomediastinum is rarely a major problem in older children because
the mediastinum can be depressurized by escape of air into the neck or
abdomen. In the newborn, however, the rate at which air can leave the
mediastinum is limited, and pneumomediastinum can lead to dangerous
cardiovascular compromise or pneumothorax (see Chapters 132 and 461).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 463

Hydrothorax
Aarthi P. Vemana and Suraiya K. Haider
Hydrothorax is a transudative pleural effusion; typically, it is caused by
abnormal pressure gradients in the lung. Hydrothorax is most often associated with cardiac, renal, or hepatic disease. It can also be a manifestation
of severe nutritional edema and hypoalbuminemia. Rarely, it results from
superior vena cava obstruction by neoplasms, enlarged lymph nodes, pulmonary embolism, or adhesions. It may occur from a ventriculoperitoneal
(VP) shunt, central venous catheter, peritoneal dialysis, or after corrective
spinal fusion for treatment of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Hydrothorax is usually bilateral, but in cardiac or hepatic disease it can
be limited to the right side or greater on the right than on the left side.
The physical signs are the same as those described for serofibrinous
pleurisy (see Chapter 451.2), but in hydrothorax there is more rapid
shifting of the level of dullness with changes of position. Depending on
the etiology, it can be associated with an accumulation of fluid in other
parts of the body.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The fluid is transudative, noninflammatory, has few cells, and has a
lower specific gravity (<1.015) than that of a serofibrinous exudate (see
Chapters 449 and 451). The ratio of pleural fluid to serum total protein is <0.5, the ratio of pleural fluid to serum lactic dehydrogenase is
<0.6, and the pleural fluid lactic dehydrogenase value is less than 66%
of the upper limit of the normal serum lactic dehydrogenase range. In
a patient with a VP shunt, B-­transferrin assays and radionuclide tracer
shunt series may be helpful for diagnosis. Peritoneal scintigraphy may
be considered to evaluate for a peritoneal-­pleural leak. In hepatic
hydrothorax, the pleural fluid resembles spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, with positive bacterial cultures and polymorphonuclear leukocyte counts >250 cell/mm3.

TREATMENT

Fig. 462.1 Large pneumomediastinum surrounding the heart and dis-

secting into the neck. (From Clark DA. Atlas of Neonatology, 7th ed.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2000.)

Therapy is directed at the underlying disorder. If a transudative fluid
is clinically suspected, aspiration may not be needed unless pressure
symptoms are noted or there are atypical symptoms, such as fever,
pleuritic pain, or asymmetric effusions. Aspirated fluid may be diagnostic using PCR for bacteria and cytology and flow cytometry for
malignancies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com Bibliography.

Chapter 464

Hemothorax
Suraiya K. Haider and Aarthi P. Vemana

Fig. 462.2 Sail sign—thymic elevation. (From Clark DA. Atlas of Neo-

Hemothorax, an accumulation of blood in the pleural cavity, is rare
in children. Bleeding into the chest cavity most commonly occurs
after chest trauma, either blunt or penetrating. It can be the result
of iatrogenic trauma, including surgical procedures and venous line
insertion. Hemothorax can also result from erosion of a blood vessel in association with inflammatory processes, such as tuberculosis

natology, 7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2000: p. 94.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 465 u Chylothorax 2709
and empyema. It may complicate a variety of congenital anomalies,
including sequestration, patent ductus arteriosus, and pulmonary
arteriovenous malformation (see Fig. 458.2 in Chapter 458), or
occur in association with vascular Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome. It is
also an occasional manifestation of intrathoracic neoplasms, costal exostoses, blood dyscrasias, bleeding diatheses, thrombolytic
therapy, thoracic endometriosis, or rarely COVID-19 infections.
Rupture of an aneurysm is unlikely during childhood. Hemothorax
may occur spontaneously but is rare in children. A pleural hemorrhage associated with a pneumothorax is a hemopneumothorax; it is
usually the result of a ruptured bulla with lung volume loss causing
a torn pleural adhesion.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In addition to the symptoms and signs of pleural effusion (see
Chapter 451.2), hemothorax is associated with hemodynamic compromise related to the amount and rapidity of bleeding, with ventilatory collapse. Spontaneous hemothorax presents with sudden
onset of chest or back pain or dyspnea and can progress rapidly to
hemorrhagic shock.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of a hemothorax is initially suspected from radiographs,
ultrasounds, or CT scans but can be made definitively with thoracentesis (Fig. 464.1). In every case, an effort must be made to determine
and treat the cause.

TREATMENT

Therapy includes supplemental oxygen, fluid resuscitation (including possible blood transfusion), and tube thoracostomy. Video-­assisted thorascopic
surgery (VATS) can be considered in most patients with stable vital signs to
visualize the source of bleeding, remove blood clots, resect bullae or blebs,
and to perform pleurodesis. An open thoracotomy may be indicated if there
is uncontrolled bleeding or in a hemodynamically compromised patient.
Inadequate removal of blood in extensive hemothorax leading to a retained
hemothorax can increase the risk for development of pneumonia, empyema,
or substantial restrictive disease secondary to organization of fibrin. Fibrinolytic therapy or a decortication may then be necessary. Embolization is the
treatment of choice for an arteriovenous malformation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 465

Chylothorax
Suraiya K. Haider and Aarthi P. Vemana

*
Chylothorax is a pleural collection of fluid formed by the escape of chyle
from the thoracic duct or lymphatics into the thoracic cavity. Chylothorax in children occurs most frequently because of thoracic duct injury
as a complication of cardiothoracic surgery (post Fontan surgery) (Fig.
465.1). Other cases are associated with chest injury (Fig. 465.2), extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, or primary or metastatic intrathoracic
malignancy, particularly lymphoma. In newborns, rapidly increased
venous pressure during delivery may lead to thoracic duct rupture. Chylothorax has also been associated with Down syndrome, Noonan syndrome, Turner syndrome, and congenital myotonic dystrophy. Genetic
pathogenic variants involving the VEGFC/VEGFR3, PI3K/AKT/mTOR,
and RAS/MAPK pathways can impact lymphangiogenesis leading to
lymphatic malformations. Refractory chylothorax in the fetus has been
associated with a missense variant in integrin α9β1 gene. Persistent or
recurrent chylothorax has been described in association with pathogenic
variants in the PIEZO1 gene. Less common causes include lymphangiomatosis (Fig. 465.3), restrictive pulmonary diseases, thrombosis of the
duct, superior vena cava, or subclavian vein; tuberculosis or histoplasmosis, Gorham-­Stout disease, and congenital anomalies of the lymphatic
system (Fig. 465.4). Chylothorax can occur in trauma and child abuse (see
Chapter 16). It is important to establish the etiology because treatment
varies with the cause. In some patients, no specific cause is identified.

A

*

B
Fig. 464.1 Chest radiograph (A) and CT scan (B) of hemothorax (as-

terisk) and associated rib fractures (arrows) in a teenager involved in a
motor vehicle accident.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The signs and symptoms of chylothorax are the same as those from
pleural effusion of similar size, including cough, chest discomfort, and
dyspnea. Chyle is not irritating, so pleuritic pain is uncommon. Onset
is often gradual. However, after trauma to the thoracic duct, chyle may
accumulate in the posterior mediastinum for days and then rupture
into the pleural space with sudden onset of dyspnea, hypotension, and
hypoxemia. Approximately 50% of newborns with chylothorax present
with respiratory distress in the first day of life. Chylothorax is rarely
bilateral and usually occurs on the right side.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2710 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Fig. 465.1 Chylothorax (arrows) following cardiac surgery in a
2-­wk-­old infant.

Fig. 465.3 Large right chylous effusion opacifying much of the right

thorax in a teenager with pulmonary lymphangiomatosis and hemangiomatosis. Note the associated interstitial lung disease.

demonstrate abnormalities of the lymphatic trunks and peripheral
lymphatics. MR lymphangiography also allows for visualization of
the peripheral and segments of the central lymphatics. Dynamic
contrast-­enhanced magnetic resonance lymphangiography can provide real-­time evaluation of the central lymphatic flow with good
spatial resolution to guide management options.

TREATMENT

Fig. 465.2 Left chylothorax (arrows) following spinal fusion with Harrington rods. It is postulated that the thoracic duct was injured during
spine surgery. The pigtail chest tube (arrowhead) needed to be retracted to better drain the effusion.

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND IMAGING

Chest radiographs can help to delineate the location of an effusion;
CT scans show normal pleural thickness and may demonstrate a
mediastinal mass such as a lymphoma, as the etiology of the chylothorax. Thoracentesis demonstrates a chylous effusion, a milky
fluid containing triglycerides, protein, lymphocytes, and other
constituents of chyle; fluid may be yellow or bloody. In newborn
infants or those who are not ingesting food, the fluid may be clear.
A pseudochylous milky fluid may be present in chronic serous effusion, in which fatty material arises from degenerative changes in
the fluid and not from lymph. In chylothorax, the fluid triglyceride level is >110 mg/dL, the pleural fluid:serum triglyceride ratio is
>1.0, and pleural fluid:serum cholesterol ratio is <1.0; lipoprotein
analysis reveals chylomicrons. Fluid immunoglobulin levels are elevated. The cells are primarily (>80%) lymphocytes and often exceed
1,000 cells per mm3. After diagnosing chylothorax, a lymphangiogram can localize the site of the leak, and lymphoscintigraphy may

Treatment involves symptomatic support and decreasing or stopping chyle accumulation. Management is divided into two categories: nonsurgical and surgical. Nutritional management strategies
include a combination of nil-per-os (NPO) and total parenteral
nutrition, or enteral feeds using either a low-fat or medium-chain
triglyceride diet or defatted human milk (also known as skimmed
human milk). Thoracentesis is repeated as needed to relieve pressure symptoms; tube thoracostomy is often performed. Somatostatin and octreotide have been used to manage chylothorax. Various
octreotide dosages have been described, including 1–4 μg/kg/
hr intravenously and 10 μg/kg/day subcutaneously. Retrospective
analyses have shown beneficial effects with the use of steroids, in
particular, hydrocortisone, methylprednisolone, and dexamethasone combined with somatostatin or octreotide. Use of propranolol
or sirolimus in severe or refractory cases may be effective. Further
studies are required to confirm the optimal dosage for steroids, propranolol, and sirolimus. Other therapeutic approaches include pressure control ventilation with positive end-­expiratory pressure and
inhalation of nitric oxide. If medical management is unsuccessful,
surgical options should be considered and can include a pleuroperitoneal shunt, thoracic duct ligation, and pleurodesis with the use of
a sclerosing agents such as fibrin glue or povidone-­iodine. Treatment is similar for traumatic chylothorax. Chemical pleurodesis
or irradiation is used in malignant chylothorax. OK432 (picibanil)
has been used to treat fetal and newborn chylothorax. Etilefrine,
a sympathomimetic agent with both α-­ and β-­adrenergic activity,
has been successfully used in a few patients. Constriction of the
thoracic duct by this drug may reduce pleural chyle accumulation.
Percutaneous thoracic duct embolization or treatment of other
lymphatic vessels is a successful interventional radiology strategy.
Surgery should be considered earlier in neonates with massive
chylothorax and chyle output of >50 mL/kg/day despite maximum
medical therapy for 3 days.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 466 u Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia 2711

Fig. 465.4 Spontaneous chylo-

thorax in a 4 yr old with a duplication of chromosome 6. A, Chest
radiograph shows opacification of
the right thorax. B, CT scan shows
the chylous pleural effusion (asterisk) compressing the atelectatic
right lung (arrows).

*

A

COMPLICATIONS

If repeated thoracenteses are required due to the rapid reaccumulation of chyle, malnutrition may occur with significant loss of calories,
protein, and electrolytes. Immunodeficiencies, including hypogammaglobulinemia and abnormal cell-­mediated immune responses, have
been associated with repeated and chronic thoracenteses for chylothorax. The loss of T lymphocytes is associated with increased risk of
infection in neonates; otherwise, infection is uncommon, but patients
should not receive live virus vaccines. Lack of resolution of chylothorax
can lead to malnutrition, infection, and death.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 466

Bronchopulmonary
Dysplasia
Sharon A. McGrath-­Morrow and
J. Michael Collaco
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is a chronic lung disease of
infancy and childhood that occurs primarily in preterm infants born
at less than 32 weeks’ gestation. BPD is characterized by alveolar hypoplasia, often with concomitant small airway dysfunction and impaired
pulmonary vascular growth. Contributing factors to the development of BPD may include early gestational age, low birthweight, lung
barotrauma, exposure to hyperoxia, lung inflammation, and pre-­and
postnatal infections, as well as potential modifier genes and epigenetic factors. The currently accepted definition for diagnosis includes an
oxygen requirement for 28 days postnatally, and the disorder is graded
as mild, moderate, or severe based on supplemental oxygen and ventilation requirements at specific time points (Table 466.1). For initial
inpatient presentation and management, see Chapter 127.

B

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Physical findings of the pulmonary exam vary with the severity of the
disease and with respiratory illnesses. Although some patients may
appear to be comfortably breathing when well, they can experience significant deterioration when ill or with periods of stress due to decreased
pulmonary reserve secondary to alveolar hypoplasia and small airway
disease. Children with BPD may exhibit tachypnea, head bobbing, and
retractions when ill or at baseline depending on the severity of the disease. Although breath sounds may be clear, many patients have baseline wheeze or coarse crackles. A persistent, fixed wheeze or stridor
suggests subglottic stenosis (see Chapter 436) or large airway malacia.
Fine crackles may be present in patients prone to fluid overload. Chest
radiographs may demonstrate air trapping, focal atelectasis, interstitial
changes, and/or peribronchial thickening.
The most severely affected patients may require respiratory support to achieve adequate gas exchange. Supplemental oxygen may be
required to maintain acceptable oxygen saturations and often is needed
to minimize the work of breathing. Chronic respiratory insufficiency
may be evidenced as elevation of serum bicarbonate, elevated carbon
dioxide on blood gas analysis, hypoxemia, or polycythemia; the most
severe cases may require tracheostomy and ventilation to achieve
long-­term respiratory stability. Patients must be monitored for the
development of pulmonary hypertension, especially if they require
supplemental oxygen and have chronic respiratory insufficiency.
Aspiration from dysphagia and/or gastroesophageal reflux (GERD)
(see Chapter 369) can compromise pulmonary status. The risk of
aspiration may increase during periods of illness due to worsening tachypnea and air trapping. Other comorbidities resulting from
premature birth that complicate the management of BPD include
fixed and functional upper airway obstruction, CNS injuries leading
to abnormal control of breathing, abnormal airway tone, increased
aspiration risk, gastrointestinal dysmotility, systemic hypertension,
and poor growth. Of note, infants with significant lung disease can
exhibit growth failure from the elevated energy expenditure essential
to maintaining the increased metabolic demands of respiration and/
or ongoing hypoxia.
A pulmonary exacerbation in a child with BPD is typically triggered
during viral respiratory infections. Other frequent risk factors for
pulmonary exacerbations may include weather changes, exposure to
cigarette smoke, exposure to emissions from vaping devices, attending
daycare, and aspiration. During an exacerbation, the infant may exhibit
increased work of breathing, crackles, and wheezing, with tachypnea
and retractions becoming more prominent. Underlying pulmonary
hypertension may worsen with pulmonary exacerbations as well.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2712 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 466.1   Definition of Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia: Diagnostic Criteria
GESTATIONAL AGE

<32 WEEKS

>
_32 WEEKS

Time point of assessment

36 weeks’ PMA or discharge to home, whichever comes first

>28 days but <56 days’ postnatal age or
discharge to home, whichever comes first

TREATMENT WITH >21% OXYGEN FOR AT LEAST 28 DAYS PLUS
Mild BPD
Breathing room air by 36 weeks’ PMA or discharge, whichever
comes first

Breathing room air by 56 days’ postnatal age or
discharge, whichever comes first

Moderate BPD

Need for <30% oxygen at 36 weeks’ PMA or discharge,
whichever comes first

Need for <30% oxygen at 56 days’ postnatal
age or discharge, whichever comes first

Severe BPD

Need for ≥30% oxygen and/or positive pressure (PPV or
NCPAP) at 36 weeks’ PMA or discharge, whichever comes
first

Need for ≥30% oxygen and/or positive pressure
(PPV or NCPAP) at 56 days’ postnatal age or
discharge, whichever comes first

BPD, Bronchopulmonary dysplasia; NCPAP, nasal continuous positive airway pressure; PMA, postmenstrual age; PPV, positive pressure ventilation.
Adapted from Jobe AH, Bancalari E. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001;163:1723.

TREATMENT

Treatment is directed toward decreasing the work of breathing and
normalizing gas exchange to allow for optimal growth and neurodevelopment. After initial hospital discharge, infants and children with BPD
are at high risk for rehospitalization. Up to 50% of infants with BPD are
readmitted for acute respiratory illnesses within the first 2 years of life.
These children also may require multiple daily medications, supplemental oxygen, and/or chronic ventilation.
Adherence to prescribed daily medication regimens may decrease
the risk of acute care use and chronic respiratory symptoms; however,
there are no standard guidelines for the management of BPD concerning post-­NICU care. Although commonly used, there are limited data
regarding the efficacy of diuretics in the outpatient setting.
With regard to respiratory support, targeted oxygen saturations
should be ≥92% outside of the NICU to ensure adequate growth and
neurocognitive development. Pulse-­oximetry and polysomnography
may be helpful for titration purposes. Before initial hospital discharge,
infants and children who require chronic ventilatory support have
been shown to benefit from standardized protocols to determine medical readiness, assess familial proficiency in respiratory care, and establish adequate support in an outpatient setting. After discharge, these
patients will require close follow-­up from pulmonologists and otolaryngologists to manage ventilator titration and weaning and tracheostomy care and decannulation, respectively. As infants and children with
tracheostomies are at high risk for adverse events, including death, an
awake and alert trained caregiver is recommended at all times.
Pulmonary function testing in children with a history of BPD has
consistently demonstrated obstructive small airway disease. Small
airway disease in this population may be partially responsive to bronchodilators but may also have a fixed obstructive component. Inhaled
corticosteroids and β-­agonists may be effective in treating symptoms,
such as wheezing or chronic cough.
Adequate caloric intake is important to ensure catch-­
up lung
growth. Some children may require fortified breast milk or formula
to achieve adequate growth. Patients at risk for aspiration and those
with inadequate oral intake may require tube feeding to meet nutritional goals. Placement of a gastrostomy tube should be considered
before discharging home. Aspiration secondary to dysphagia and/or
gastroesophageal reflux should be considered in patients with recurrent respiratory symptoms or pneumonia without obvious infectious
etiologies. Because of their tenuous respiratory status, some infants and
children with BPD may not be able to tolerate even minimal amounts
of aspiration from gastroesophageal reflux. There are limited data
regarding risks and benefits of antireflux medications in infants with
BPD, such as histamine-­2 blockers, proton pump inhibitors, and motility agents. Medications that reduce gastric acidity may increase the
risk of pneumonia in some children. Consideration for either Nissen
fundoplication or gastrojejunostomy tubes may be required in cases of
failure of antireflux medical therapy.

Up to 15–25% of infants with severe BPD will be diagnosed with
pulmonary hypertension, which may be secondary to decreased pulmonary vascular growth and/or a reactive vascular bed. Other risk
factors for developing pulmonary hypertension may include extreme
prematurity and decreased intrauterine growth; recurrent aspiration,
hypoxia, and hypercarbia may worsen severity. Pulmonary hypertension in infants is associated with increased morbidity and mortality
compared to infants without pulmonary hypertension. Although
definitive diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension requires cardiac catheterization, in practice transthoracic echocardiography provides a low-­
risk screening tool. Screening should also attempt to identify potential
structural causes of pulmonary hypertension, such as pulmonary vein
stenosis. Serum biomarkers, such as brain natriuretic protein, may
be useful in tracking response to therapy. Abrupt worsening of pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary hypertensive crises) can occur in
the context of illnesses and with anesthesia. Crises can occur even in
stable children with a history of pulmonary hypertension who become
acutely ill. Although pulmonary hypertension that is associated with
BPD can improve with adequate lung growth, therapies such as sildenafil and other antipulmonary hypertensive agents have been used in
management.
Prevention of respiratory viral illness is vitally important; frequent
handwashing by caregivers (especially before they handle the baby)
and avoidance of contact with children and adults with current
respiratory symptoms are essential. Respiratory syncytial virus (see
Chapter 307) immunoprophylaxis should be considered based on
the severity of lung disease and the patient’s gestational age and current age. Another environmental factor that can worsen respiratory
symptoms is exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke (see Chapter
759.1).

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis for infants with BPD is generally good, although the
presence of BPD may result in a longer initial hospitalization compared
with preterm infants without BPD. Most infants are weaned off of oxygen during the first year of life, and those requiring home mechanical
ventilation are often weaned from this support during toddlerhood.
Many children exhibit an asthma-­like phenotype during early childhood, characterized by episodes of wheezing or coughing triggered by
upper respiratory tract infections, exertion, allergens, etc. For some of
these children, symptoms improve by school age; others may continue
to have asthma-­like exacerbations with viral illnesses and exercise
throughout childhood that may persist into adulthood. Even asymptomatic patients with a history of BPD can continue to demonstrate
small airway flow limitations by spirometry. Lastly, obstructive sleep
apnea may also be more common in infants, children, and young adults
with a history of BPD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 467 u Skeletal Diseases Influencing Pulmonary Function

2713

Skeletal Diseases
Influencing Pulmonary
Function

function tests may be normal but commonly show an obstructive
defect in the lower airways and, less commonly, a restrictive defect
as the result of abnormal chest wall mechanics. Exercise testing may
demonstrate either normal tolerance or limitations from underlying
cardiopulmonary dysfunction that are associated with the severity of
the defect. Pulmonary limitations, such as ventilatory limitations and
associated flow volume loop abnormalities, are commonly seen in
younger children and adolescents, whereas additional cardiac limitations secondary to stroke volume impairments are more commonly
seen in older adolescents and young adults.

Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier

TREATMENT

Chapter 467

Pulmonary function is influenced by the structure of the chest wall
(see Chapter 421). Chest wall abnormalities can lead to restrictive or
obstructive pulmonary disease, impaired respiratory muscle strength,
and decreased ventilatory performance in response to physical stress.
The congenital chest wall deformities include pectus excavatum, pectus
carinatum, sternal clefts, Poland syndrome, and skeletal and cartilage
dysplasias. Vertebral anomalies such as kyphoscoliosis can alter pulmonary function in children and adolescents.

467.1 Pectus Excavatum (Funnel Chest)
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier

ETIOLOGY

Pectus excavatum—midline narrowing of the thoracic cavity—is usually an isolated skeletal abnormality. The cause is unknown. Pectus
excavatum can occur in isolation, or it may be associated with a connective tissue disorder—Marfan (see Chapter 743) or Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome (see Chapter 700). It may be acquired secondarily to chronic
lung disease, neuromuscular disease, or trauma.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Pectus excavatum occurs in 1 in 400 births with a 9:1 male preponderance and accounts for >90% of congenital chest wall anomalies. There
is a positive family history in ∼30% of cases.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The deformity is present at or shortly after birth in one third of cases
but is usually not associated with any symptoms at that time. In time,
fatigue, chest pain, palpitations, recurrent respiratory infections,
wheezing, stridor, and cough may be present. Decreased exercise tolerance is one of the most common symptoms. Because of the cosmetic
nature of this deformity, children may experience significant psychologic stress. Physical examination may reveal sternal depression, protracted shoulders, kyphoscoliosis, dorsal lordosis, inferior rib flares, rib
cage rigidity, forward head tilt, scapular winging, and loss of vertebral
contours (Fig. 467.1). Patients may exhibit paroxysmal sternal motion
and a shift of point of maximal impulse to the left. Innocent systolic
murmurs may be heard.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Lateral chest radiograms demonstrate sternal depression. The Haller
index on chest CT (maximal internal transverse diameter of the chest
divided by the minimal anteroposterior diameter at the same level) in
comparison with age-­and gender-­appropriate normative values have
been used historically to help determine the extent of the anatomic
abnormality. However, the correlation of the Haller index with the
physiologic compromise or associated systems appears suboptimal.
The use of 3D chest optical imaging or “surface scan” is gaining popularity in the evaluation. An electrocardiogram may show a right-­axis
deviation or Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome (see Chapter 485); an
echocardiogram may demonstrate mitral valve prolapse (see Chapter 477.3) and ventricular compression. Results of static pulmonary

Treatment is based on the severity of the deformity and the extent
of physiologic compromise as defined by physical examination and
physiologic assessment of cardiopulmonary function (lung function
and exercise tolerance assessment). Therapeutic options include careful observation, the use of physical therapy to address musculoskeletal
compromise, corrective surgery, cosmetic surgery, and noninvasive
thorascopic techniques. For patients with significant physiologic compromise, surgical correction may improve the cosmetic deformity and
may help minimize progression or even improve the cardiopulmonary
compromise. The two main surgical interventions are the Ravitch and
Nuss procedures. The Nuss procedure is a minimally invasive thoracoscopic repair that has been associated with good cosmetic and functional outcomes.
The extent of the anatomic defect, including the degree of asymmetry, may help determine the appropriate surgical approach. Although
surgical repair may result in improved exercise tolerance for some
individuals, usually observed at submaximal exercise intensities,
many patients do not show improvement in either respiratory or cardiac function. Normalization of lung perfusion scans and maximal
voluntary ventilation have also been observed after surgery. Use of a
magnetic brace with gradual remodeling (Magnetic Mini Mover procedure) of the pectus deformity is under clinical investigation, with some
promising results seen for prepubertal children. Surgically placed silicone implants for cosmetic appearance have also been used with high
patient satisfaction. For selected patients, the use of a more noninvasive
approach (i.e., cup suction) has been gaining popularity. Regardless of
the treatment approach, addressing secondary musculoskeletal findings is commonly employed before and after any intervention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

467.2 Pectus Carinatum and Sternal Clefts
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier

PECTUS CARINATUM

Pectus carinatum is a sternal deformity accounting for 5–15% of congenital chest wall anomalies. Anterior displacements of the mid and
lower sternum and adjacent costal cartilages are the most common
types. They are most commonly associated with protrusion of the
upper sternum; depression of the lower sternum occurs in only 15% of
patients. Asymmetry of the sternum is common, and localized depression of the lower anterolateral chest is also often observed. Males are
affected four times more often than females. There is a high familial
occurrence and a common association of mild to moderate scoliosis.
Mitral valve disease and coarctation of the aorta are associated with
this anomaly. Three types of anatomic deformity occur (upper, lower,
and lateral pectus carinatum), with corresponding physiologic changes
and treatment algorithms.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In early childhood, symptoms appear minimal. School-­age children
and adolescents commonly complain of dyspnea with mild exertion,
decreased endurance with exercise, and exercise-­induced wheezing.
The incidence of increased respiratory infections and use of asthma

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2714 Part XVII u The Respiratory System

Fig. 467.1 Pectus excavatum in a 15-­yr-­old male. Note the presence
of protracted shoulders, inferior rib flares, and sternal depression.

medication is higher than in nonaffected individuals. On physical
examination, a marked increase in the anteroposterior chest diameter
is seen, with a resultant reduction in chest excursion and expansion
(Fig. 467.2). Spirometry has demonstrated both restrictive and obstructive patterns, although the majority of individuals have normal values.
Increases in residual volume are often present and result in tachypnea
and diaphragmatic respirations. Exercise testing shows variable results.
Chest radiographs show an increased anteroposterior diameter of the
chest wall, emphysematous-­appearing lungs, and a narrow cardiac
shadow. The pectus severity score (width of chest divided by distance
between sternum and spine; analogous to the Haller index) is reduced.

TREATMENT

For symptomatic patients with pectus carinatum, minimally invasive
surgical correction procedures may result in an improvement of the
clinical symptoms. Many surgeons prefer to use bracing techniques as
a first-­line treatment, especially for younger patients. Although surgery
is performed for some individuals who are symptomatic, it is often performed for cosmetic and psychologic reasons.

STERNAL CLEFTS

Sternal clefts are rare congenital malformations that result from the
failure of the fusion of the sternum during the eighth week of gestation.
No familial predisposition has been described. Sternal clefts occur in
less than 1% of all chest wall deformities. Sternal clefts are classified as
partial or complete. Partial sternal clefts are more common and may
involve the superior sternum in association with other lesions, such
as vascular dysplasias and supraumbilical raphe, or the inferior sternal
clefts, which are often associated with other midline defects (pentalogy of Cantrell). Complete sternal clefts with complete failure of sternal fusion are rare. These disorders may also occur in isolation. The
paradoxic movement of thoracic organs with respiration may alter pulmonary mechanics. Rarely, respiratory infections and even significant
compromise result. Surgery is required early in life before fixation and
immobility occur.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 467.2 Pectus carinatum in a 13-­yr-­old male. Note the central
sternal prominence.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most patients with this disorder die shortly after birth from respiratory failure, although less-­aggressive forms have been reported in older
children. For those who survive the neonatal period, progressive respiratory failure often ensues, owing to impaired lung growth, recurrent
pneumonia, and atelectasis originating from the rigid chest wall.

DIAGNOSIS

Physical examination reveals a narrowed thorax that, at birth, is much
smaller than the head circumference. The ribs are horizontal, and the
child has short extremities. Chest radiographs demonstrate a bell-­
shaped chest cage with short, horizontal, flaring ribs, and high clavicles.

TREATMENT

No specific treatment exists, although thoracoplasty to enlarge the
chest wall and long-­term mechanical ventilation have been tried. Rib-­
expanding (vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib [VEPTR]) procedures have resulted in improved survival (Fig. 467.3).

PROGNOSIS

For some children with asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy, improvement
in the bony abnormalities occurs with age. However, children younger
than age 1 year often succumb to respiratory infection and failure. Progressive renal disease often occurs in older children. Use of vaccines
for influenza and other respiratory pathogens is warranted, as is the
aggressive use of antibiotics for respiratory infections.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

467.3 Asphyxiating Thoracic Dystrophy
(Thoracic-­Pelvic-­Phalangeal
Dystrophy)
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier
A multisystem autosomal recessive disorder, asphyxiating thoracic
dystrophy results in a constricted and narrow rib cage. Also known as
Jeune syndrome, the disorder is associated with characteristic skeletal
abnormalities as well as variable involvement of other systems, including renal, hepatic, neurologic, pancreatic, and retinal abnormalities
(see Chapter 741).

467.4 Achondroplasia
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier
Achondroplasia is the most common condition characterized by disproportionate short stature (see Chapter 737). This condition is inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder that results in disordered
growth. Much has been learned about this disorder, including its
genetic origins (95% of cases are caused by pathogenic variants in the
gene coding for fibroblast growth factor receptor type 3) and how to
minimize its serious complications.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 467 u Skeletal Diseases Influencing Pulmonary Function

2715

their teen years and during periods of rapid growth. The cause is
unknown. Congenital scoliosis is uncommon, affecting females more
than males, and is apparent in the first year of life (see Chapter 720.2).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A

B

Fig. 467.3 A, Seven-mo-­old with Jeune syndrome preoperatively. B,

18 mo after VEPTR insertion. (From Mayer OH. Chest wall hypoplasia—
principles and treatment. Pediatr Respir Rev. 2015;16:30–34, Fig. 3.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Restrictive pulmonary disease, affecting <5% of children with achondroplasia who are younger than 3 years, is more likely at high elevation.
Recurrent infections, cor pulmonale, and dyspnea are commonly associated. There is an increased risk of obstructive sleep apnea or hypopneas. Hypoxemia during sleep is a common feature. Risk of airway
malacia is greater than the general population. Onset of restrictive lung
disease can begin at a very young age. On examination, the breathing
pattern is rapid and shallow, with associated abdominal breathing. The
anteroposterior diameter of the thorax is reduced. Special growth curves
for chest circumference of patients with achondroplasia from birth to
7 years are available. Three distinct phenotypes exist: phenotypic group
1 patients possess relative adenotonsillar hypertrophy, group 2 patients
have muscular upper airway obstruction and progressive hydrocephalus, and group 3 patients have upper airway obstruction without hydrocephalus. Kyphoscoliosis may develop during infancy.

DIAGNOSIS

Pulmonary function tests reveal a reduced vital capacity that is more
pronounced in males. The lungs are small but functionally normal.
Sleep studies are recommended because of the high prevalence of sleep-­
disordered breathing. Chest radiographs demonstrate the decreased
anteroposterior diameter along with anterior cupping of the ribs. The
degree of foramen magnum involvement correlates with the extent of
respiratory dysfunction.

TREATMENT

Treatment of sleep apnea, if present, is supportive (see Chapter 31).
Physiotherapy and bracing may minimize the complications of both
kyphosis and severe lordosis. Aggressive treatment of respiratory infections and scoliosis is warranted.

PROGNOSIS

The life span is normal for most children with this condition, except
for the phenotypic groups with hydrocephalus or with severe cervical
or lumbar spinal compression.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

467.5 Kyphoscoliosis: Adolescent Idiopathic
Scoliosis and Congenital Scoliosis
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is characterized by lateral bending of the spine (see Chapter 720). It commonly affects children during

The pulmonary manifestations of scoliosis may include chest wall
restriction, leading to a reduction in total lung capacity, abnormal gas
exchange, airway obstruction, and hypoinflation with associated atelectasis. The angle of scoliosis deformity has been correlated with the
degree of lung impairment only for patients with thoracic curves. Vital
capacity, forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1), work capacity, oxygen consumption, diffusion capacity, chest wall compliance, and partial
pressure of arterial oxygen decrease as the severity of thoracic curve
increases. These findings can be seen in even mild to moderate AIS
(Cobb angle <30 degrees) but generally do not occur in other, nonthoracic curves. Respiratory compromise is often more severe in children younger than 5 years of age with large scoliotic curves. Reduction
in peripheral muscle function is associated with AIS through either
intrinsic mechanisms or deconditioning. Severe impairment can lead
to cor pulmonale or respiratory failure and can occur before 20 years
old. Children with severe scoliosis (Cobb’s angle >70 degrees), especially males, may have abnormalities of breathing during sleep, and the
resultant periods of hypoxemia may contribute to the eventual development of pulmonary hypertension.

DIAGNOSIS

Physical examination and an upright, posteroanterior radiograph with
subsequent measurement of the angle of curvature (Cobb technique)
remain the gold standard for the assessment of scoliosis. Curves >10
degrees define the presence of scoliosis. Lung volume, respiratory muscle strength, and exercise capacity determination are essential in assessing the degree of respiratory compromise associated with scoliosis.

TREATMENT

Depending on the extent of the curve and the degree of skeletal maturation, treatment options include reassurance, observation, physical
therapy, bracing, and surgery (spinal fusion). Influenza vaccine should
be administered, given the extent of pulmonary compromise that may
coexist. Because vital capacity is a strong predictor for the development
of respiratory failure in untreated AIS, surgical goals are to diminish
the scoliotic curve, maintain the correction, and prevent deterioration
in pulmonary function. Abnormalities of vital capacity and total lung
capacity, exercise intolerance, and the rate of change of these variables
over time should be taken into consideration for the timing of surgical correction. Preoperative assessment of lung function (i.e., lung volumes, oxygen consumption, muscle strength, ventilation/perfusion)
may assist in predicting postsurgical pulmonary difficulties. Many
patients undergoing surgical correction may be managed postoperatively without mechanical ventilation. Even patients with mild scoliosis
may have pulmonary compromise immediately after spinal fusion, secondary to pain, and a body cast that may restrict breathing and interfere with coughing. Children with a preoperative FEV1 <40% predicted
are at risk for requiring prolonged postoperative mechanical ventilation. Rib-­expanding procedures have been successful in severe cases of
congenital scoliosis. Choice of surgical approach may also impact lung
function postoperatively.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

467.6 Congenital Rib Anomalies
Steven R. Boas and Catherine Kier
Isolated defects of the highest and lowest ribs have minimal clinical
pulmonary consequences. Missing midthoracic ribs are associated
with the absence of the pectoralis muscle (Poland syndrome), and lung
function can become compromised. Associated kyphoscoliosis and
hemivertebrae may accompany this defect. If the rib defect is small,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2716 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
no significant sequelae ensue. When the second to fifth ribs are absent
anteriorly, lung herniation and significant abnormal respiration ensue.
The lung is soft and nontender and may be easily reducible on examination. Complicating sequelae include severe lung restriction (secondary
to scoliosis), cor pulmonale, and congestive heart failure. Symptoms
are often minimal but can cause dyspnea. Respiratory distress is rare
in infancy.

DIAGNOSIS

Chest radiographs demonstrate the deformation and absence of ribs
with secondary scoliosis. Most rib abnormalities are discovered as incidental findings on a chest film.

TREATMENT

If symptoms are severe enough to cause clinical compromise or significant lung herniation, then homologous rib grafting can be performed.
Rib-­expanding procedures are also of great value. A modified Nuss
procedure has been used to correct associated chest wall anomalies
with rib abnormalities. Adolescent girls with congenital rib anomalies
may require cosmetic breast surgery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 468

Chronic Respiratory
Insufficiency
468.1 Chronic Respiratory Failure and Long-­
Term Mechanical Ventilation
Denise M. Goodman and Steven O. Lestrud
Care has improved for the growing population of children with
chronic respiratory failure requiring invasive (ventilation through
a tracheostomy) and noninvasive (mask ventilation) ventilation,
including those with predisposing conditions such as acute respiratory failure, prematurity, and neuromuscular disease. Although it
is difficult to determine the prevalence of chronic ventilation, estimates range from approximately 4-­6/100,000 children, or 3,000-­
4,000 children nationally who receive home ventilation. There may
be roughly three times more children receiving mask ventilation than
invasive mechanical ventilation. The conditions leading to the need
for home ventilation are diverse. About 65% of children have a primary neurologic indication, including neuromuscular weakness or
abnormal ventilatory control, and ∼30% have chronic lung disease
(Table 468.1).
Patients with primarily pulmonary indications have a greater likelihood of ultimately being weaned from the need for ventilation than
do those with neuromuscular or central nervous system disease. Mortality for patients requiring chronic ventilation is ∼12–34%, depending on underlying disease. The lower mortality range is for children
with neonatal lung disease, with the higher value for children with
complex congenital heart disease. Approximately 12–40% of children
are eventually weaned from ventilation and decannulated, reflecting
the underlying cause for which ventilation is required. This can usually be accomplished within the first 5 years of life. Nonetheless, the
care of these children can be challenging. One study reported that

Table 468.1   Indications for Long-­Term Mechanical
Ventilation
PULMONARY/ALVEOLAR
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD)
Severe acquired lung disease, such as after pediatric acute
respiratory distress syndrome (PARDS)
Pulmonary fibrosis syndromes
AIRWAY
Severe tracheomalacia
Severe bronchomalacia
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
Storage diseases
CHEST
Kyphoscoliosis
Skeletal dysplasias
Obesity
NEUROMUSCULAR
Spinal muscular atrophy
Spinal cord injury
Diaphragmatic dysfunction
Mitochondrial diseases
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (CNS)
Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS)
Rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic dysregulation, hypoventilation,
and autonomic dysfunction (ROHHAD)
Severe ischemic brain injury
Myelomeningocele with Arnold-­Chiari type II malformation
Acquired hypoventilation syndromes

up to 40% of chronically ventilated children are readmitted within
the first year of discharge, usually within the first 3 months. Children requiring long-­term mechanical ventilation (LMV) benefit from
comprehensive care coordination incorporating generalists, specialists, home nursing, therapies, and a durable medical equipment
(DME) resource.

MODALITIES FOR RESPIRATORY SUPPORT

The goals of home mechanical ventilation are to maintain adequate
oxygenation and ventilation, minimizing metabolic demands of
chronic respiratory failure to ensure adequate somatic growth and
optimal developmental gains.

Invasive Positive Pressure Ventilation

The term invasive designates ventilation through a tracheostomy. Some
devices are suitable for both noninvasive positive pressure ventilation
(NPPV) and invasive ventilation, whereas other devices are suitable
for only one approach. The ideal home ventilator is lightweight, portable, and quiet. All home ventilators differ from hospital-­based ventilators in that air movement is affected either by a piston or turbine
that is electrically controlled. This contrasts with hospital ventilators,
which are often gas-­driven. A home ventilator should be able to provide continuous flow and have a wide range of settings (particularly for
pressure, volume, pressure support, and rate) that allows ventilatory
support from infancy to adulthood. Battery power for the ventilator,
both internal and external, should be sufficient to permit unrestricted
portability in the home and community. The equipment must also be
impervious to electromagnetic interference and must be relatively easy
to understand and troubleshoot.
Although families and care teams may at first resist placement, a
tracheostomy has several advantages. It provides a secure and stable
airway, a standardized interface for attaching the ventilator circuit
to the patient, and the ability to easily remove airway secretions and
deliver inhaled medications. Pediatric tracheostomy tubes typically
have a single lumen and may have an inflatable cuff. Tracheostomy
tubes with and without cuff inflation should be sized to control the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
air leak around the tube and promote adequate gas exchange, yet
allow enough space around the tube to facilitate vocalization and
prevent tracheal irritation and erosion from the tube. The child’s
caregivers need to learn stoma care, elective and emergent tracheostomy changes, proper securing of the tube, suctioning of secretions, and recognition of emergencies such as tube obstruction or
decannulation.

Optimal Ventilator Support

Factors such as underlying neuromuscular disease; medications such
as sedatives, analgesics, steroids, and muscle relaxants; and prolonged
immobility, as well as use of mechanical ventilation, may decondition
the respiratory muscles and the diaphragm, resulting in muscle weakness. Consequently, it is important to avoid 24 hour a day patient synchrony with ventilation and titrate the amount of ventilator support
to prevent fatigue yet facilitate spontaneous breathing. While assessing
ventilator needs, frequent evaluation of gas exchange is needed and can
usually be done noninvasively. Ventilator settings should be stable for
a given period, dictated by the severity of pulmonary disease, before
discharge home.

OTHER MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Airway Clearance

One of the most important considerations is maintenance of airway
patency. Adequate removal of secretions may minimize intercurrent pulmonary infections. In turn, infections may cause a transient
increase in secretions, requiring an escalation of clearance strategies.
If the child has an adequate cough, then periodic suctioning may be
all that is needed. Some children, however, need additional help mobilizing and clearing secretions. This becomes particularly important in
children with neuromuscular disease, for whom regularly scheduled
clearance therapies are an imperative. Vest therapy (high-­frequency
chest wall oscillation) uses an inflatable vest that encircles the chest.
Air inflates and deflates the vest with phasic pulses against the chest
wall, loosening secretions. This device still requires a preserved and
strong enough cough to expel secretions. The cough assist device
provides more active airway clearance, delivering a forceful positive
pressure adjunct during inspiration and active negative pressure during expiration. Thus the cough is more effective because of the rapid
pressure changes. The cough assist can be used with an artificial airway
or mask. Controls will set the inspiratory and expiratory pressures and
periods.

Inhalation Medications

Clearance of secretions may be promoted with delivery of hypertonic
(3% saline) nebulizations. These are often timed to cough-­assist sessions to maximize the clearance benefits of both. Children requiring
ventilation also commonly need bronchodilators.

Mucolytics and Anticholinergics

Some patients may need additional interventions as a result of excess
secretions. Anticholinergic drugs, principally glycopyrrolate, are
often effective, but must be dosed carefully to avoid thickening secretions excessively, which can lead to inspissated secretions and life-­
threatening plugging of the airway. Oral secretions are sometimes
amenable to localized injection of botulinum toxin or select surgical
ligation of salivary ducts. It is also wise to ensure that the patient is adequately hydrated, as dehydration may produce thick tenacious secretions. At times a mucolytic may be used. Hypertonic saline is the most
common mucolytic, but a number of other agents have been tried, such
as dornase alfa and N-­acetylcysteine.

Monitoring

A patient who is ventilated in the home must be electronically and/or
physically monitored at all times. Infants and young children, children
who are cognitively impaired, and children who are completely tracheostomy dependent for airway patency because of suprastomal obstruction must be under direct observation of the caregivers at all times.

2717

Caregivers should also closely monitor children whose pulmonary status is fragile or fluctuant. Continuous monitoring of O2 saturation and
heart rate is recommended during sleep and either continuous or intermittent monitoring during the daytime, depending on patient stability.
Patients with congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS)
or pulmonary hypertension are particularly vulnerable to episodes of
hypoxemia and/or hypercarbia, and those with pulmonary hypertension are particularly susceptible to rapid drops in O2 saturation.

Supplemental Oxygen

Supplemental oxygen may be delivered from a tank or concentrator.
Whether on room air or oxygen at baseline, even mild intercurrent
infections may lead to an increase in oxygen requirement. In these
situations, the child should be evaluated in person rather than over the
phone to ensure that a more serious illness is not developing.

Physical, Occupational, and Speech Therapy

The technology needed to support physical well-­being should not
overshadow the inherent needs common to all children—to play, grow,
develop, and interact. Ongoing physical therapy, occupational therapy,
and speech therapy can help a child reach full potential, and many
achieve complete catch-­up development. Early intervention programs
and access to play groups are important factors to attaining cognitive
and social milestones. When typical development is not attainable,
therapies can improve mobilization and muscle strength. Core trunk
and abdominal strength is particularly important for pulmonary rehabilitation and essential for successful weaning off ventilation. Other
important skills include oromotor skills for feeding and communication. Evaluation of swallow is a key component of therapy for children
with chronic respiratory failure. Sign language is frequently used for
communication because of delayed speech or hearing loss. Audiology
specialists should be involved in the assessment of hearing because
there is a higher incidence of hearing loss in patients undergoing long-­
term ventilation.

PREPARING FOR DISCHARGE

A number of threads need to come together for a safe and effective discharge, including medical stability, family education, financial support
(insurance or a state waiver program), availability of a DME company,
and, when appropriate, home private-­duty nursing. A poor outcome
may occur with any of the many medical or process factors or family factors, including not only education but also home readiness and
psychosocial supports. A standardized discharge process can ensure
that all details are addressed, minimizing length of stay and improving
safety. An awake and attentive trained caregiver should be in the home
of a child with invasive ventilation at all times; this expectation may
differ for those receiving NPPV depending on clinical circumstance.
For those receiving invasive ventilation, the caregiver may be a nurse,
but nursing resources are often scarce, so many programs require two
trained family caregivers. The training given to the family includes tracheostomy stoma care, suctioning, equipment expertise, administration of medications, and facility with other devices, such as gastrostomy
tubes. In addition, the family is instructed in emergency preparedness,
including what to do for acute changes in clinical status, desaturation,
or airway obstruction or decannulation. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation training is essential. Parents also need to be able to travel portably
with the child and equipment. A standardized emergency bag containing critical tracheostomy and ventilator supplies should accompany
the child at all times. Other preparations center around home readiness, including accessibility (number of stairs, if any), members of the
household, assuring no smoking in the home, and notification of utility
companies such as the electric or heating company to ensure the home
is serviced quickly in the event of power interruption. The family must
also have a functioning telephone to ensure adequate accessibility and
communication between the family and care team. For those going
home with invasive mechanical ventilation, both a primary and backup
ventilator may be needed, as well as batteries, a self-­inflating bag and
mask, suctioning equipment, supplemental oxygen, and appropriate monitoring, including a pulse oximeter. The use of high-­fidelity

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2718 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
simulation as a means to rehearse skills is increasing. Family training
often culminates in an autonomous 24-­hour stay in the hospital during which time one caregiver must continuously remain awake, and
all cares, including ventilator checks, suctioning, tracheostomy tube
changes, medications, and the like, are provided by the family.
See Chapter 468.4.

mechanical ventilation device. Successful liberation from mechanical ventilation, if it occurs, often takes place between the ages of 2
and 5 years. One thought is that with ambulation and development
of core strength, respiratory reserve improves, facilitating weaning.
Even so, residual lung disease is common. Children with a history of
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) and previous ventilator dependence often have significant airway obstruction on pulmonary function testing.

Nutrition

PSYCHOSOCIAL CONSIDERATIONS

CARE BY THE GENERAL PEDIATRICIAN

Ventilated patients may have nutritional needs that are equal to, greater
than, or lesser than those of comparably aged well children. Growth
should be tracked at each well child and subspecialty visit. Excessive
growth is as harmful as inadequate growth, and excess calories may
lead to increased carbon dioxide (CO2) production. Anthropometry or
measured energy expenditure may be needed to assure a more precise
prescription of nutritional support. Many children with tracheostomies have oral aversion and/or dyscoordination of swallowing, with
resultant risk for aspiration. In these children a gastrostomy tube may
ensure adequate nutrition in the interim, while ongoing speech therapy
promotes oral feeding.

Infections

Tracheitis (see Chapter 433.2), bronchiolitis (see Chapter 439), and
pneumonia (see Chapter 449) are common in patients with chronic
respiratory failure. Infections may be caused by community-­acquired
viruses (adenovirus, influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rhinovirus) or community-­or hospital-­acquired bacteria. Common pathogens are gram-­
negative, highly antimicrobial-­
resistant
pathogens that may cause further deterioration in pulmonary function.
Bacterial infection is most likely in the presence of fever, deteriorating
lung function (hypoxia, hypercarbia, tachypnea, and retractions), leukocytosis, and mucopurulent sputum. The presence of leukocytes and
organisms on Gram stain of tracheal aspirate, along with the visualization of new infiltrates on radiographs, may be consistent with bacterial
infection.
Infection must be distinguished from tracheal colonization of bacteria, which is asymptomatic and associated with normal amounts
of clear tracheal secretions. Colonization may also be distinguished
from infection in that colonization usually has few, if any, white blood
cells on Gram stain of tracheal secretions. If infection is suspected,
it must be treated with antibiotics, based on the culture and sensitivities of organisms recovered from the tracheal aspirate. At times
an inhaled antibiotic such as tobramycin might avert progression of
infection. Antibiotics should be used judiciously to prevent further
colonization with drug-­resistant organisms. However, some patients
who have recurrent infections may benefit from prophylaxis with
inhaled antibiotics. Clinical decisions will be based on the child’s
appearance, any increased need for ventilation or supplemental oxygen, and consultation with the subspecialist. A final caveat is that if
a respiratory viral panel is desired, this must be obtained from nasal
secretions similar to a well child; tracheal aspirate does not provide
an appropriate specimen.

CARE BY THE SUBSPECIALTY TEAM
Weaning Off of the Ventilator

Typically, the ventilator settings are reduced, minimizing ventilator
parameters to achieve physiologic respiratory rates and 6-­8 mL/kg
tidal volumes. Subsequent maneuvers will evaluate the patient free
breathing, initially with simple observed transition times of 5-­10 minutes, extending time off as clinically indicated. This can be done in the
outpatient setting during visits with the pulmonologist or other subspecialist responsible for ventilator management. Additional factors
that reflect tolerance of increased work of breathing, including weight
gain, energy levels, general behavior, and sleep patterns, are also
monitored carefully. When the child has completely weaned off ventilator support while awake and is only on the ventilator approximately
6 hours nightly during sleep, a polysomnogram study performed off
the ventilator may be considered before complete liberation from the

Caring for a child on long-­term ventilatory support in the home is a
complex, physically demanding, emotionally taxing, and expensive
process for the family. It changes the family routines, priorities, and
overall lifestyle and may adversely affect relationships both within the
family and with extended family and friends. Practical considerations
include loss of spontaneity in family outings, sleep disturbance, extra
expenses, having strangers in the house providing care, and adhering
to medical regimens and follow-­up visits. Intangible stresses are also
prominent, including disruption in the usual parent–child caregiving
roles and stresses between parent partners and with other children. The
loss of normality, sense of isolation, and concerns regarding what is
best for the child are additional sources of distress. All of these stresses
are exacerbated by challenges in securing reliable home private-­duty
nurse resources; this issue may delay hospital discharge and complicate
postdischarge care, at times even leading to readmission because of lack
of adequate support. For children with a life-­limiting condition, there
is the additional need to periodically revisit the child’s current medical
state, sense of well-­being, and trajectory of illness, as critical decisions
will eventually arise regarding end-­of-­life care. The general pediatrician can often be a familiar and comfortable safe place to explore these
issues, as parents may be conflicted in wanting to be a “good” parent
while feeling guilty about their own needs and vulnerabilities. Finally,
families may find transportation to frequent outpatient visits difficult;
telemedicine may offer an alternative for select situations.

ADULT TRANSITION

There are a growing number of children surviving into adulthood who
require chronic ventilation. There are little empiric data regarding this
transition, including identifying patients for whom transition is appropriate, implementing a standardized transition process, partnering
with adult pulmonologists, or replicating in an adult environment the
care coordination provided by the pediatric care team. The pulmonary
team ideally initiates ongoing discussions regarding self-­care responsibilities and transitioning of medical care to adult providers with the
adolescent and his or her parents when the patient reaches the early
teens. Discussion about self-­care should take into consideration realistic expectations about the adolescent’s physical and cognitive capabilities. The actual transition of care occurs for most young adults at
age 18-­21 years and includes referral to an internist and an adult pulmonologist. Transition of medical care also includes transition from
pediatric to adult support services for funding sources and nursing
care. Ideally, an outpatient visit that includes current and future adult
medical providers together is completed to facilitate communication
and formally transition care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

468.2 Congenital Central Hypoventilation
Syndrome
Amy Zhou, Susan M. Slattery, Casey M. Rand, and
Debra E. Weese-­Mayer
CCHS is a clinically complex neurocristopathy that includes a variable severity of respiratory and autonomic dysregulation, as well as
Hirschsprung disease and neural crest tumors in a subset of patients.
In the classic CCHS presentation, symptoms of alveolar hypoventilation manifest in the newborn period and during sleep only—with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
Table 468.2  Clinical Manifestations of CCHS
ORGAN SYSTEM

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Ophthalmologic

Decreased/absent pupillary light response
Anisocoria
Strabismus
Lack of convergent gaze
Marcus Gunn jaw winking

Respiratory

Alveolar hypoventilation
Absent perception of dyspnea

Cardiovascular

Bradycardia
Prolonged sinus pauses (>3 seconds)
Transient asystole
Decreased heart rate variability
Low normal daytime blood pressure
Orthostatic hypotension
Nondipping blood pressure circadian
pattern
Decreased BP response to exercise
Syncope

Gastrointestinal

Hirschsprung disease (20%)
Constipation
Esophageal dysmotility

Endocrine

Hyperinsulinism
Hypoglycemia
Hyperglycemia

Neurologic

Decreased anxiety
Decreased pain perception
Seizures
Neurocognitive deficits

Skin

Sporadic profuse sweating

Tumors

Neuroblastoma
Ganglioneuroma
Ganglioneuroblastoma

Others

Decreased baseline body temperature
Poor heat tolerance

CCHS, Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome; BP, blood pressure; GI,
gastrointestinal.
From Bishara J, Keens TG, Perez IA. The genetics of congenital central hypoventilation
syndrome: clinical implications. App Clin Genetics. 2018;11:135–144, Table 1. Originally
published by and used with permission from Dove Medical Press Ltd.

diminished tidal volume and a typically monotonous respiratory rate
leading to cyanosis and hypercarbia. In more severe cases of CCHS,
the hypoventilation manifests during wakefulness and sleep. In the
later-­onset cases of CCHS (LO-­CCHS), onset of overt symptoms
is delayed until 1 month of age or older (often into childhood and
adulthood). Hypoventilation is typically during sleep only and usually milder in LO-­CCHS. CCHS and LO-­CCHS are further characterized by partial to complete failure of peripheral and central
chemoreceptors to properly respond to hypercarbia and hypoxemia
during wakefulness and sleep, coupled with physiologic and/or anatomic autonomic nervous system (ANS) dysregulation (ANSD).
Physiologic dysregulation may include all organ systems affected by
the ANS, specifically the respiratory, cardiac, sudomotor, vasomotor, ophthalmologic, neurologic, and enteric systems (Table 468.2).
The anatomic or structural ANSD includes Hirschsprung disease and
tumors of neural crest origin (neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroma, or
ganglioneuroblastoma).

GENETICS

The PHOX2B gene is the disease-­defining gene for CCHS. PHOX2B
encodes a highly conserved homeodomain transcription factor, is
essential to the embryologic development of the ANS from the neural
crest, and is expressed in key regions and systems that explain much

2719

of the CCHS phenotype. Individuals with CCHS are heterozygous for
either a polyalanine repeat expansion pathogenic variant (PARPV)
in exon 3 of the PHOX2B gene (normal number of alanines is 20 with
normal genotype 20/20), such that individuals with CCHS have 24-­
33 alanines on the affected allele (genotype range is 20/24-­20/33), or
a nonpolyalanine repeat expansion pathogenic variant (NPARPV)
resulting from a missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon, in-­frame
indels (in-­frame insertions, deletions, or duplications), full exon/gene
deletions, or splice-­
site pathologic genetic variant. Approximately
90–92% of cases of CCHS have PARPVs and the remaining 8–10% of
cases have NPARPVs (Table 468.3).
Stepwise clinical PHOX2B testing for probands with the CCHS phenotype is advised. Step 1: PHOX2B screening test (fragment analysis),
then if negative; Step 2: PHOX2B sequencing test, then if negative;
Step 3: PHOX2B multiplex ligation-­dependent probe amplification
(MLPA) test to minimize the risk of false-­negative findings, minimize
the expense and need for more than one blood sample, and expedite
confirmation of the diagnosis.
Genetic counseling is essential for family planning and for delivery
room preparation in anticipation of a CCHS birth and ensuring adequate ventilation for the mother during pregnancy. PHOX2B testing
is also advised for both parents of a child with CCHS to anticipate the
risk of recurrence in subsequent pregnancies (if mosaic) and to determine if a parent has yet-­undiagnosed LO-­CCHS. Fragment analysis
PHOX2B testing (also known as the screening test) will best identify
low-­level somatic mosaicism. Prenatal testing for a PHOX2B variant
is clinically available (www.genetests.org) for families with a known
PHOX2B gene variant.

Ventilator Dependence and Control of Breathing

Patients with CCHS have deficient CO2 sensitivity during wakefulness
and sleep such that they do not respond with a normal increase in
ventilation in either state, nor do they arouse in response to hypercarbia and/or hypoxemia during sleep. During wakefulness, a subset
of patients may respond sufficiently to avoid significant hypercarbia,
but most individuals with CCHS have hypoventilation that is severe
enough that hypercarbia is apparent in the resting awake state. Children with CCHS also have altered sensitivity to hypoxia while awake
and asleep. A key feature of CCHS is the lack of respiratory distress
or sense of asphyxia with physiologic compromise (hypercarbia and/
or hypoxemia). This lack of responsiveness to hypercarbia and/or
hypoxemia, which can result in respiratory failure, does not consistently improve with advancing age. A subset of older children with
CCHS may show an increase in ventilation (specifically an increase
in respiratory rate rather than an increase in tidal volume) when they
are exercised at various work rates. This response is possibly secondary to neural reflexes from rhythmic limb movements, although an
increase in minute ventilation is often insufficient to avoid physiologic
compromise.
The greater the number of extra alanines, the more likely the need
for continuous ventilatory support, at least among the most common PHOX2B PARPV genotypes (20/25, 20/26, 20/27). Although
PHOX2B genotype seems to anticipate the severity of hypoventilation, it does not correlate with exogenous ventilatory challenge
responses. Infants and young children as a group have reasonable
ventilatory response slopes while awake, but this advantage seems to
vanish by school age.

Hirschsprung Disease (see Chapter 378.4)

Overall, 20% of children with CCHS also have Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), known as Haddad syndrome, and any infant or child
with CCHS who presents with constipation should undergo rectal
biopsy to screen for the absence of ganglion cells. The frequency of
Hirschsprung disease seems to increase with the longer polyalanine
repeat tracts (genotypes 20/27-­20/33) and in those with NPARPVs.
Even in cases without frank HSCR disease, individuals with CCHS
may display symptoms of gastrointestinal abnormalities such as severe
constipation and abnormal esophageal motility, suggesting ganglion
cell dysfunction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2720 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 468.3   Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome–Related Symptoms by PARPV vs NPARPV and PARPV Genotype
GENOTYPE
NPARPVS

PARPV GENOTYPE
FEATURE

20/241,
20/25

Respiratory (hypoventilation)

20/26

20/27

NPARPV IN GENERAL

38BP DELETION

Asleep only

Awake with
exertion and
eating and
asleep

Awake and
asleep

Awake and asleep

Awake and asleep

Cardiac arrhythmia:
Abrupt sinus pauses ≥3 seconds
warranting cardiac pacemaker

Variable:
None with
childhood
onset; a
subset
will have
prolonged
sinus
pauses in
adulthood

19%

>80%

None with childhood onset to date

Hirschsprung disease

<0.1%

20–30%

30%

80–90%

∼50+%

~50+%

Severe constipation
Esophageal dysmotility/dysphagia
Neural crest
tumors

95–100% severe
long segment
disease (i.e.,
entire colon
and some small
intestine)

First year of life

First year of life

Neuroblastoma

0%

0%

See footnote 2

50%

Ganglioneuroblastoma

0%

0%

0%

<5%

Ganglioneuroma

0%

0%

0%

<5%

Normal
response

Midsize
pupils with
attenuated
response to
light

Small pupils at
rest; nearly
absent
response to
light

Large pupils at rest; negligible response to
light

ANSD: Pupillary response to light

ANSD, Autonomic nervous system dysregulation; NPARPV, nonpolyalanine repeat expansion pathogenic variant (i.e., missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon, splice site); PARPV,
polyalanine repeat expansion pathogenic variant.
1. Genotype 20/24 would be considered a susceptibility allele (needs another factor to manifest) or a low-­or variable-­penetrance allele with features that can be triggered by
pharmacologic agents (a pharmaco-­genetic phenomenon) or a gene × environment interaction (without main effects).
2. Generally 0%; however, an infant with the 20/33 genotype had metastatic neuroblastoma (12).
From Weese-­Mayer DE, Rand CM, Khaytin I, et al. Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome. Updated 2021 Jan 28. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al., eds.
GeneReviews [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-­2021. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1427/. Table 2, pp. 7–8.

Tumors of Neural Crest Origin (see Chapter 547)

Tumors of neural crest origin are more frequent in patients with
NPARPVs (50%) than in those with PARPVs (1%). These extracranial
tumors are more often neuroblastomas in individuals with NPARPVs,
but ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas occur in a small subset of patients.

Cardiac Asystoles

Transient, abrupt, and prolonged sinus pauses have been identified in
patients with CCHS, necessitating implantation of cardiac pacemakers
when the pauses are ≥3 seconds. Among patients with the most common PHOX2B genotypes, 19% of those with the 20/26 genotype and
83% of those with the 20/27 genotype have cardiac pauses of 3 seconds
or longer. The risk for sinus pauses among children with NPARPVs is
unknown at present.
Heart rate variability is characteristically decreased in CCHS,
likely because of reduced cardiac baroreflex sensitivity and blunted

sympathetic response. One report demonstrated a genotype-­
phenotype relationship for heart rate variability during exogenous ventilatory response testing, prompting assessment of risk
for sinus pauses. Introduction of 72-­hour Holter recordings every
12 months, at a minimum, has allowed for early identification of
these abrupt sinus pauses, permitting timely cardiac pacemaker
implantation.

Autonomic Nervous System Dysregulation

A higher number of polyalanine repeats on the affected allele among
patients with a PARPV is associated with an increased number of
physiologic symptoms of ANSD. In addition, there is a spectrum of
physiologic ANSD symptoms, including decreased heart rate variability, esophageal/gastric/colonic dysmotility, decreased pupillary
response to light, reduced basal body temperature, altered distribution
and amount of diaphoresis, altered vasomotor tone, and altered pain
and anxiety perception.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
Characteristic Facial Morphology

Characteristic facial features have been described for children with
CCHS. Using facial photogrammetry, five features were used to correctly predict 86% of CCHS cases and 82% of controls in a matched
case control study. A typical CCHS face is characterized by an upper
and midface that is short relative to its width, resulting in a characteristic broad, flat, boxlike appearance (Fig. 468.1). The lateral one third
of the upper lip vermillion border is overturned so it is flesh-­colored
instead of pink. Results also suggest that male CCHS patients are more
strongly affected than females.

Neuropathology

Brain imaging studies and functional MRI (fMRI) responses have
identified structural anomalies in CCHS cases that may contribute
to the observed respiratory and autonomic phenotypes. These findings may be primarily the result of PHOX2B variant–induced failure
of neurogenesis in the human embryo, but a significant contribution
from postnatal hypoxic, hypercarbic, or perfusion damage cannot be
excluded. The neuroanatomic defects in CCHS are likely the result
of focal PHOX2B (mis)expression coupled with sequelae of recurrent hypoxemia/hypercarbia in the subset of suboptimally managed
patients. The following regions pertinent to respiratory control in the
pons and medulla of the brainstem show PHOX2B expression: locus
coeruleus, dorsal respiratory group, nucleus ambiguus, and parafacial
respiratory group, among other areas. Physiologic evidence suggests
that the respiratory failure in these children is mostly based on defects
in central mechanisms, but peripheral mechanisms (mainly carotid
bodies) may also be important.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients with CCHS usually present with symptoms in the first few hours
after birth. Most children are the products of uneventful pregnancies
and are term infants with appropriate weight for gestational age. Variable Apgar scores have been reported. The affected infants do not show
signs of respiratory distress, but their shallow respirations and respiratory pauses (apnea) usually evolve to respiratory failure with apparent
cyanosis in the first days of life. In neonates with CCHS, Paco2 accumulates during sleep to very high levels, sometimes >90 mm Hg, and may
decline to normal levels after the infants awaken. This problem becomes
most apparent when multiple attempts at extubation fail in an intubated
neonate who appears well with ventilatory support but develops respiratory failure without respiratory distress after removal of the support.
However, more severely affected infants with CCHS hypoventilate awake

and asleep; thus the previously described difference in Paco2 between
states may not be apparent. Often, the respiratory rate is higher in
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep than in non-­REM sleep in individuals with CCHS, and in general, respiratory rates are higher in infants
and children with CCHS than similarly aged peers with intact control
of breathing.
LO-­CCHS should be suspected in infants, children, and adults who
have unexplained centrally mediated hypoventilation and/or seizures
or cyanosis, especially subsequent to the use of anesthetic agents and/
or sedation, acute respiratory illness or recurrent severe respiratory illness with difficulty weaning from ventilator support (and failed extubations), and potentially obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) unresponsive
to traditional intervention. These individuals may have other evidence
of chronic hypoventilation, including pulmonary hypertension, polycythemia, elevated bicarbonate concentration, difficulty concentrating,
and mild unexplained neurocognitive impairment. A heightened level
of suspicion has led to increasing numbers of older children and adults
diagnosed with LO-­CCHS receiving proper treatment. This later presentation reflects the variable penetrance of a subset of PHOX2B variants and the potential role of an exogenous cofactor in unmasking the
hypoventilation phenotype.
In addition to treatment for the alveolar hypoventilation, children
with CCHS require comprehensive physiologic evaluation during sleep
and wakefulness, including age-­appropriate activities of daily living
such as eating, as their hypoxemia and hypercarbia from insufficient
artificial ventilation may go unnoticed. It is necessary to provide coordinated care to optimally manage associated multisystem abnormalities such as Hirschsprung disease, tumors of neural crest origin, and
symptoms of physiologic ANSD, including cardiac asystole, among
other findings (details provided in American Thoracic Society [ATS]
2010 Statement on CCHS) (Table 468.4).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Testing should be performed to rule out primary neuromuscular, lung,
and cardiac disease as well as an identifiable brainstem lesion that
could account for the symptoms characteristic of CCHS (Table 468.5).
The availability of clinical PHOX2B genetic testing allows for early and
definitive diagnosis of CCHS (see Table 468.3). Because individual
subfeatures of CCHS mimic many treatable and/or genetic diseases,
the following disorders should also be considered: altered airway or
intrathoracic anatomy (diagnosis made with bronchoscopy and chest
CT), diaphragm dysfunction (diagnosis made with diaphragm fluoroscopy), a structural hindbrain or brainstem abnormality (diagnosis made with MRI of the brain and brainstem), Möbius syndrome
(diagnosis made with MRI of the brain and brainstem and neurologic
examination), and specific metabolic diseases, such as Leigh syndrome,
pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency, and discrete carnitine deficiency.
However, profound hypercarbia without respiratory distress during
sleep will quickly lead the clinician to consider the diagnosis of CCHS
or LO-­CCHS.

MANAGEMENT
Supported Ventilation: Diaphragm Pacing

A

B

Fig. 468.1 Characteristic CCHS facies. Photographs of representative

CCHS. These two children with CCHS both have the representative facies. The female with CCHS (A) has a PHOX2B genotype of 20/25, and
the male with CCHS (B) has a 20/27 genotype. Note the decreases
in sloping of the forehead, upper face height, upper facial inclination,
nasolabial angle, upper and lower lip heights, and the inferior inflection of the lateral vermillion border of the upper lip. (Modified from
Todd ES, Weinberg SM, Berry-­Kravis EM, et al. Facial phenotype in
children and young adults with PHOX2B-­determined congenital central hypoventilation syndrome: quantitative pattern of dysmorphology.
Pediatr Res. 2006;59:39–45, Fig. 2A and 2C.)

2721

Depending on the severity of the hypoventilation, the individual with
CCHS can have various options for artificial ventilation: positive
pressure ventilation (noninvasive via mask or invasive via tracheostomy) or negative pressure ventilation (pneumosuit, chest cuirass, or
diaphragm pacing). Chronic mechanical ventilation is addressed in
Chapters 468.1 and 468.4. Diaphragm pacing offers another mode of
supported ventilation, involving bilateral thoracoscopic implantation
of electrodes beneath the phrenic nerves, with connecting wires to
subcutaneously implanted receivers. The external transmitter, which
is much smaller and lighter in weight than a ventilator, sends a signal to flat, donut-­shaped antennae that are placed on the skin over the
subcutaneously implanted receivers. A signal travels from the external transmitter to the phrenic nerve to stimulate contraction of the
diaphragm. A tracheostomy is typically required, because the pacers
induce a negative pressure on inspiration as a result of the contraction
of the diaphragm being unopposed by pharyngeal dilatation, resulting

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2722 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
Table 468.4   Recommended Evaluations in Patients with CCHS
EVALUATION

FREQUENCY

PHOX2B GENOTYPE

Pulmonary

Comprehensive physiologic
testing during sleep and
wakefulness, including
continuous pulse oximetry,
cardiorespiratory monitoring,
capnography, and
polysomnography

<3 yr of age: every 6 mo
≥3 yr: annually

All PHOX2B PARM and NPARM

Cardiovascular

Ambulatory cardiac monitoring
(≥72 hr), blood pressure, and
echocardiogram

Annually

All PHOX2B PARM and NPARM

Gastrointestinal

Barium enema or anorectal
manometry; confirmation by
rectal biopsy

At initial diagnosis and
subsequently if symptoms
appear

20/26-­20/33 PARM and NPARM

Neurodevelopmental

Comprehensive neurocognitive
tests

<3 yr of age: every 6 mo
≥3 yr: annually

All PHOX2B PARM and NPARM

Oncologic

Chest radiograph, abdominal
ultrasound, and urine
catecholamines (homovanillic
acid and vanillylmandelic acid)

0-­6 yr of age: every 3 mo
6-­10 yr of age: every 6 mo
>10 yr of age: per oncologist
recommendation

20/28-­20/33 PARM and NPARM

Ophthalmologic

Comprehensive ocular testing by
an ophthalmologist

Annually

All PHOX2B PARM and NPARM

NPARM, Nonpolyalanine repeat expansion mutation; PARM, polyalanine repeat expansion mutation; PHOX2B, paired-­like homeobox 2B.
Data from the 2010 American Thoracic Society Statement on CCHS Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010;181:626–644.
From Kasi AS, Li H, Harford KL, et al. Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome: optimizing care with a multidisciplinary approach. J Multidisp Healthcare. 2022;15:455–469, Table 1.
Originally published by and used with permission from Dove Medical Press Ltd.

Table 468.5  Differential Diagnoses of Congenital Central
Hypoventilation Syndrome
METABOLIC
Mitochondrial defects (e.g., Leigh disease)
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
Hypothyroidism
NEUROLOGIC
Structural central nervous system abnormalities (e.g., Arnold Chiari
malformation, Möbius syndrome)
Vascular injury (e.g., central nervous system [CNS] hemorrhage,
infarct)
Trauma
Tumor
PULMONARY
Primary lung disease
Respiratory muscle weakness (e.g., diaphragm paralysis, congenital
myopathy, myasthenia gravis)
GENETIC
Prader-­Willi syndrome
Familial dysautonomia and other neuropathies
OTHER
Sedative drugs
Rapid-­onset obesity, hypothalamic dysregulation hypoventilation,
autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD)
Modified from Healy F, Marcus CL. Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome in
children. Pediatr Respir Rev. 2011;12:253–263, Table 1.

in airway obstruction with paced breaths. Individuals with CCHS who
are ventilator-­dependent for 24 hours a day are ideal candidates for
diaphragm pacing to provide increased ambulatory freedom (without
the ventilator tether) while they are awake; however, they still require
mechanical ventilator support while they are asleep. This balance
between awake pacing and asleep mechanical ventilation allows for a
rest from phrenic nerve stimulation at night. In addition, a growing
but still limited number of children and adults who require artificial

ventilatory support only during sleep are now using diaphragm pacing.
This is likely because of the introduction of thoracoscopic diaphragm
pacer implantation and shortened postoperative recovery time. However, in the absence of a tracheostomy, diaphragm pacing during sleep
may cause airway obstruction at varied levels of the airway, depending
on the specific patient. The potential for these obstructions needs to
be carefully considered before diaphragm pacer implantation, and certainly before tracheal decannulation.

Monitoring in the Home

Home monitoring for individuals with CCHS and LO-­CCHS is distinctly different from and more conservative than that for other children requiring long-­term ventilation, because CCHS individuals lack
innate ventilatory and arousal responses to hypoxemia and hypercarbia. In the event of physiologic compromise, other non-­CCHS children
will show clinical signs of respiratory distress. By contrast, for children
and adults with CCHS and LO-­CCHS, the only means of determining adequate ventilation and oxygenation is with objective measures
from a pulse oximeter, end-­tidal CO2 monitor, and close supervision
of these values by a highly trained registered nurse (RN) in the home
and at school. While awake, patients with CCHS themselves are unable
to sense or adequately respond to a respiratory challenge that may
occur with ensuing respiratory illness, increased exertion, or even the
simple activity of eating. At a minimum, it is essential that individuals with CCHS have continuous monitoring with pulse oximetry and
end-­tidal CO2 with RN supervision during all sleep time, but ideally
24 hours a day. These recommendations apply to all CCHS and LO-­
CCHS patients regardless of the nature of their artificial ventilatory
support, but especially those with diaphragm pacers, as only the most
recent transmitter has mechanical dysfunction alarms intrinsic to the
diaphragm pacer device.

Noninvasive Ventilatory Support Equipment

Supplemental oxygen with positive pressure support can be administered by nasal cannula, pillows, nasal mask, or full-­face mask via
an actual ventilator, but this is suitable only for highly cooperative
children with milder hypoventilation during sleep only. Long-­term
use of mask ventilation in infants and young children may result in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
midface dysplasia or pressure wounds. Mask ventilation does not
offer the stable airway provided by a tracheostomy with mechanical
ventilation, especially in the rapidly developing infant and young
child.

Positive Pressure Ventilators

Ideally, a ventilator intended for home use is lightweight and small,
quiet so it does not interfere with activities of daily living or sleep, is
able to entrain room air, preferably has continuous flow, and has a wide
range of settings (particularly for pressure support, pressure, volume,
and rate) that allows ventilatory support from infancy to adulthood.
Battery power for the ventilator, both internal and external, should
be sufficient to permit unrestricted portability in the home and community. The equipment must also be impervious to electromagnetic
interference and must be relatively easy to understand and troubleshoot. Children who are chronically ventilated via positive pressure
ventilation will require surgical placement of a tracheostomy tube. The
tracheostomy tube provides stable access to the airway, a standardized
interface for attaching the ventilator circuit to the patient, and the ability to easily remove airway secretions or deliver inhaled medications.
Pediatric tracheostomy tubes typically have a single lumen and may
have an inflatable tight-­to-­the-­shaft cuff. Tracheostomy tubes with and
without cuff inflation should be sized to control the air leak around
the tube and promote adequate gas exchange yet allow enough space
around the tube to facilitate vocalization and prevent tracheal irritation
and erosion from the tube.

Optimizing Neurocognitive Performance

Impaired oxygen delivery to the brain, whether acute or chronic, can
have detrimental effects on neurocognitive development. The ATS
statement on CCHS recommends positive pressure ventilation via tracheostomy in the first several years of life to ensure optimal oxygenation and ventilation. The method of choice for respiratory support in
later years will depend on a variety of factors, including severity of disease, patient age, level of patient and family cooperation, and availability and quality of home healthcare, among other factors. The level of
oxygen stability obtained with each modality varies. Thus the method
of respiratory assistance, especially in infancy and early childhood, is
likely to play a factor in neurocognitive outcome.
Past literature has indicated reduced neurocognitive performance
in school-­age children with CCHS, with mean full scale intellectual
quotient (IQ) values one standard deviation below the normal IQ
of 100. Even in preschool years, children with CCHS and the 20/26
and 20/27 PHOX2B genotypes demonstrate reduced neurocognitive performance compared to children with the 20/25 genotype. In
these cases, PHOX2B genotype is clearly associated with both mental and motor outcomes. An association is also found between IQ
and CCHS-­related features such as severe cyanotic breath holding
spells, sinus pauses, seizures, and severity of hypoventilation. One
study reported a negative correlation between neurocognitive performance scores and length of polyalanine expansion, suggesting that
both the specific gene variant and ventilatory method may influence
neurocognitive outcome. Findings from a neurocognition study in
preschool-­age children suggest the potential for excellent neurocognitive outcome in some patients with CCHS. Neurodevelopmental
monitoring would be most beneficial beginning in early infancy and
followed closely with advancing age.
Efforts are underway to evaluate and characterize the CCHS phenotype longitudinally through the International CCHS Registry (htt
ps://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT03088020) (Northwestern University). Delineating markers of disease progression and understanding
the clinical manifestations of CCHS with advancing age will provide
more accurate guidelines to healthcare providers, allowing physicians,
families, and patients to better anticipate healthcare needs of affected
individuals and for use as biomarkers for future pharmacologic intervention studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2723

468.3 Rapid-­Onset Obesity with Hypothalamic
Dysfunction, Hypoventilation, and
Autonomic Dysregulation
Sarah F. Barclay, Ilya Khaytin, Amy Zhou,
Casey M. Rand, and Debra E. Weese-­Mayer
Rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation,
and autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD) is a rare, poorly understood
disorder with childhood onset, the first sign of which is sudden, rapid,
and extreme weight gain in a previously healthy child. The acronym
describes the presenting symptoms and the typical order in which they
will manifest or unfold, as the condition evolves over months to years.
Despite its rarity, ROHHAD must be considered whenever rapid-­onset
obesity is observed in a child, because in the absence of appropriate treatment, a high mortality rate is associated with the severe central hypoventilation that will invariably develop.
The diagnosis is initially considered after the observation of rapid-­
onset obesity (15-­20 lb gain) after age 1.5 years, accompanied by at
least one additional sign of hypothalamic dysfunction (HD). Central
hypoventilation may not be present at the time of rapid weight gain but
will develop over time, and artificial ventilatory support will be required
at least during sleep, if not 24 hours a day. Signs of autonomic nervous
system dysregulation typically occur after the weight gain, HD, and
hypoventilation have been identified. Additionally, approximately 40%
of ROHHAD patients will have or develop a tumor of neural crest origin, typically ganglioneuroma or ganglioneuroblastoma (a small number of neuroblastomas have been identified).
ROHHAD is distinct from LO-­
CCHS (see Chapter 468.2).
ROHHAD is primarily distinguished from LO-­CCHS by the presence
of obesity and other signs of HD and by the absence of a CCHS-­related
pathogenic PHOX2B variant.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Children with ROHHAD initially appear healthy, with an unremarkable medical history. The initial symptoms present between ages 18
months and 7 years. Typically, the first symptom observed is rapid-­
onset obesity, with weight gain of 15-­30 lb in 6-­12 months. The growth
charts from a representative child followed longitudinally illustrate
the characteristic accelerated increase in weight and body mass index
(BMI) (Fig. 468.2). This is considered one sign of HD in these patients.
The second common sign of HD, seen in most ROHHAD patients, is
disordered water balance, including hypernatremia and hyponatremia
and both adipsia and polydipsia. Growth hormone (GH) deficiency
is also observed in most patients. In some, this manifests clinically as
slowed growth rate and short stature, whereas in others a failed GH
stimulation test is the only manifestation. Hyperprolactinemia is
observed near universally in patients with ROHHAD. Other symptoms
of HD, occurring in >25–50% of ROHHAD patients, include poor
thermoregulation, central hypothyroidism, central adrenal insufficiency, and delayed or precocious puberty. The number of hypothalamic abnormalities that will be observed and the sequential order
in which they will appear are variable, and some symptoms may not
manifest for months to 1-­2 years after the initial diagnosis. However, all
ROHHAD patients will present with at least one of these signs of HD
beyond the rapid-­onset weight gain.
Sleep-­disordered breathing (SDB) is one of the key symptoms of
ROHHAD, often manifesting as one of the most severe features of the
phenotype, with the greatest potential for severe morbidity and death.
More than half of ROHHAD patients have initial obstructive sleep
apnea (OSA); although SDB is known to be associated with obesity and
OSA is often seen in obese individuals, over time, when the ROHHAD
phenotype unfolds, SDB will evolve beyond what could potentially be
explained as obesity related. All ROHHAD patients will eventually
develop central alveolar hypoventilation, requiring artificial ventilation as life support, even when the upper airway obstruction is relieved
as an intervention for OSA. About half of ROHHAD patients will
require artificial ventilation only during sleep, whereas half will require

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2724 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
hypoventilation because the majority of ROHHAD patients have no
behavioral issues and a normal IQ.
Seizures have been reported in some ROHHAD patients, likely
caused by episodes of hypoxemia, when hypoventilation either has not
yet been diagnosed or has been inadequately managed.

Weight (kg)

80
60

DIAGNOSIS

40
20
0

BMI (%ile)

150

100

50

0
0

5

10

15

Age (years)

Fig. 468.2 Growth curves of weight and body mass index (BMI) from

an individual child with ROHHAD. Weight and BMI percentiles for a
child with ROHHAD from the time of diagnosis until age 14.3 yr, demonstrating the rapid onset of obesity. Weight and BMI percentiles were
calculated using published CDC growth charts and methods. Solid lines
in weight graph represent 3rd, 50th, and 97th percentiles. Dots and
open squares are individual measurements for the child.

continuous artificial ventilation (during sleep and wakefulness). Up to
50% of children with ROHHAD will have a cardiorespiratory arrest
before their hypoventilation is identified and treated. Unfortunately,
many ROHHAD patients die from cardiorespiratory arrest because
of unrecognized or inadequately managed hypoventilation. Thus if a
ROHHAD diagnosis is suspected, it is crucial that a comprehensive
respiratory physiology evaluation be performed, including overnight
polysomnography and awake physiologic recording in activities of
daily living and followed serially long after the hypoventilation is identified and intervention provided.
All ROHHAD patients have symptoms of autonomic nervous
system (ANS) dysregulation (ANSD); the specific symptoms and
the order and timing of their appearance will vary among patients.
The most common manifestations of ANSD in ROHHAD are
ophthalmologic, including pupillary dysfunction, strabismus,
and alacrima. Many ROHHAD patients will have gastrointestinal dysmotility, presenting as either chronic constipation or, less
commonly, chronic diarrhea. Other signs of ANSD include altered
sweating, decreased body temperature, decreased sensitivity to
pain, and cold hands and feet indicating altered vasomotor tone.
Bradycardia is observed in some ROHHAD patients, typically
related to extreme hypothermia.
Neural crest tumors are observed in ∼40% of ROHHAD patients,
most frequently ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas of the
chest or abdomen; rarely a neuroblastoma has been reported. These
tumors can occur at any age, so proactive imaging evaluation throughout childhood and adolescence to identify the tumors is essential.
Patients do not always have behavioral or psychologic disorders
if artificial ventilation is optimized. For those who do, however,
the disorders can be quite severe, including anxiety, depression,
rage, lethargy, irritability, aggressiveness, psychosis, and obsessive-­
compulsive disorder. Developmental disorders described include
neurocognitive delay, developmental regression, attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder.
These disorders are most likely accentuated by poorly managed

The diagnostic criteria for ROHHAD include rapid-­onset obesity after
1.5 years of age; central hypoventilation beginning after age 1.5 years;
≥1 of the following signs of HD: disordered water balance, hyperprolactinemia, failed GH stimulation test, central hypothyroidism, corticotropin deficiency, and altered onset of puberty; and features of
autonomic dysregulation. Additionally, it must be confirmed that no
CCHS-­related PHOX2B pathogenic variant is present to rule out a
diagnosis of CCHS or LO-­CCHS.
Because no single diagnostic test is currently available for ROHHAD,
the diagnosis must be based on observation of the clinical presentation and therefore requires expert consultation in multiple pediatric
subspecialties, including respiratory physiology, endocrinology, autonomic medicine, cardiology, oncology, nutrition, critical care, sleep,
and psychiatry, with orchestration by the child’s pediatrician. When a
child with rapid-­onset obesity is seen by a general pediatrician or family
physician, the steep trajectory of weight gain should signal prompt consideration of a ROHHAD diagnosis, with immediate referral to a center
with expertise in this unique constellation of symptoms. Early recognition is critical for a positive outcome in children with ROHHAD. If
alveolar hypoventilation is not identified and aggressively managed, cardiorespiratory arrest can occur and has proved fatal in many cases.
A characteristic set of facial features has been described for CCHS,
which, using facial photogrammetry, is able to identify 86% of genetically confirmed CCHS cases (see Chapter 468.2). Although such
formal evaluation of ROHHAD facies has not been completed, a preliminary report indicates that ROHHAD patients have similar facial
mapping characteristics to CCHS patients, especially the characteristic
“lip trait,” in which the lateral one third of the upper vermillion border is flesh-­colored instead of pink (Fig. 468.3). This is distinct from
the general lip changes observed with increasing BMI in a study of
adolescent females, which include fuller-­looking lips and downturned
corners of the mouth.
Initial evaluations should include overnight polysomnography to
identify OSA or central hypoventilation, awake comprehensive physiologic recording in age-­appropriate activities of daily living, cardiac
evaluation to assess for cor pulmonale and rhythm disturbance, endocrine function evaluation, screening for neural crest tumors (chest
radiograph, abdominopelvic ultrasound, or meta-iodobenzylguanidine [MIBG] scan), and a behavioral and psychological evaluation,
especially if any behavioral, psychologic, or developmental disorders
are seen or suspected. Brain imaging should be performed to rule out
intracranial lesions that may account for the observed hypothalamic-­
pituitary abnormalities (using the hypothalamic-­pituitary protocol).
If the criteria are met and a ROHHAD diagnosis is made, successful
management requires ongoing teamwork among the various subspecialists, with a pediatrician team leader to orchestrate all testing, the
family, and the child to provide optimized integrated care for the child.

MANAGEMENT

There is currently no cure for ROHHAD. Rather, treatment consists
of early identification, meticulous monitoring, and anticipatory along
with symptomatic management of the various phenotypic features as
they develop (“unfold”). Comprehensive initial evaluations should
determine the nature and severity of hypoventilation, HD, and ANSD,
and appropriate interventions should be implemented in a time-­
sensitive manner. Obesity in ROHHAD is very difficult to control,
but in consultation with a nutritionist and endocrinologist, the trajectory of advancing weight gain can be diminished with moderate exercise and calorie restriction, leading to improved BMI with advancing
age. Specific signs of HD and ANSD should be evaluated by a pediatric endocrinologist and expert in pediatric autonomic medicine,
respectively, and treated as necessary longitudinally as the phenotype

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency

2725

monitoring with oximetry and capnography during sleep, with spot
checks during wakefulness. The goal should be to maintain hemoglobin saturation values of ≥95% and end-­tidal CO2 values of 35-­45 mm
Hg, with vigilant evaluation for awake hypoventilation necessitating
artificial ventilation up to 24 hours a day as necessary.
Given that the ROHHAD phenotype evolves with advancing age,
ongoing care requires regularly scheduled evaluation of all the systems
involved to identify and treat further symptoms as they appear. Comprehensive evaluation should ideally occur at a Center of Excellence for
ROHHAD and should include respiratory physiology assessment both
asleep and awake (in varied levels of age-­appropriate exertion, concentrational tasks, quiet play, and eating), screening of chest and abdomen for
neural crest tumors in the adrenals or along the sympathetic chain, evaluation of the hypothalamic-­pituitary axis with hormonal replacement as
necessary, age-­appropriate noninvasive evaluation of ANS dysregulation,
comprehensive cardiac evaluation for sequelae of recurrent hypoxemia
and/or bradycardia, and neurocognitive testing. These evaluations should
initially occur at 2-­to 3-­month intervals, but this schedule may be altered
with advancing age, depending on each patient’s clinical condition.
With proper and meticulous management, the ROHHAD phenotype has been observed to “refold,” with the possibility of achieving
weight control, eventually recovering spontaneous awake breathing,
and improvement of other autonomic measures. Without proper management, oxygen deprivation can lead to irreversible deterioration in
patients. However, with prompt diagnosis and aggressive management,
including careful attention to the child’s airway, breathing, and circulation, complications can be minimized and the prognosis can be quite
favorable, although long-­term outcome remains the focus of an international registry (https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT03135730).

A

Paraneoplastic/Autoimmune Hypothesis
B
Fig. 468.3 Characteristic CCHS “lip trait” shown in a child with

ROHHAD. Shown here is the mouth of a child with ROHHAD at age 4
(A) and 11 (B) years. The lateral one third of the upper vermillion border
is flesh-­colored instead of pink. This is not a characteristic feature of
obese faces in general (the upper lip is neural crest in origin).

“unfolds” and “refolds.” Such treatments or management strategies
may include hormone replacement; regimented fluid intake; ophthalmologic assessment and treatment; longitudinal monitoring of peripheral, core, and ambient temperature; and management of constipation
with stool softeners. Disordered water balance to prevent dehydration
should be addressed, as well as regulation of heart rate, because bradycardia is seen in some patients (usually with decreased core temperature), though cardiac pacemakers are rarely indicated.
Neural crest tumors should be assessed and resected by a pediatric
surgeon together with a pediatric oncologist, because the sheer size of
these benign tumors creates serious compromise to surrounding tissues. If no tumor is identified initially, screening should continue every
6 months until adulthood, because a malignant neuroblastoma has
been identified in an adolescent ROHHAD patient.
Most critical is the management of hypoventilation. Initial intervention for OSA will likely involve surgical relief of the upper airway
obstruction. This will usually unveil central hypoventilation, and initiation of supported ventilation will be required. If no central hypoventilation is identified, the patient should continue to be vigilantly
monitored by a respiratory physiologist because all ROHHAD patients
will eventually develop central hypoventilation requiring artificial ventilation during sleep at a minimum. Individuals with ROHHAD have
attenuated to absent physiologic responsiveness to hypoxemia/hypercarbia, and they lack behavioral awareness of hypoxemia/hypercarbia.
Optimal oxygenation and ventilation can then be maintained using
a mechanical ventilator with mask initially then, if necessary, by tracheostomy to secure the airway and optimize ventilation. This should
be accompanied by highly trained home nursing and continuous

Paraneoplastic syndromes are rare disorders caused by a neoplasm triggering an altered immune response that aberrantly attacks and destroys
neurons, leading to the nervous system symptoms. An autoimmune or
paraneoplastic basis for ROHHAD has been suggested based on neural
crest tumors occurring in 40% of ROHHAD patients and reports of
encephalitis seen on autopsy. The evidence so far is conflicting, with
some reports supporting the autoimmune hypothesis, whereas others
do not. Further, the onset of ROHHAD symptoms often precedes identification of a neural crest tumor in ROHHAD patients, and in many
cases, neural crest tumors have not been discovered with MRI or even
an autopsy. Of note, with excision of the identified neural crest tumor
there has not been consistent “recovery” from ROHHAD. Rather, the
ROHHAD phenotype continues to “unfold.”

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome is a rare pediatric disorder of the ANS and respiratory control. CCHS is caused by pathogenic variants in the PHOX2B gene, which plays an important role
in the differentiation and development of the ANS from neural crest
progenitor cells (see Chapter 468.2). The hallmark feature of CCHS is
life-­threatening hypoventilation while sleeping (and, in some cases, also
while awake). CCHS patients require artificial ventilatory life support,
typically by tracheostomy and mechanical ventilator. Unlike ROHHAD,
however, CCHS usually presents in the newborn period, although later-­
onset CCHS has been diagnosed after 1 month of age, in later childhood, in adolescence, and even in adulthood. CCHS also presents with
other symptoms of ANS dysregulation, including altered heart rate regulation, vasomotor tone, and temperature regulation, ophthalmologic
manifestations, and reduced gastrointestinal motility. However, CCHS
patients are not obese and only rarely have isolated measures of HD.
When hypoventilation is observed, a simple blood test can confirm a
CCHS diagnosis by looking for pathogenic PHOX2B variants.
Prader-­Willi syndrome (PWS) shares childhood obesity as one of
the most prominent features with ROHHAD. PWS is caused by chromosomal abnormalities at chromosome 15q11-­q13, specifically by a
lack of the paternal contribution at this region (from genomic deletion,
uniparental disomy, or imprinting error), whereas methylation differences, loss of heterozygosity, and pathogenic variants in this region

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2726 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
have been ruled out in a ROHHAD cohort. Infants with PWS present with neonatal hypotonia and failure to thrive (malnutrition). Later,
children with PWS develop extreme hyperphagia and obesity. Other
major symptoms of PWS include intellectual impairment, maladaptive
behaviors, short stature caused by GH insufficiency, hypogonadism,
and SDB. In addition, many PWS patients show signs of ANS dysregulation, including altered temperature perception and regulation, strabismus, and high pain threshold.
ROHHAD should also be distinguished from other obesity-­related
genetic disorders. Smith-­Magenis syndrome, Carpenter syndrome,
and 16p11.2 deletion syndrome present with obesity. However, all of
them are additionally marked by early developmental delay, unlike
ROHHAD, which has normal neurodevelopment in the absence of
cardiorespiratory arrest. Therefore testing for genetic causes of obesity
should be undertaken in obese children whose phenotype does not
appear to match that of ROHHAD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

468.4 Long-­Term Ventilation and Technology
Support: Indications, Principles,
Decision-­Making, Pragmatics, and
Home Provision
Robert J. Graham

INDICATIONS, GOALS, AND DECISION-­MAKING

The decision to implement LMV has many challenges from a diversity of underlying pathophysiology, uncertain disease trajectories, the
development of new condition-­
specific therapies, personal experiences, and values held by providers, patients, parents, and the broader
community, variability in resources, and lack of standards. Although
optimizing gas exchange (i.e., oxygenation and CO2 removal), mitigating the impact of intercurrent respiratory infections, and supporting
neuromuscular-­skeletal limitations, growth, and development remain
among the primary objectives, LMV represents a tool for the comprehensive care of children with complex needs.
LMV has a role within the broad spectrum of palliative care. It is
used proactively to attenuate cumulative morbidities (respiratory and
cardiac) associated with progressive neuromuscular conditions, such
as Duchenne muscular dystrophy. LMV is also used reactively when
acute illness (e.g., acute respiratory distress syndrome or an acute flaccid myelitis) does not resolve. In infants with premature lung disease or
complex airway anomalies, LMV may be implemented as a temporary
measure, as these conditions may improve with maturity or surgical
interventions. LMV can also represent a bridge to lung transplant for
those with intrinsic pulmonary or pulmonary vascular disease. More
commonly, LMV has become a destination therapy to optimize symptom management and prolong life in complex conditions. Etiologies of
the chronic respiratory failure include but are not limited to congenital
anomalies (e.g., complex cardiac conditions, central nervous system
disorders, interruptions in aerodigestive morphogenesis, and skeletal
dysplasias), acquired central neurologic injuries from perinatal, infectious, traumatic, and hypoxic-­ischemic events, metabolic disorders, or
progressive neuromuscular conditions. Progress in other areas of medicine, such as gene-­targeted therapy in spinal muscular atrophy and
myotubular myopathy, may alter the LMV decision-­making landscape
as families foresee the prospect of improvement.

NONINVASIVE AND TRANSTRACHEAL SUPPORTS

The essential modalities for LMV include negative pressure, noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV with either continuous
or biphasic support provided through an occlusive mask interface),
or transtracheal positive pressure. Considerations for a given child
or young adult should include but are not limited to anatomic factors, physiologic goals, long-­term care goals, comfort, tolerability/

compliance, and safety (mobility/portability, monitoring, device availability and backup, training capacity).
Negative pressure devices, such as the cuirass ventilator, do not
require any interface with the face or trachea and are more natural from
a mechanical perspective. The need for oxygen supplementation is not
addressed directly through such a device. NIPPV can address dynamic
upper airway obstruction and can augment respiratory mechanics and
gas exchange. This modality may, however, have limitations if upper
airway obstruction is severe or fixed or the need for oxygen supplementation is high. Masks, prongs, and pillows of varying sizes are available for nasal, oral, combination, and full interface, including those for
infants. A mouthpiece interface has also been demonstrated to be effective and feasible. The choice of continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) versus biphasic positive airway pressure (BiPAP) is dependent
on the underlying pathophysiology. Conceptually, CPAP can overcome
a dynamic upper airway obstruction and allow for spontaneous ventilation, while BiPAP is more versatile in compensating for upper airway
obstruction and supporting lung recruitment and gas exchange. CPAP
is limited to management of mild OSA. In addition, BiPAP may allow
for home escalation for the management of intercurrent illness with
oversight of the medical team. Although NIPPV can be maintained
24 hours a day, efficacy of ventilation, difficult airway considerations
(i.e., whether the child can anatomically be intubated), developmental
needs, implications for midface hypoplasia, and secretion clearance are
among factors that affect the decision to pursue tracheostomy placement and invasive LMV.
Transtracheal LMV provides the most secure and effective respiratory support. Fixed and dynamic upper airway obstruction is bypassed
with tracheostomy tube placement. Secretions are more readily cleared
from the lower airway. Positive pressure and oxygen delivery via a tracheostomy tube more consistently address primary impairments in
gas exchange (within limits) as well as mechanical disadvantages from
neuromuscular insufficiency and restrictive disease. When possible,
placement of a tracheostomy tube in a child should be coordinated at
an institution with pediatric expertise, including in long-­term tracheostomy care, because the short-­term morbidities and, potentially, mortality are not insignificant.
Individuals using NIPPV are at risk for pressure ulcerations on the
face and on the scalp. Proper fit of the interface must be assured because
a tighter fit is not necessarily commensurate with better support. Alternating masks on a regular basis may alleviate pressure on a given site.
Additional nonadhesive dressings can also be used to facilitate the
mask seal and minimize skin breakdown. For those with a tracheostomy tube in place, care of tracheostomy ties and regular assessment
of the stoma are required. Moisture-­wicking dressings can attenuate
risk of maceration, but their use should be balanced against the value
of exposure to air for drying. Stomal assessment should include evaluation for granulation, fissures, and traction created by additional torque
from ventilator tubing, which should be maintained midline and without weight displacement on the tracheostomy tube itself. Any areas of
integument interruption are potential niduses for infection and of great
concern for immunocompromised hosts.

AUGMENTED SECRETION CLEARANCE
See Chapter 468.1.

AERODIGESTIVE AND COMMUNICATION
CONSIDERATIONS

Assessment of swallowing and speaking capacity should be part of an
assessment for LMV and may help guide the modality. Implementation
of noninvasive or transtracheal supports will not further impair either
of these functions. Rather, the underlying condition is the primary
determinant. This consideration is most notable in children or young
adults with neurologic injury or neuromuscular conditions. Decision-­
making around placement of a transabdominal gastric or gastrojejunal
enteral feeding tube, if not already in place, should coincide with decisions around LMV. Nasogastric tubes, it should be appreciated, may
impair the NIPPV mask seal and cause laryngeal irritation in the long
term. Antireflux surgery (i.e., fundoplication) should also be discussed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
at this time as providers consider ongoing implications of esophageal
reflux, aerophagia, and challenges maintaining jejunostomy tubes.
Use of NIPPV must be approached cautiously in those with impaired
swallowing, as positive pressure will increase the risk of macroaspiration and microaspiration. Individuals using NIPPV can eat and drink
while on support with risk versus benefit determination and assessment
of impact on quality of life. Aerophagia on NIPPV is also problematic, regardless of bulbar function and swallowing capacity; abdominal
distention is uncomfortable, contributes to satiety and vomiting risk,
and further impairs respiratory mechanics with decreased functional
residual capacity and increased inspiratory workload. If a gastrostomy
is present, active evacuation of swallowed air and use of passive venting
tubes can be helpful.
Children with swallowing capacity can continue to eat and drink
by mouth with a tracheostomy tube in place on LMV. The presence
of a cuffed tracheostomy tube does not prevent aspiration if swallowing is impaired. Speaking may be facilitated by LMV, as settings can
be increased or a speaking valve used to increased airflow across the
vocal cords. Regardless, multidisciplinary care with a speech-­language
pathologist, feeding specialist, and augmented communication services
can be helpful for many children and their families using LMV. Conditioned aversions to oral stimulation can be challenging for infants, but
developmental gains should not be impeded by LMV.

GAS EXCHANGE AND VENTILATOR STRATEGIES

Pressure-­or volume-­regulated modes, spontaneous or controlled settings, and mixed modes are all feasible for NIPPV and transtracheal
supports with new devices. The appropriate support should coincide
with oxygenation and ventilation goals on a case-­by-­case basis. Consideration, however, should be given to the site of care and contingencies
for presentation to acute cure during intercurrent illness or emergency.
Providers should assess limitations in oxygen supplementation outside
of the hospital; measured or estimated delivered fractional inspired
oxygen (Fio2) will inform families and providers of capacity when adding oxygen in liters/minute flow to the ventilator circuit; dilution can
have a dramatic effect, and achieving Fio2 >0.60 may be difficult when
oxygen is added to a home ventilator circuit. Safety allowances should
also account for the duration of portable oxygen provision, which is
based upon liter flow and tank/reservoir volume.
Monitoring of CO2 in the homecare setting is not usual, although
portable end-­tidal CO2 devices are available. Conditions such as CCHS
warrant vigilance, and parameters for implementation, or titration, of
mechanical ventilation should be discussed with families. Recognition
that significant and indolent hypercapnia can precede hypoxia is necessary, and long-­term effects on cerebral and pulmonary vasculature
should be considered. In the absence of direct CO2 monitoring, periodic measurement of serum bicarbonate may be helpful to assess for
renal compensation for altered CO2 clearance; however, interpretation
may be altered in the presence of diuretic therapy, metabolic disease,
or ketogenic diets.

CARDIOPULMONARY INTERACTIONS

Closely linked to the gas-­exchange goals are considerations for cardiopulmonary interactions. Although there are subtle implications for systemic venous return of any form of positive pressure ventilation, LMV
can be used to decrease transmural myocardial load and to optimize
right ventricular afterload through lung recruitment and pulmonary vascular reactivity. The prolonged survival of young males with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy is in part the result of consistent respiratory support
to optimize lung health and to attenuate myocardial dysfunction. Primary or secondary pulmonary hypertension, whether overt or indolent,
requires consideration of oxygenation and ventilation goals. Echocardiograms are not required for all children or young adults with LMV, but
this modality may be helpful to guide management in cohorts with congenital heart lesions, cardiomyopathies, severe obstructive pulmonary
disease, significant central dysregulation, and on a case-­by-­case basis.
When considering gas-­exchange goals and cardiopulmonary interactions, providers must also consider daytime and nocturnal differences. Neuromuscular-­derived hypoventilation is more prominent at

2727

night, as is upper airway obstructive disease; the latter is more important for those using noninvasive LMV. Daytime support provision
must account for increased oxygen consumption and demand based on
variable activity and stressors, including environmental temperature.
Providers and families must factor in mobility, behavioral tolerance,
and quality of life.

CHEST WALL/THORACIC CONFIGURATION

Positive pressure through LMV in early childhood for children with
neuromuscular conditions and/or restrictive lung disease is also used to
improve thoracic compliance and configuration. Lung inflation can be
used to attenuate the impact of thoracic asphyxiation as well as progressive parasol chest deformation in diaphragm-­dependent conditions,
such spinal muscular atrophy. This use has implications for atelectasis
and secretion inspissation, associated pulmonary vasoconstriction, and
cumulative restrictive or asymmetric pulmonary mechanics.

NUTRITION AND WEIGHT GAIN
See Chapter 468.1.

DEVELOPMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS

Decisions regarding the LMV modality, noninvasive or transtracheal,
requires consideration of development as well. Beyond safety factors,
tolerance of interventions, availability of appropriate-­sized interfaces,
and portability, there remains substantial subjectivity with respect
to perspective on the implication for social interactions (i.e., devices
covering the face versus a device in the neck). Although there are no
published series, long-­term or near-­continuous NIV also has implications for midface hypoplasia and potentially compounds upper airway
obstructive symptoms, as is evident by images of BiPAP faces. Swallowing and speech capacity primarily reflect the child’s underlying condition and conditioned aversions rather than the LMV itself.

PROJECTED INTERVENTIONS AND NEEDS

The trajectory and management of the underlying disease, as well as
symptom management, are the primary drivers in determining the
need and duration of LMV. Stakeholders should also consider future
interventions, specifically surgical procedures. LMV, noninvasive or
transtracheal, can be used to optimize perioperative standing and facilitate recovery and provision of opiate-­based analgesia that could alter
respiratory drive. The maintenance of a tracheostomy tube in anticipation of sequential surgeries (e.g., spinal instrumentation, craniofacial and airway reconstruction, or serial cardiac interventions) may be
required for practical reasons but also minimizes the need for repeated
intubation.

PREPARING FOR THE LIVED EXPERIENCE OF LMV
AND OTHER TECHNOLOGY SUPPORTS

Emotional challenges are associated with the integration of technology supports into “routine” care and assuming an altered role as a parent and care provider. Addressing practical needs, however, can help
attenuate some of the anxiety and allow families to focus on, or revisit,
the global goals of care, quality of life, and the role of technology. The
family will need to consider each of the following implications.
Financial (e.g., insurance, subsidies, alternative funding, and parental employment): Independent of personal resources, the majority of
families with children requiring technology assistance report some
degree of financial burden. These costs arise from the direct outlay for
equipment and medications, lost work time or need to discontinue/
change vocations, home adaptations, and other indirect costs. Accessing a financial counselor or case manager may help identify and navigate through local, state/regional, and government/federal resources.
Additional considerations should also be paid to personal trusts, wills,
and estate planning, as all of these have implications for long-­term benefits and financial supports for the individual with special healthcare
needs.
Equipment and supplies: Ideally, the equipment intended for use at
home will be tested before discharge to home. Testing ensures proper
function and any tolerance. Electrical compatibility with the home

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2728 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
service should be confirmed. Delivery of backup devices (e.g., tracheostomy tubes, including a smaller size for contingency planning; batteries
for ventilators; and portable oxygen tanks as a supplement to electric
oxygen concentrators) and emergency supplies (e.g., self-­
inflating
respiratory bags, epinephrine for those who have allergy histories, or
prophylactic antiepileptic medication for those prone to breakthrough
seizures) should be confirmed. Medication supplies and refills should
be sufficient to allow for the scheduling of follow-­up visits. Providers
responsible for recertification or reordering should be identified.
Training: Standards for training and demonstration of competency
vary among institutions and across providers. Families and their medical teams should come to an agreement on minimum safety preparation and the number of responsible parties available to assist in the
home. Hospital-­based training around ventilator use and troubleshooting, central-­line care, tracheostomy tube exchanges and suctioning,
wound care, and other interventions could include basic life support
classes and one-­on-­one sessions with nurses, respiratory therapists,
or other staff, with hands-­on or mannequin simulation. Assumption
of full care by families while in the hospital can be informative for all
stakeholders and reassuring to families; supported replication of the
demands of homecare before discharge is ideal.
Augmented staff: Home nursing, hospice, personal care assistants,
extended family, and friends represent additional resources for the
child and their family. Allowances vary based on the child’s age, independence, medical condition, technology dependence, goals of care,
and other factors. These individuals may require additional training,
but augmenting numbers of proficient homecare providers is crucial
for safety and consistency of care. When considering homecare provision, families should consider the type of personnel and how additional supports would allow the child to attend school, the parent to
work or maintain the household, continue care when the parent is sick
or incapacitated, or assist with other children. The challenges of establishing, training, and maintaining a home staff require time and tolerance, recognizing that the child’s safety is the priority.
Monitoring: Conceptually, monitoring is used to detect early physiologic changes, determine adequacy of LMV, and minimize cumulative morbidities or risk of mortality. Continuous direct observation
is not practical, or often desirable, in the community setting. Recommendations for monitoring children and young adults on LMV vary
based on underlying vulnerability, care setting, activity (e.g., home,
long-­term care facility, school, or in transport via car), and adjuvant
supports (e.g., home nursing or personal care assistant). Pulse oximetry can be used intermittently or on a continuous basis, with oxygen
and heart rate parameters determined on a case-­by-­case basis. Typically, capnography is not available except in cases of central hypoventilation syndromes but can complement oximetry. Internal ventilator
alarm settings for both NIPPV and transtracheal ventilators are used
to monitor high-­and low-­pressure parameters and minute ventilation.
Stakeholders must acknowledge, however, that internal alarms may be
insufficient in the setting of a large mask or peritracheal leak or in the
event of a device malfunction.
The child’s individual risks and the environmental circumstances
drive the balance of extrinsic monitoring (e.g., pulse oximetry and
heart rate) and intrinsic device alarms. There are also pragmatic considerations of signal-­to-­noise when determining monitoring parameters; recurrent false alarms will desensitize providers and may disturb
a child’s sleep; conversely, wide alarm parameters circumvent early
warning systems with significant consequences. Alarm fatigue, as
experienced by hospital-­based providers, should be discussed, as it can
be of great consequence where the resources are not as robust. Simple
audio and video monitors (i.e., video cameras) can be used to augment
surveillance and may help families in their activities of daily living.
Adaptations to the homecare setting: Modifications to the home
may be required to ease care and optimize safety. Ramps for wheelchair
access will permit ingress and egress. Lift systems can minimize physical burden and injury risk to providers. Doorways can be expanded to
permit access to multiple rooms. Alternative bath and toileting accommodations may be needed. Electrical system upgrades with grounding

and increased amperage are often required for equipment demand and
safety.
Transportation: Discharge planning for a child or young adult with
technology dependence should include transportation to school, community programs, routine family activities, and scheduled or urgent
medical services. Proximity (rural or urban), the child’s mobility,
weather, and the need for monitoring en route are other considerations.
Adaptive car seats or car beds can be purchased. Personal vehicles may
need expensive modifications, including lifts and power inverters.
Allowances may also be required for one person to drive while another
(i.e., nurse, parent, or care assistant) tends to the child. If traveling long
distances, perhaps on vacation, advanced planning might include identification of hospitals along the route and reciprocal equipment companies to assist with unexpected supply needs.
Air transportation: If a family anticipates travel by plane, contingencies should be made for oxygen support at altitude, recognizing
that most commercial airlines pressurize their cabins to the equivalent
of 7,000-­8,000 feet. Portable oxygen sources may have less liter flow
capacity than stationary or home devices; there is also a need to differentiate continuous versus on-­demand flow options. Space and limited supplies inflight should be considerations. Power wheelchairs are
prone to damage when placed in cargo holds, and ground crews likely
require explicit instructions. Providers may need to write letters for
airport security and airlines for excess baggage, electronic equipment,
medication, and fluid allowance. Families can also consider sending
additional supplies to the final destination in advance.
Environmental stressors: Extreme temperatures, heat or cold, variability in humidity, and other environmental variables can greatly
affect the well-­being of a child with underlying cardiorespiratory insufficiency or other special healthcare needs. Home adaptations to permit climate control for the child’s room may be required. Families may
consider prewarming, or cooling, vehicles for routine excursions, and
limitations on day-­to-­day activities are warranted at times. Augmented
hydration needs should be reviewed with medical providers, along
with routine sunscreen and preventive measures.
Preparation for transition to the homecare setting may include a
period of quiescence, depending on the circumstances and family preferences. Establishing a period of stability, when there has been no need
to alter supports, may minimize unplanned readmissions.

Community Resources

The transition from the acute care or rehabilitation facility to homecare setting is often much anticipated and welcomed. This step can also
be frightening and overwhelming, whether it represents the first time
home or a return after an acute illness or planned surgery. Hospital-­
based providers can partner with families to alleviate some anxiety and
to avoid potential pitfalls through proactive engagement. Hand-­off to
outpatient and community stakeholders can include the following:
The community medical practice: Updates on problem lists, projected follow-­up, medication and equipment needs, routine health
maintenance and preventive measures (e.g., immunizations), special
considerations for nutrition, identification of specialty providers and
follow-­up schedules, and case-­specific risks.
First responders: Confirmation that the family has the capacity to
call emergency services, outreach to police and ambulance services to
outline baseline needs, special condition-­specific interventions or precautions, identification of equipment that may need to be taken with
the child in the event of an emergency, determination of emergency
destination (i.e., local hospital or referral center), and clarification of
resuscitation status and life-­sustaining therapies.
Therapy programs: Physical, occupational, speech-­language/feeding, and other therapists benefit from hospital-­based assessments and
outlines of expectations, restrictions, and uncertainties.
Educational programs/schools/day habilitation: Integration into
community services requires evaluation of developmental needs and
potential adaptive settings, equipment, services, staffing, and transportation for all ages.
Power and water: Alerting local housing, social, power, and water
authorities to medical necessities can facilitate prioritization of service

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 468 u Chronic Respiratory Insufficiency
restoration during natural disasters or other interruptions and identify
programs to defray incurred costs with increased technology-­driven
electrical usage (e.g., home ventilators, oxygen concentrators, and climate control).
Families may find additional resources through faith-­based institutions, nonprofit and advocacy groups (e.g., Kiwanis, Shriners, Boy
Scouts), and condition-­specific entities, such as the Muscular Dystrophy Association. Outreach to other families with similar circumstances
can also be helpful with the caveat that their recommendations reflect
their own goals and lived experience with special healthcare needs.

Subacute Care

Local resources for medical services should be identified in advance.
This begins with the primary care and first responders but extends to
local and regional hospitals. It is important to determine the range of
services available and to identify specific providers who would familiarize themselves with a given case. The child with technology dependence will experience intercurrent illnesses or unexpected accidents
that require evaluation, but may not always necessitate transport to
tertiary care or referral centers. Individual care plans can be developed
in conjunction with the family and local providers and may include
thresholds for transfer.
Families should also consider bringing home equipment and supplies when presenting to urgent and acute care settings. Devices such
as pediatric NIPPV masks and cough-­assist machines or compounded
medications may not be available at every facility. Short-­term evaluations may become protracted, and lack of routine care provision may
compound the immediate issues.

Emergency and Acute Care

Providers and families should acknowledge that children with special healthcare needs (CSHCN) and LMV are at risk for repeated
hospitalization. Progression of underlying illnesses (e.g., heart failure), planned surgical interventions (e.g., spinal instrumentation,
bronchoscopy surveillance, tendon releases), or superimposed acute
illnesses (e.g., pneumonia, gastroenteritis, appendicitis, recurrent
seizures) may necessitate readmission. Those children who are technology dependent have a higher likelihood of requiring critical care
services because of the nature of their needs and their vulnerability. Preventable equipment-­related issues may be obviated through
the planning described previously. Once hospitalized, CSHCN are at
greater risk of medical error and incur more interventions when compared with otherwise healthy children. Parents should be encouraged
to develop a medical passport and reference list of providers to facilitate communication and consistency of care. Referencing established
care guidelines and, again, developing individualized care plans may
be helpful.

Quality of Life

CSHCN of increasing complexity and technology dependence are
thriving in the homecare setting as a result of advances in medical care,
shared decision-­making, community services, and most notably, extensive, vigilant, and proactive care efforts by their families. Adaptations
allow for participation in all aspects of family, school, and community
activities. Although individual trajectory and subsequent needs may be
difficult to predict, all stakeholders should acknowledge the impact of
chronic care on the family unit and health-­related quality of life. The
evolution of a medical home for this cohort of children will require
provisions for family mental health, sibling supports, respite, and other
measures to optimize outcomes.

TRANSITIONING FROM ACUTE CARE TO
REHABILITATION OR COMMUNITY SETTING

Disposition of children and young adults with LMV will vary based on
their relative stability, local support services, and goals of care. A proactive, flexible, comprehensive care model is required to assure safe and
effective provision. The impacts of care needs on the child and family
are inextricably linked.

2729

ROUTINE HEALTH MAINTENANCE
Airway Evaluation

There is no standard for regular airway assessment for children with
LMV, specifically those with transtracheal support, but annual evaluation should represent the minimum. Office-­based transtracheal tube
endoscopy can facilitate assessment of tube upsizing for linear growth,
presence of granulation tissue, airway inflammation, and general
mucosal integrity. Formal diagnostic laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy under general anesthesia are required to assess for suprastomal
and laryngeal-­level pathology along with the rare acquired trachea-­
esophageal fistulae. Independent of routine evaluation, recurrent or
unexpected tracheal bleeding may warrant evaluation for a trachea-­
vascular fistula via CT angiogram and bronchoscopy.

Bacterial Colonization

Chronic respiratory failure lends itself to airway bacterial colonization
because of alterations in secretion clearance, aerodigestive interactions, the presence of artificial airways with the development of biofilms, and other factors. Hydrophilic and gram-­negative bacteria (e.g.,
Pseudomonas, Serratia, and Stenotrophomonas) are common. There is
no standard of care for determining pathogenicity versus colonization.
Use of systemic or inhaled antibacterial agents to decrease colonization load, frequency of tracheostomy tube exchanges to reduce biofilm
accumulation, utility of viral screening, and threshold for treatment of
an acute lower airway process or tracheitis is provider and case dependent. Providers should appreciate that recurrent empiric antibacterial
treatment may select for resistant bacterial strains and has implications
for enteric bacterial colonization.

Dental Care

Routine daily and office-­based dental care should follow standard recommendations for all children. Extrapolation from the acute care setting and general population would suggest that oropharyngeal care and
minimization of bacterial overgrowth would affect the risk of superimposed respiratory illness in LMV and long-­term cardiovascular outcomes, respectively. Special consideration with respect to aspiration
risk, developmental tolerance, and prophylaxis and procedural sedation for intervention may require engagement of specialty providers.

Immunizations

No immunizations are specifically indicated for individuals receiving
LMV. Routine provision is recommended, including seasonal vaccinations for viral pathogens. Expansion of exposure precautions, as experienced during the COVID-­19 pandemic, also remain essential.

Radiography, Laboratory, Polysomnography, and
Pulmonary Function Testing

There are no recommendations for routine chest radiography, standard
or cross-­sectional, in the context of LMV. The cumulative radiation
exposure would need to be considered. Gas exchange adequacy can
often be assessed noninvasively. Venous, capillary, or arterial puncture for determining resting and long-­term oxygenation and ventilation status may be of limited utility and validity, as intercurrent illness,
technique with tourniquet, and associated agitation will alter results.
Condition-­specific (e.g., muscular dystrophy) recommendations for
polysomnography, spirometry, or pulmonary function testing have
been established and may be extrapolated with some validity. Regular
assessment may also be helpful when gauging disease trajectory, LMV
titration, safety parameters, and weaning potential.

LONG-­TERM MECHANICAL VENTILATION
WEANING AND TRACHEAL DECANNULATION

Reassessment of the role of LMV should be part of routine and
family-­centered care. Determination should include but is not limited to the factors described earlier with open discussion of goals of
care, developmental appropriateness, physiologic and anatomic consideration, growth implications, new treatments, and contingencies.
As there are currently no definitive conditioning regimens or LMV

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2730 Part XVII u The Respiratory System
weaning strategies, providers can determine the value of time off versus decreased level of supports as well as pragmatic considerations for
the child and family. Continuity of care, however, holds implicit value.
Monitoring provision may need to be increased during weaning.
If tracheal decannulation is required, a formal diagnostic laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy should be considered to rule out granulation (suprastomal and infrastomal) and dynamic airway collapse
that may prohibit immediate tracheostomy tube removal. If positive
pressure or oxygen supplementation will still be required after decannulation, determination of the child’s tolerance of noninvasive ventilation or other interventions (e.g., cough assist) should be determined in
advance. Desensitization may be required.

Ultimately, LMV has an increasing role in the support of children
and young adults with chronic respiratory failure. Decision-­making
about any technology supports can be challenging from an emotional,
practical, and ethical perspective. As families and other stakeholders
explore options, the goal at these consequential junctures should be
to align expectations, hopes, and potential lived experiences. Everyone
should acknowledge the uncertainties and the potential to withhold,
withdraw, and regularly reassess, even in the community setting. As
this population of CSHCN and technology dependence ages, transition
from pediatric to adult services should also be anticipated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The Cardiovascular System
Section 1

Developmental Biology
of the Cardiovascular
System
Chapter 469

Cardiac Development
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
INTRODUCTION

Cardiac defects have traditionally been grouped by common morphologic patterns: for example, abnormalities of the outflow tracts
(conotruncal lesions such as tetralogy of Fallot and truncus arteriosus)
and abnormalities of atrioventricular septation (primum atrial septal defect, atrioventricular septal defect). These morphologic categories may be revised or eventually supplanted by new categories as our
understanding of the genetic and molecular basis of congenital heart
disease progresses.

469.1 Early Cardiac Morphogenesis
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
In the early presomite embryo, the first identifiable cardiac progenitor
cell clusters migrate from the primitive streak and are arranged in the
anterior lateral plate mesoderm on both sides of the embryo’s central
axis in a horseshoe pattern, also known as the cardiac crescent. These
cell clusters are marked by their expression of the basic helix-­loop-­
helix (bHLH) transcription factor mesoderm posterior 1 (MESP1) and
subsequently form paired cardiac tubes by 18 days of gestation. This
cardiac progenitor zone is shaped by a balanced gradient of positive and
negative signals arising from the tissues surrounding the cardiac mesodermal cells, with signals from the surrounding ventral/lateral tissues
promoting cardiogenesis through signaling molecules such as bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP), sonic hedgehog (SHH), and fibroblast
growth factor 8 (FGF8) and signals from dorsal/medial structures
such as members of the canonical Wnt/β-­catenin pathway inhibiting
cardiogenesis. Cardiogenic signals activate the genetic expression of
cardiac-­specific transcription factors (e.g., TBX, GATA, NKX2.5) to
activate developmental cardiac gene expression The paired tubes fuse
in the midline on the ventral surface of the embryo to form the primitive heart tube by 22 days. This straight heart tube is composed of an
outer myocardial layer, an inner endocardium, and a middle layer of
extracellular matrix (ECM) known as the cardiac jelly. There are two
distinct cell lineages: the first heart field (regulated mainly by NKX2.5)
provides precursor cells for the left ventricle and parts of the atria; the
second heart field (regulated mainly by ISL1) provides precursors for
the right ventricle, outflow tracts, and caudal aspects of the atria. Pre-­
myocardial cells, including epicardial cells and cells derived from the
neural crest, continue their migration into the region of the heart tube.

PART

XVIII

Regulation of this early phase of cardiac morphogenesis is controlled
in part by the interaction of specific signaling molecules or ligands,
usually expressed by one cell type, with specific receptors, usually
expressed by another cell type. Positional information is conveyed to
the developing cardiac mesoderm by factors such as retinoids (isoforms
of vitamin A), which bind to specific nuclear receptors and regulate
gene transcription. Migration of epithelial cells into the developing
heart tube is directed by ECM proteins (e.g., fibronectin) that interact
with cell surface receptors (the integrins). The clinical importance of
these signaling pathways is revealed by the spectrum of cardiac teratogenic effects caused by the retinoid-­like drug isotretinoin.
As early as 20-­22 days, before cardiac looping, the embryonic heart
begins to contract and exhibit phases of the cardiac cycle that are surprisingly similar to those in the mature heart. Morphologists initially
identified segments of the heart tube that were believed to correspond
to structures in the mature heart (Fig. 469.1). The sinus venosus (systemic venous system and part of right atrium), primitive atrium (right
and left atria), primitive ventricle (left ventricle), and bulbus cordis that
can be broken down into three sections (the proximal one third, right
ventricle; mid-­third, conus cordis to outflow tracts; and distal third,
truncus arteriosus to aorta and pulmonary artery). However, this
model is oversimplified. Only the trabecular (most heavily muscularized) portions of the left ventricular myocardium are present in the
early cardiac tube; the cells that will become the inlet portion of the
left ventricle migrate into the cardiac tube at a later stage (after looping is initiated). Even later to appear are the primordial cells that give
rise to the great arteries (truncus arteriosus), including cells derived
from the neural crest, which are not present until after cardiac looping
is complete. Chamber-­specific transcription factors participate in the
differentiation of atria from ventricles and in the right and left ventricles. The bHLH transcription factor gene (HAND2) is expressed in
the developing right ventricle. Disruption of this gene or of other transcriptional factors such as MEF2c in mice leads to hypoplasia of the
right ventricle. Other genetic markers of the second heart field (early
right ventricle) cells include IRX4, TBX20, ISL1, TNNT2, MLC2v, and
TBX1. The transcription factor HAND1 is expressed in the developing
left ventricle and conotruncus and is also critical to their development.
Other genetic markers of the first heart field (early left ventricle) cells
include TBX5, NKX2.5, TNNT2, MLC2v, and HCN4.
One mechanism of how regulation of developmentally coordinated groups of genes is achieved is through the expression of small,
noncoding RNAs known as microRNAs, each of which regulates the
expression of multiple target genes. Another is through modifications
in chromatin, the DNA scaffolding that acts as a controller of gene
expression. Chromatin remodeling mediated by genes or enzymes
such as BRG1, CHD7, histone demethylases, and methyltransferases is
associated with cardiac developmental defects, including septal defects,
dilated cardiomyopathy, and double-­outlet right ventricle.

469.2 Cardiac Looping
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
At approximately 22-­24 days, the heart tube begins to bend ventrally
and toward the right (see Fig. 469.1). The heart is the first organ to
escape from the bilateral symmetry of the early embryo. An asymmetric signaling program that also affects the position of the lungs,
liver, spleen, and gastrointestinal tract determines the direction of
cardiac looping. During gastrulation, before organ formation begins,
asymmetric expression of SHH and nodal (a member of the transforming growth factor beta [TGF-­β] family) are directed in the lateral

2731
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2732 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Weeks

Days
19

3
20

Vasculogenesis in the cardiac region forms the lateral
endocardial tubes

Embryonic folding brings the endocardial tubes together
in the thoracic region
Bulboventricular sulcus
The endocardial tubes fuse to form the primitive heart tube,
which is divided into incipient chambers by sulci

21

Atrioventricular sulcus

22
The heart begins to beat

Splanchnopleuric mesoderm invests the heart tube and forms
the myocardium and cardiac jelly; migrating mesothelial cells
invest the myocardium and form the epicardium

4
23 The heart begins to fold
The septum primum begins to form

28 Folding is complete
The muscular ventricular
septum begins to form
5
33

The atrioventricular valves begin to form
(complete by 3 mo)

35

Right and left
truncoconal ridges
begin to form

6
Superior and inferior
endocardial cushions fuse
to form the septum
intermedium

42
7

46

Definitive atria and auricles are present
The ostium secundum and foramen ovale
form as the septum primum meets
the septum intermedium

The muscular ventricular
septum ceases to grow

8
56

The coronary sinus is formed

63

The semilunar valves are complete

9

Fig. 469.1 Timeline of cardiac morphogenesis. (From Larsen WJ. Essentials of Human Embryology. New York:
Churchill Livingstone; 1998.)

The aortic and pulmonary
outflow tracts and
the ventricles are fully
separated by growth of
the truncoconal ridges

10

mesoderm. These directionality signals set up a concentration gradient
between the right and left sides of the embryo in the expression of critical signaling molecules. This asymmetric signaling is then amplified
and propagated through the transcription factor gene (PITX2), which
is expressed on the left side of the early heart tube, LEFTY1 and left-­
right Dynein (LRD). Interestingly, mice in which LRD has been inactivated display random left-­right (L-­R) orientation of the heart and
abdominal viscera, with 50% of their hearts looping to the right and
50% looping to the left. Other potential mechanisms of cardiac looping include differential growth rates for myocytes on the convex versus
the concave surface of the curve, differential rates of programmed cell
death (apoptosis), and mechanical forces generated within myocardial
cells at the inner and outer edges of the bending heart tube through
their actin cytoskeleton.
Looping brings the future left ventricle leftward and in continuity with the sinus venosus (future left and right atria), whereas the
future right ventricle is shifted rightward and in continuity with the
truncus arteriosus (future aorta and pulmonary artery). This pattern
of development explains the relatively common occurrence of the

TIMELINE. FORMATION OF THE HEART.

cardiac anomalies double-­outlet right ventricle and double-­inlet
left ventricle and the extreme rarity of double-­outlet left ventricle and
double-­inlet right ventricle (see Chapter 479.5). When cardiac looping is abnormal (situs inversus, heterotaxia), the incidence of serious
cardiac malformations is high, and there are usually associated abnormalities in the L-­R patterning of the lungs and abdominal viscera,
including absence of the spleen (asplenia) or multiple small spleens
(polysplenia).

469.3 Cardiac Septation
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
When looping is complete, the external appearance of the heart is
like that of a mature heart; internally, the structure resembles a single
continuous tube, although it now has several bulges resulting in the
appearance of primitive chambers. The common atrium (comprising
both right and left atria) is connected to the primitive ventricle (future

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 469 u Cardiac Development
left ventricle) via the atrioventricular canal. The primitive ventricle is
connected to the bulbus cordis (future right ventricle) via the bulboventricular foramen. The distal portion of the bulbus cordis is connected to
the truncus arteriosus via an outlet segment (the conus).
The heart tube now consists of several layers of myocardium and
a single layer of endocardium separated by cardiac jelly (acellular
ECM secreted by the myocardium). Septation of the heart begins at
approximately day 26 with the ingrowth of large tissue masses, the
endocardial cushions, at both the atrioventricular and conotruncal
junctions (see Fig. 469.1). These cushions consist of protrusions of
ECM (cardiac jelly), which, in addition to their role in development,
also serve a physiologic function as primitive heart valves. Endocardial cells dedifferentiate and migrate into the cardiac jelly in the region
of the endocardial cushions, eventually becoming mesenchymal cells
(endothelial-­mesenchymal transformation) that will form part of the
atrioventricular valves. The endocardium, secondary heart field, and
neural crest all contribute to the formation of the valve leaflets. Besides
direct contribution to valve tissue, these progenitor cells also interact
with each other and with other cells in the heart to orchestrate cardiac
valve development.
Complete septation of the atrioventricular canal occurs with fusion
of the endocardial cushions. Most of the atrioventricular valve tissue is derived from the ventricular myocardium in a process involving undermining of the ventricular walls. Because this process occurs
asymmetrically, the tricuspid valve annulus sits closer to the apex of
the heart than the mitral valve annulus. Physical separation of these
two valves produces the atrioventricular septum, the absence of which
is the primary common defect in patients with atrioventricular canal
defects (see Chapter 475.5). If the process of undermining is incomplete, the right atrioventricular valve may not separate normally from
the ventricular myocardium, a possible cause of Ebstein anomaly (see
Chapter 479.7).
Septation of the atria begins at around 30 days with growth of the
septum primum downward toward the endocardial cushions (see Fig.
469.1). The orifice that remains is the ostium primum. The endocardial
cushions then fuse and, together with the completed septum primum,
divide the atrioventricular canal into right and left segments. A second
opening appears in the posterior portion of the septum primum, the
ostium secundum, and it allows a portion of the fetal venous return to
the right atrium to pass across to the left atrium. Finally, the septum
secundum grows downward, just to the right of the septum primum.
Together with a flap of the septum primum, the ridge of the ostium
secundum forms the foramen ovale, through which fetal blood passes
from the inferior vena cava to the left atrium (see Chapter 470).
Septation of the ventricles begins at about embryonic day 25 with
protrusions of endocardium in both the inlet (primitive ventricle) and
outlet (bulbus cordis) segments of the heart. The inlet protrusions fuse
into the bulboventricular septum and extend posteriorly toward the
inferior endocardial cushion, where they give rise to the inlet and trabecular portions of the interventricular septum. Ventricular septal
defects can occur in any portion of the developing interventricular
septum (see Chapter 475.6). The outlet or conotruncal septum develops from ridges of cardiac jelly, similar to the atrioventricular cushions. These ridges fuse to form a spiral septum that brings the future
pulmonary artery into communication with the anterior and rightward right ventricle and the future aorta into communication with the
posterior and leftward left ventricle. Differences in cell growth of the
outlet septum lead to lengthening of the segment of smooth muscle
beneath the pulmonary valve (conus), a process that separates the tricuspid and pulmonary valves. In contrast, disappearance of the segment beneath the aortic valve leads to fibrous continuity of the mitral
and aortic valves. Within the lumen of distal outflow tract, local tissue swellings (truncal cushions) arise and are later populated by mesenchymal cells originating from the neural crest, participating in the
formation of the semilunar (pulmonary and aortic) valves. Defects
in these processes are responsible for conotruncal and aortic arch
defects (truncus arteriosus, tetralogy of Fallot, pulmonary atresia,
double-­outlet right ventricle, interrupted aortic arch), a group of cardiac anomalies often associated with deletions of the DiGeorge critical

2733

region of chromosome 22q11 (see Chapters 472 and 473). The transcription factor gene (TBX1) has been implicated as a candidate gene,
which may be responsible for DiGeorge syndrome. Several genes have
been implicated in valve formation, including PTPN11, which encodes
the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-­2, and when present in a mutated form,
is one of the genes responsible for Noonan syndrome, associated with
pulmonary valve stenosis, and NOTCH1, a regulator of cell differentiation associated with aortic valve disease.

469.4 Aortic Arch Development
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
The aortic arch, head and neck vessels, proximal pulmonary arteries,
and ductus arteriosus develop from the aortic sac, arterial arches, and
dorsal aortae. When the straight heart tube develops, the distal outflow
portion bifurcates into the right and left first aortic arches, which join
the paired dorsal aortae (Fig. 469.2). The dorsal aortae will fuse to form
the descending aorta. The proximal aorta from the aortic valve to the
left carotid artery arises from the aortic sac. The first and second arches
largely regress by about 22 days, with the first aortic arch giving rise to
the maxillary artery and the second to the stapedial and hyoid arteries. The third arches participate in the formation of the innominate
artery and the common and internal carotid arteries. The right fourth
arch gives rise to the innominate and right subclavian arteries, and the
left fourth arch participates in formation of the segment of the aortic
arch between the left carotid artery and the ductus arteriosus. The fifth
arch does not persist as a major structure in the mature circulation.
The sixth arches join the more distal pulmonary arteries, with the right
sixth arch giving rise to a portion of the proximal right pulmonary
artery and the left sixth arch to the proximal left pulmonary artery and
to the ductus arteriosus. The aortic arch between the ductus arteriosus
and left subclavian artery is derived from the left-­sided dorsal aorta,
whereas the aortic arch distal to the left subclavian artery is derived
from the fused right and left dorsal aortae. Abnormalities in development of the paired aortic arches are responsible for right aortic arch,
double aortic arch, and vascular rings (see Chapter 481.1).

469.5 Cardiac Differentiation
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
The process by which the totipotential cells of the early embryo become
committed to specific cell lineages is termed differentiation. Precardiac
mesodermal cells differentiate into mature cardiac muscle cells with an
appropriate complement of cardiac-­specific contractile elements, regulatory proteins, receptors, and ion channels. Expression of the contractile protein myosin occurs at an early stage of cardiac development,
even before fusion of the bilateral heart primordia. Differentiation in
these early mesodermal cells is regulated by signals from the anterior
endoderm, a process known as induction. Several putative early signaling molecules include fibroblast growth factor, activin, and insulin.
Signaling molecules interact with receptors on the cell surface; these
receptors activate second messengers, which in turn activate specific
nuclear transcription factor genes (GATA-­4, MEF2, NKX, bHLH, and
retinoic acid receptor family) that induce the expression of specific
gene products to regulate cardiac differentiation. Some of the primary
disorders of cardiac muscle, the cardiomyopathies, may be related to
defects in some of these signaling molecules (see Chapter 488).
Developmental processes are chamber specific. Early in development, ventricular myocytes express both ventricular and atrial isoforms of several proteins, such as atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and
myosin light chain (MLC). Mature ventricular myocytes do not express
ANP and express only a ventricular-­specific MLC 2v isoform, whereas
mature atrial myocytes express ANP and an atrial-­specific MLC 2a isoform. Heart failure (see Chapter 491), volume overload (see Chapters
475 and 477), and pressure overload hypertrophy (see Chapter 476)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2734 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
3rd aortic
arch

4th aortic
arch

6th aortic
arch

Truncus
arteriosus

4
5 6

Aortic
sac

External carotid artery

Left common
carotid artery

External
carotid
arteries

Left dorsal aorta

3

Internal carotid
artery

Left subclavian
artery

4
Pharyngeal arch
arteries

Aortic sac

5
6

Ductus
arteriosus

Truncus arteriosus
(partly divided into
aortic and pulmonary
arteries)

Arch of aorta

Right pulmonary
artery

Ligamentum
arteriosum

Left dorsal aorta
Pulmonary arteries

Right subclavian artery

Left pulmonary
artery

Ascending aorta
Left subclavian artery
Descending aorta

7th intersegmental artery

A

Dorsal aortae

Internal
carotid
arteries

Left dorsal
aorta

3

Aortic sac

B

C

Fig. 469.2 Schematic drawings illustrating the changes that result during transformation of the truncus arteriosus, aortic sac, aortic arches, and
dorsal aortae into the adult arterial pattern. The vessels that are not shaded or colored are not derived from these structures. A, Aortic arches at
6 weeks; by this stage, the first two pairs of aortic arches have largely disappeared. B, Aortic arches at 7 weeks; the parts of the dorsal aortae and
aortic arches that normally disappear are indicated by broken lines. C, Arterial vessels of 6-­mo-­old infant. (From Moore KL, Persaud TVN, Torchia M.
The Developing Human. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2007.)

are associated with a recapitulation of fetal cell phenotypes in which
mature myocytes re-­express fetal proteins. Because different isoforms
have different contractile behavior (fast vs slow activation, high vs low
adenosine triphosphatase activity), expression of different isoforms
may have important functional consequences.

469.6 Developmental Changes in Cardiac
Function
Daniel Bernstein and William R. Goodyer
During development, the composition of the myocardium undergoes
profound changes that result in an increase in the number and size
of myocytes. During prenatal life, this process involves myocyte division (hyperplasia), whereas after the first few postnatal weeks, subsequent cardiac growth occurs mostly by an increase in myocyte size
(hypertrophy). The myocytes themselves change shape from round to
cylindrical, the proportion of myofibrils (which contain the contractile
apparatus) increases, and the myofibrils become more regular in their
orientation.
The plasma membrane (known as the sarcolemma in myocytes) is the
location of the ion channels and transmembrane receptors that regulate the exchange of chemical information from the cell surface to the
cell interior. Ion fluxes through these channels control the processes of
depolarization and repolarization. Developmental changes have been
described for the sodium-­
potassium pump, the sodium-­
hydrogen
exchanger, and voltage-­dependent calcium channels. As the myocyte
matures, extensions of the sarcolemma develop toward the interior of
the cell (the T-­tubule system), which dramatically increases its surface
area and enhances rapid activation of the myocyte. Regulation of the
membrane’s α-­ and β-­adrenergic receptors with development enhances
the ability of the sympathetic nervous system to control cardiac function as the heart matures.

The sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), a series of tubules surrounding the myofibrils, is the principal mediator of the intracellular
calcium concentration. Calcium release to the myofibrils for initiation of contraction is mediated by the ryanodine receptor (RYR),
and calcium reuptake for initiation of relaxation is mediated by the
sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA). This SR calcium
transport system is less well developed in immature hearts, which
thus depend more on transport of calcium from outside the cell for
contraction. In a mature heart, the majority of the calcium required
for contraction comes from within the cardiomyocyte via the SR.
This developmental phenomenon may explain the sensitivity of the
infant heart to sarcolemmal calcium channel blockers such as verapamil, which can result in a marked depression in contractility (see
Chapter 484).
The major contractile proteins (myosin, actin, tropomyosin, and
troponin) are organized into the functional unit of cardiac contraction, the sarcomere. Each has several isoforms that are expressed differentially by location (atrium vs ventricle) and by developmental stage
(embryo, fetus, newborn, adult).
Changes in myocardial structure and myocyte biochemistry
result in easily quantifiable differences in cardiac function with
development. Fetal cardiac function is less responsive to changes in
preload (filling volume). Thus the most effective means of increasing cardiac output in the fetus is through increasing the heart rate.
After birth and with further maturation, preload and afterload play
an increasing role in regulating cardiac function. The rate of cardiac
relaxation is also developmentally regulated. The decreased ability
of the immature SR calcium pump (SERCA) to remove calcium
from the contractile apparatus is manifested as a decreased ability
of the fetal heart to enhance relaxation in response to sympathetic
stimulation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 470 u The Fetal to Neonatal Circulatory Transition

Chapter 470

The Fetal to Neonatal
Circulatory Transition
Daniel Bernstein
470.1 The Fetal Circulation
Daniel Bernstein
The transition from the fetal to the postnatal circulation represents one
of the most dramatic circulatory adaptations at any time of life. In the
fetal circulation, the right and left ventricles exist in a parallel circuit,
as opposed to the series circuit of the newborn or adult (Fig. 470.1A).
In the fetus, the placenta provides for gas and metabolite exchange.
Because the lungs do not provide gas exchange, blood is diverted away
from the pulmonary circulation, which is vasoconstricted. Three cardiovascular structures unique to the fetus are important for maintaining this parallel circulation: the ductus venosus, foramen ovale, and
ductus arteriosus.
The placenta is not as efficient an oxygen-­exchange organ as the
lungs, so that umbilical venous partial pressure of oxygen (Po2), the
highest O2 level provided to the fetus, is only 30-­35 mm Hg. Approximately 50% of the umbilical venous blood enters the hepatic circulation, whereas the rest bypasses the liver and joins the inferior vena
cava (IVC) via the ductus venosus, where it partially mixes with poorly
oxygenated IVC blood derived from the lower part of the fetal body.
This combined lower body plus umbilical venous blood flow (Po2 of
26-­28 mm Hg) enters the right atrium and is preferentially directed by
a flap of tissue at the right atrium–IVC junction, the eustachian valve,
across the foramen ovale to the left atrium (see Fig. 470.1B). This is the
major source of left ventricular (LV) blood flow in the fetus, because
pulmonary venous return from the vasoconstricted lungs is minimal.
LV blood is then ejected into the ascending aorta, where it supplies
predominantly the fetal upper body and brain.
Fetal superior vena cava (SVC) blood, which is considerably less
oxygenated (Po2 of 12-­14 mm Hg) than IVC blood, enters the right
atrium and preferentially flows across the tricuspid valve, rather than
the foramen ovale, into the right ventricle. From the right ventricle,
this blood is ejected into the pulmonary artery. Because the pulmonary
arterial circulation is vasoconstricted, only approximately 5% of right
ventricular (RV) outflow enters the lungs. The major portion of this
blood bypasses the lungs and flows right to left through the ductus arteriosus into the descending aorta to perfuse the lower part of the fetal
body, including providing flow to the placenta via the two umbilical
arteries. Thus the upper part of the fetal body (including the coronary
and cerebral arteries and those to the upper extremities) is perfused
exclusively from the left ventricle with blood that has a slightly higher
Po2 than the blood perfusing the lower part of the fetal body, which is
derived mostly from the right ventricle. Only a small volume of blood
from the ascending aorta (10% of fetal cardiac output) flows all the way
around the aortic arch (aortic isthmus) to the descending aorta.
The total fetal cardiac output—the combined output of both the
left and right ventricles—is approximately 450 mL/kg/min. Approximately 65% of descending aortic blood flow returns to the placenta;
the remaining 35% perfuses the fetal organs and tissues. In the human
fetus, RV output is approximately 1.3 times LV flow. Thus during fetal
life the right ventricle is not only pumping against the higher systemic
blood pressure but also performing slightly greater volume work than
the left ventricle. This results in the RV wall being as thick (hypertrophied) as the LV wall during fetal and immediate neonatal life, explaining the unique features of the neonatal electrocardiogram (showing
what would be read as right ventricular hypertrophy in an adult).

2735

Blood flow is believed to be an important determinant of growth of
fetal cardiac chambers, valves, and blood vessels. Thus in the presence
of a narrowing (stenosis) of an upstream structure such as the mitral
valve, flow downstream into the left ventricle is limited and LV growth
may be compromised, which may be one of the mechanisms of hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS; see Chapter 480.10). Similarly,
stenosis of a downstream structure such as the aortic valve can also
disrupt flow into the LV and contribute to HLHS. Fetal cardiac interventional treatments, currently experimental, are aimed at opening
stenotic aortic valves in mid-­gestation fetuses and allowing more normal LV growth. However, the outcome of these procedures does not
enhance LV growth in all patients, suggesting that in the majority of
cases of HLHS there is a different mechanism, suspected to be a defect
in the LV cardiomyocytes themselves (i.e., a cell-­autonomous defect).

470.2 The Transitional Circulation
Daniel Bernstein
At birth, mechanical expansion of the lungs and an increase in arterial
Po2 result in a rapid decrease in pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR).
Concomitantly, removal of the low-­resistance placental circulation
leads to an increase in systemic vascular resistance (SVR). The output
from the right ventricle now flows entirely into the pulmonary circulation, and because PVR becomes lower than SVR, the shunt through
the ductus arteriosus reverses and becomes left to right. Over several
days the high arterial Po2 constricts and eventually closes the ductus
arteriosus, which eventually becomes the ligamentum arteriosum. The
increased volume of pulmonary blood flow returning to the left atrium
from the lungs increases left atrial volume and pressure sufficiently to
close the flap of the foramen ovale functionally, although the foramen
may remain patent on probing with a catheter for several years. A patent foramen ovale can be a source of embolic stroke in later life.
Removal of the placenta from the circulation also results in closure
of the ductus venosus. The left ventricle is now coupled to the high-­
resistance systemic circulation, and its wall thickness and mass begin
to increase. In contrast, the right ventricle is now coupled to the low-­
resistance pulmonary circulation, and its wall thickness and mass
decrease. The left ventricle, which in the fetus pumped blood only
to the upper part of the body and brain, must now deliver the entire
systemic cardiac output (approximately 350 mL/kg/min), an almost
200% increase in output. This marked increase in LV performance is
achieved through a combination of hormonal and metabolic signals,
including an increase in the level of circulating catecholamines and in
the density of myocardial β-­adrenergic receptors, through which catecholamines have their effect.
When superimposed on these dramatic physiologic changes, congenital structural cardiac defects often impede this smooth transition
and greatly increase the burden on the newborn myocardium. Importantly, because the ductus arteriosus and foramen ovale do not close
completely at birth, they can provide a lifesaving pathway for blood to
bypass a congenital defect (the patent ductus arteriosus in tetralogy of
Fallot, pulmonary atresia, coarctation of aorta or HLHS; the foramen
ovale in transposition of the great vessels). Alternatively, persistent
fetal pathways can present an additional stress to the circulation (patent ductus arteriosus in the premature infant). Therapeutic agents can
be used to either maintain these fetal pathways open (e.g., prostaglandin E1) or hasten their closure (e.g., indomethacin). This pharmacology
explains why indomethacin and similar drugs are contraindicated or
used with extreme caution during the third trimester.

470.3 The Neonatal Circulation
Daniel Bernstein
At birth, the fetal circulation must immediately adapt to extrauterine
life as gas exchange is transferred from the placenta to the lungs (see

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2736 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Head
Arm

21

Arm

Fig. 470.1 A, The human circula-

tion before birth (partly after Dawes).
Lung
Red indicates more highly oxygenated blood, and arrows indicate the
Liver
direction of flow. More highly oxygenated blood from the placenta passes
through the foramen ovale from the
Ductus venosus
right to the left atrium, thus bypassing
the lungs. B, Percentages of combined
ventricular output that return to the
fetal heart, that are ejected by each
Umbilical vein
ventricle, and that flow through the
Gut
main vascular channels. Figures are
those obtained from studies of late-­
gestation fetal lambs. Ao, Aorta; DA,
Placenta
ductus arteriosus; IVC, inferior vena
cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle;
PA, pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary
Umbilical artery
veins; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava. (From
Rudolph AM. Congenital Diseases of
A
the Heart. Chicago: Year Book; 1974.)

Chapter 124). Some of these changes are virtually instantaneous with
the first breath, whereas others develop over hours or weeks. With the
onset of breathing and lung ventilation, pulmonary vascular resistance
is greatly decreased because of both active (i.e., Po2-­metabolic-­related)
and passive (i.e., mechanical stretch-­related) pulmonary vasodilation.
In a normal neonate, closure of the ductus arteriosus and the fall in
PVR decreases pulmonary arterial and RV pressures. The largest
decline in PVR from the high fetal levels to the lower “adult” levels in
the human infant usually occurs within 2-­3 days, but may be prolonged
for ≥7 days after birth. However, over the next several weeks of life,
PVR continues to decrease further, now secondary to physical remodeling of the pulmonary vasculature, including thinning of vascular
smooth muscle and recruitment of new vessels. This decrease in PVR
significantly influences the timing of the clinical appearance of many
congenital heart lesions dependent on the relative levels of SVR and
PVR. For example, the left-­to-­right shunt through a large ventricular
septal defect (VSD) may be minimal in the first week after birth, when
PVR is still high. As PVR decreases in the next 1-­2 weeks, the volume
of the left-­to-­right shunt through the VSD increases and eventually
leads to the signs and symptoms of heart failure.
There are several significant differences between the neonatal circulation and that of older infants: (1) right-­to-­left or left-­to-­right shunting may persist across the patent foramen ovale; (2) in the presence
of cardiopulmonary disease, continued patency of the ductus arteriosus may allow left-­to-­right, right-­to-­left, or bidirectional shunting;
(3) the neonatal pulmonary vasculature constricts more vigorously in
response to hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and acidosis; (4) the wall thickness and muscle mass of the neonatal left and right ventricles are
almost equal; and (5) newborn infants at rest have a relatively high oxygen consumption, associated with a relatively high cardiac output. The
newborn cardiac output, indexed to body weight (200 mL/kg/min),
falls in the first 2 months of life to approximately 150 mL/kg/min and
then more gradually to the normal adult cardiac output of 75 mL/kg/
min. Although fetal hemoglobin is beneficial to delivery of oxygen in
the low-­Po2 fetal circulation, the high percentage of fetal hemoglobin
present in the newborn may actually interfere with delivery of oxygen

Ductus arteriosus
31
Lung

10
59 DA

66

Foramen
ovale

RV

PA

Ao

3

7

34
LV

66

Kidney

69

SVC
21
RA

27
LA
7

PV

3
69
Legs

IVC

B

to tissues in the high-­systemic Po2 neonatal circulation, and therefore
adult hemoglobin production begins immediately (see Chapter 124).
The foramen ovale is usually functionally closed by the third month
of life, although it is possible to pass a catheter through the overlapping flaps in a large percentage of children and in 15–25% of adults.
Functional closure of the ductus arteriosus is usually complete by 10-­
15 hours of postnatal age in a normal neonate, although the ductus
may remain patent much longer in the presence of congenital heart
disease, especially when associated with cyanosis. In premature newborn infants, a systolic murmur with late accentuation or a continuous
murmur may be audible beneath the left clavicle, and in the context of
respiratory distress syndrome, the presence of a patent ductus arteriosus should be suspected (see Chapter 126.1).
The normal ductus arteriosus differs morphologically from the
adjoining aorta and pulmonary artery in that the ductus has a significant amount of circularly arranged smooth muscle in its medial
layer. During fetal life, patency of the ductus arteriosus appears to be
maintained by the combined relaxant effects of low oxygen tension and
endogenously produced prostaglandins, specifically prostaglandin E2.
In a full-­term neonate, oxygen is the most important factor controlling
ductal closure. When the Po2 of the blood passing through the ductus
reaches about 50 mm Hg, the ductal wall begins to constrict. The effects
of oxygen on ductal smooth muscle may be direct or mediated by its
effects on prostaglandin synthesis. Gestational age also appears to play
an important role; the ductus of a premature infant is less responsive to
oxygen, even though its musculature is well developed.

470.4 Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension
of the Neonate (Persistence of Fetal
Circulatory Pathways)
See Chapter 130.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 471 u History and Physical Examination in Cardiac Evaluation

Section 2

Evaluation of the
Cardiovascular System
and the Child with a
Heart Murmur
Chapter 471

History and Physical
Examination in Cardiac
Evaluation
Daniel Bernstein
One of the most common reasons for cardiac evaluation in young
children is the heart murmur; innocent or functional murmurs (Still
murmurs) may be heard in up to 30% of patients at some time during
childhood. Functional murmurs are usually accentuated by fever and
first noticed during a visit for an intercurrent illness. Thus the general pediatrician must be able to distinguish those murmurs that are
functional from those that are potentially pathologic and refer patients
with pathologic-­sounding murmurs or murmurs of uncertain nature
for evaluation by a pediatric cardiologist.
Patients may require further laboratory evaluation (e.g., electrocardiogram and echocardiogram), or the family may be reassured that no
significant problem exists. Although the ready availability of echocardiography may entice the clinician to skip a good history and physical
exam, an initial evaluation by a skilled cardiologist is preferred for several reasons: (1) a cardiac examination allows the cardiologist to guide
the echocardiographic evaluation toward confirming or eliminating
specific diagnoses, thereby increasing its accuracy; (2) because most
childhood murmurs are innocent, evaluation by a pediatric cardiologist can eliminate unnecessary and expensive laboratory tests; and (3)
the cardiologist’s knowledge and experience are important in reassuring
the patient’s family and preventing unnecessary, and all too common,
restrictions on healthy physical activity. An experienced pediatric cardiologist can differentiate an innocent murmur from serious congenital
heart disease by history and physical examination alone with high sensitivity and specificity.

HISTORY

The evaluation begins with a comprehensive cardiac history because
a diagnosis of a functional murmur can only be made in the absence
of any concerning symptoms, signs, or family history. A comprehensive cardiac history starts with details of the perinatal period, including
the presence of cyanosis, respiratory distress, or prematurity. Maternal
complications such as gestational diabetes, teratogenic medications,
infections, systemic lupus erythematosus, or substance misuse can be
associated with cardiac problems. If cardiac symptoms began during
infancy, the timing of the initial symptoms should be noted to provide
important clues about the specific cardiac condition.
Many of the symptoms of heart failure in infants and children
are age specific. In infants, feeding difficulties are common. Inquiry
should be made about the frequency of feeding and either the volume
of each feeding or the time spent on each breast. An infant with heart
failure often takes less volume per feeding and becomes dyspneic or

2737

diaphoretic while nursing. After falling asleep exhausted, the baby,
inadequately fed, will awaken for the next feeding after a brief time.
This cycle continues around the clock and must be carefully differentiated from colic or other feeding disorders. Additional symptoms and
signs include those of respiratory distress: rapid breathing, nasal flaring,
cyanosis, and chest retractions. In older children, heart failure may be
manifested as exercise intolerance, difficulty keeping up with peers during sports or the need for a nap after coming home from school, poor
growth, or chronic abdominal complaints. Eliciting a history of fatigue
in an older child requires questions about age-­specific activities, including stair climbing, walking, bicycle riding, physical education class, and
competitive sports; information should be obtained regarding more
severe manifestations such as orthopnea and nocturnal dyspnea.
Parents often overlook their baby’s cyanosis at rest; it may be mistaken for a normal individual variation in color. Cyanosis during crying or exercise, however, is more often noted as abnormal by observant
parents. Many infants and toddlers turn “blue around the lips” when
crying vigorously or during breath-­holding spells; this condition must
be carefully differentiated from cyanotic heart disease by inquiring
about inciting factors, the length of episodes, and whether the tongue
and mucous membranes also appear cyanotic. Newborns often have
cyanosis of their extremities (acrocyanosis) when undressed and cold;
this response to cold must be carefully differentiated from true cyanosis, where the mucous membranes are also blue.
Chest pain is an unusual manifestation of cardiac disease in pediatric patients, although it is a frequent cause for referral to a pediatric
cardiologist, especially in adolescents. Nonetheless, a careful history,
physical examination, and, if indicated, laboratory or imaging tests will
assist in identifying the cause of chest pain (Table 471.1). For patients
with some forms of repaired congenital heart disease (CHD), for example, those with surgery on the aortic root or those with a history of
Kawasaki disease (see Chapter 493.1), chest pain should be evaluated
carefully for a coronary etiology.
Cardiac disease may be a manifestation of a known congenital
malformation syndrome with typical physical findings (Table 471.2)
or a manifestation of a generalized disorder affecting the heart and
other organ systems (Table 471.3). Extracardiac malformations may
be noted in 20–45% of infants with CHD. Between 5% and 10% of
patients have a known chromosomal abnormality. Specific gene or
whole exome sequencing can enhance the diagnostic approach to
CHD (Fig. 471.1).
A careful family history may also reveal early (at age <50 years) coronary artery disease or stroke (suggestive of familial hypercholesterolemia or thrombophilia), sudden death (suggestive of cardiomyopathy
or familial arrhythmic disorder), generalized muscle disease (suggestive of one of the muscular dystrophies, dermatomyositis, or familial or
metabolic cardiomyopathy), or first-­degree relatives with CHD.

GENERAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

In the evaluation of a child with a heart murmur, a general physical
examination is always performed, with specific attention directed
toward the presence of cyanosis, abnormalities in growth, chest wall
abnormalities, and any evidence of respiratory distress. Although the
murmur may be the most prominent part of the overall examination,
any murmur must be placed in context of other physical findings.
Associated findings such as quality of the pulses, presence of a ventricular heave or thrill, or splitting of the second heart sound provide
important clues to a specific cardiac diagnosis.
Accurate measurement of height and weight and plotting on a standard growth chart are important because both cardiac failure and
chronic cyanosis can result in failure to thrive. Growth failure is manifested predominantly by poor weight gain; if length and especially head
circumference is also affected, additional congenital malformations or
metabolic disorders should be suspected.
Mild cyanosis may be too subtle for early detection, and clubbing of
the fingers and toes is not usually manifested until late in the first year of
life, even in the presence of severe arterial oxygen desaturation. Cyanosis is best observed over the nail beds, lips, tongue, and mucous membranes. Delayed recognition of cyanosis in infants with darker skin color

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2738 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 471.1  Differential Diagnosis of Chest Pain in
Pediatric Patients
MUSCULOSKELETAL (COMMON)
Trauma (accidental, abuse)
Exercise, overuse injury (strain, bursitis)
Costochondritis
Tietze syndrome
Herpes zoster (cutaneous or without rash)
Pleurodynia
Fibrositis
Slipping rib
Rib fracture
Precordial catch
Sickle cell anemia vasoocclusive crisis
Osteomyelitis (rare)
Primary or metastatic tumor (rare)
Fibromyalgia
Nerve entrapment, radiculopathy
PULMONARY (COMMON)
Pneumonia
Pleurisy
Pleurodynia
Asthma
Chronic cough
Pneumothorax
Infarction (sickle cell anemia)
Foreign body
Embolism (rare)
Pulmonary hypertension (rare)
Tumor (rare)
Bronchiectasis
GASTROINTESTINAL (LESS COMMON)
Esophagitis (gastroesophageal reflux, infectious, pill)
Esophageal foreign body
Esophageal spasm
Cholecystitis
Subdiaphragmatic abscess
Perihepatitis (Fitz-­Hugh-­Curtis syndrome)
Peptic ulcer disease
Pancreatitis
Splenic rupture
CARDIAC (LESS COMMON)
Pericarditis
Postpericardiotomy syndrome
Endocarditis
Myocarditis
Cardiomyopathy
Mitral valve prolapse
Aortic or subaortic stenosis
Arrhythmias (supraventricular, ventricular, tachycardias)
Marfan syndrome (dissecting aortic aneurysm)
Kawasaki disease
Cocaine, sympathomimetic ingestion
Ischemia (familial hypercholesterolemia, anomalous coronary artery,
post-­repair of congenital heart disease involving reimplantation of
the coronary arteries [e.g., d-­transposition of the great arteries])
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (primary or secondary)
IDIOPATHIC (COMMON)
Anxiety, hyperventilation
Panic disorder
OTHER (LESS COMMON)
Spinal cord or nerve root compression
Breast-­related pathologic condition (mastalgia)
Castleman disease (lymph node neoplasm)

can lead to delayed treatment and poorer outcomes. Careful observation of the color of the tongue, mucous membranes, and nail beds,
where cyanosis is most noticeable, is critical in recognizing cyanosis in
these patients. Confirmation with pulse oximetry is easily performed.
Differential cyanosis, manifested as blue lower extremities and pink
upper extremities (usually the right arm), is seen with right-­to-­left

shunting across a ductus arteriosus in the presence of coarctation or
an interrupted aortic arch. Circumoral cyanosis or blueness around
the forehead may be the result of prominent venous plexuses in these
areas, rather than decreased arterial oxygen saturation. The extremities of infants often turn blue when the infant is unwrapped and cold
(acrocyanosis), and this condition can be distinguished from central
cyanosis by examination of the tongue and mucous membranes.
Heart failure in infants and children usually results in some degree
of hepatomegaly and occasionally splenomegaly. The sites of peripheral edema are age dependent. In infants, edema is usually seen around
the eyes and over the flanks, especially on initially waking. Older children and teenagers manifest both periorbital edema and pedal edema.
An initial complaint in these older patients may be that their clothes
are now too tight.
The heart rate of newborn infants is rapid and subject to wide fluctuations (Table 471.4). The average rate ranges from 120 to 140 beats/min
and may increase to 170+ beats/min during crying and activity or drop to
70-­90 beats/min during sleep. As the child grows older, the average pulse
rate decreases and may be as low as 40 beats/min at rest in very athletic
adolescents. Persistent tachycardia (>200 beats/min in neonates, 150
beats/min in infants, or 120 beats/min in older children), bradycardia, or
an irregular heartbeat other than sinus arrhythmia requires investigation
to exclude pathologic arrhythmias (see Chapter 484). Sinus arrhythmia
can usually be distinguished by the rhythmic nature of the heart rate
variations, occurring in concert with the respiratory cycle, with a P wave
before every QRS complex, and a normal p-­wave axis.
Careful evaluation of the character of the pulses is an important
early step in the physical diagnosis of CHD. A wide pulse pressure with
bounding pulses may suggest an aortic runoff lesion such as patent
ductus arteriosus (PDA), aortic insufficiency, an arteriovenous communication, or increased cardiac output secondary to anemia, anxiety, or conditions associated with increased catecholamine or thyroid
hormone secretion. The presence of diminished pulses in all extremities is associated with pericardial tamponade, left ventricular outflow
obstruction, or cardiomyopathy. The radial and femoral pulses should
always be palpated simultaneously. Normally, the femoral pulse should
be appreciated immediately before the radial pulse. In infants with
coarctation of the aorta, the femoral pulses may be decreased. However, in older children with coarctation of the aorta, blood flow to the
descending aorta may channel through collateral vessels and results in
the femoral pulse being palpable but delayed until after the radial pulse
(radial-­femoral delay).
Blood pressure (BP) should be measured in either leg and in the
right arm to be certain that coarctation of the aorta is not overlooked.
Palpation of the femoral or dorsalis pedis pulse, or both, is not reliable alone to exclude coarctation because collaterals may have developed. Most commonly, BP is measured using an automated oscillatory
device, but it is often necessary for the physician to manually recheck
BP by auscultation. In older children, a cuff that covers approximately
two thirds of the upper part of the arm or leg should be used for BP
measurement. A cuff that is too small results in falsely high readings,
whereas a cuff that is too large records slightly decreased BP. Pediatric
clinical facilities should be equipped with 3-­, 5-­, 7-­, 12-­, and 18-­cm cuffs
to accommodate the large spectrum of pediatric patient sizes. When
auscultating blood pressure directly, the first Korotkoff sounds indicate
systolic pressure. As cuff pressure is slowly decreased, the sounds usually become muffled before they disappear. Diastolic pressure may be
recorded when the sounds become muffled (preferred) or when they
disappear altogether; the former is usually slightly higher and the latter slightly lower than true diastolic pressure. For lower-­extremity BP
determination, the stethoscope is placed over the popliteal artery. Typically, the BP recorded in the legs with the cuff technique is approximately 10 mm Hg higher than that in the arms. In infants, BP can be
determined by auscultation or palpation.
BP varies with the age of the child and is closely correlated to height
and weight. Significant increases occur during adolescence, and many
temporary variations take place before the more stable levels of adult
life are attained. Exercise, excitement, coughing, crying, and struggling may raise the systolic BP of infants and children as much as 40-­50
mm Hg greater than their usual levels. Variability in BP in children of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 471 u History and Physical Examination in Cardiac Evaluation

2739

Table 471.2  Congenital Malformation Syndromes Associated with Congenital Heart Disease
SYNDROME

FEATURES

CHROMOSOMAL DISORDERS
Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)

Endocardial cushion defect, VSD, ASD

Trisomy 21p (cat-­eye syndrome)

Miscellaneous, total anomalous pulmonary venous return

Trisomy 18

VSD, ASD, PDA, TOF, coarctation of aorta, bicuspid aortic or
pulmonary valve

Trisomy 13

VSD, ASD, PDA, coarctation of aorta, bicuspid aortic or pulmonary
valve

Trisomy 9

Miscellaneous, VSD

XXXXY

PDA, ASD

Penta X

PDA, VSD

Triploidy

VSD, ASD, PDA

XO (Turner syndrome)

Bicuspid aortic valve, coarctation of aorta

Fragile X

Mitral valve prolapse, aortic root dilatation

Duplication 3q2

Miscellaneous

Deletion 4p

VSD, PDA, aortic stenosis

Deletion 9p

Miscellaneous

Deletion 5p (cri du chat syndrome)

VSD, PDA, ASD, TOF

Deletion 10q

VSD, TOF, conotruncal lesions*

Deletion 13q

VSD

Deletion 18q

VSD

Deletion 1p36

ASD, VSD, PDA, TOF, cardiomyopathy

Deletion/duplication 1q21.1

ASD, VSD, PS

Deletion 17q11 (William syndrome)

Supravalvar AS, branch PS

Deletion 11q 24-­25 (Jacobsen syndrome)

VSD, left sided lesions

SYNDROME COMPLEXES
CHARGE association (coloboma, heart, atresia choanae, retardation,
genital, and ear anomalies)

VSD, ASD, PDA, TOF, endocardial cushion defect

DiGeorge sequence, CATCH 22 (cardiac defects, abnormal facies,
thymic aplasia, cleft palate, hypocalcemia, and deletion 22q11)

Aortic arch anomalies, conotruncal anomalies

Alagille syndrome (arteriohepatic dysplasia)

Peripheral pulmonic stenosis, PS, TOF

VATER association (vertebral, anal, tracheoesophageal, radial, and
renal anomalies)

VSD, TOF, ASD, PDA

FAVS (facioauriculovertebral spectrum)

TOF, VSD

CHILD (congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma,
limb defects)

Miscellaneous

Mulibrey nanism (muscle, liver, brain, eye)

Pericardial thickening, constrictive pericarditis

Asplenia syndrome

Complex cyanotic heart lesions with decreased pulmonary blood flow,
transposition of great arteries, anomalous pulmonary venous return,
dextrocardia, single ventricle, single atrioventricular valve

Polysplenia syndrome

Acyanotic lesions with increased pulmonary blood flow, azygos
continuation of inferior vena cava, partial anomalous pulmonary
venous return, dextrocardia, single ventricle, common atrioventricular
valve

PHACE syndrome (posterior brain fossa anomalies, facial
hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, cardiac anomalies and aortic
coarctation, eye anomalies)

VSD, PDA, coarctation of aorta, arterial aneurysms

TERATOGENIC AGENTS
Congenital rubella

PDA, peripheral pulmonic stenosis

Fetal hydantoin syndrome

VSD, ASD, coarctation of aorta, PDA

Fetal alcohol syndrome

ASD, VSD
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2740 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 471.2  Congenital Malformation Syndromes Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
SYNDROME

FEATURES

Fetal valproate effects

Coarctation of aorta, hypoplastic left side of heart, aortic stenosis,
pulmonary atresia, VSD

Maternal phenylketonuria

VSD, ASD, PDA, coarctation of aorta

Retinoic acid embryopathy

Conotruncal anomalies

OTHERS
Apert syndrome

VSD

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease

Mitral valve prolapse

Carpenter syndrome

PDA

Conradi syndrome

VSD, PDA

Crouzon disease

PDA, coarctation of aorta

Cutis laxa

Pulmonary hypertension, pulmonic stenosis

De Lange syndrome

VSD

Ellis–van Creveld syndrome

Single atrium, VSD

Holt-­Oram syndrome

ASD, VSD, first-­degree heart block

Infant of diabetic mother

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, VSD, conotruncal anomalies

Kartagener syndrome

Dextrocardia

Meckel-­Gruber syndrome

ASD, VSD

Noonan syndrome

Pulmonic stenosis, ASD, cardiomyopathy

Pallister-­Hall syndrome

Endocardial cushion defect

Primary ciliary dyskinesia

Heterotaxia disorders

Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome

VSD

Scimitar syndrome

Hypoplasia of right lung, anomalous pulmonary venous return to
inferior vena cava

Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome

VSD, PDA

TAR syndrome (thrombocytopenia and absent radius)

ASD, TOF

Treacher Collins syndrome

VSD, ASD, PDA

*Conotruncal includes TOF, pulmonary atresia, truncus arteriosus, and transposition of great arteries.
ASD, Atrial septal defect; AV, aortic valve; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PS, pulmonary stenosis; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; VSD, ventricular septal defect.

approximately the same age and body build should be expected, and at
least three serial measurements on different dates should be obtained
when confirming the diagnosis of hypertension (Figs. 471.2 and 471.3).
Although of little use in infants, in cooperative older children,
inspection of the jugular venous pulse wave provides information
about central venous and right atrial pressure. The neck veins should be
inspected with the patient sitting at a 90-­degree angle. The external jugular vein should not be visible above the clavicles unless central venous
pressure is elevated. Increased venous pressure transmitted to the internal jugular vein may appear as venous pulsations without visible distention; such pulsation is not seen in normal children reclining at an angle
of 45 degrees. Because the great veins are in direct communication with
the right atrium, changes in pressure and the volume of this chamber
are also transmitted to the veins. The one exception occurs in superior
vena cava obstruction, in which venous pulsatility is lost.

CARDIAC EXAMINATION

The heart should be examined in a systematic manner, starting with
inspection and palpation. Any abnormalities on inspection and/or palpation strongly suggest a pathologic rather than a functional etiology
of any heart murmur. A precordial bulge to the left of the sternum
with or without increased precordial activity suggests cardiac enlargement, especially in younger children where the chest wall is still relatively flexible; such bulges can often best be appreciated by having the
child lay supine with the examiner looking up from the child’s feet.

A substernal heave indicates the presence of right ventricular hypertrophy or enlargement, whereas an apical heave is noted with left
ventricular hypertrophy or enlargement. An overall hyperdynamic
precordium suggests a volume load such as that found with a large
left-­to-­right shunt, although it may be normal in a thin patient. An
overly silent precordium with a barely detectable apical impulse suggests a large pericardial effusion or severe cardiomyopathy but may be
normal in an obese patient.
The relationship of the apical impulse to the midclavicular line is
also helpful in the estimation of cardiac size: the apical impulse shifts
laterally and inferiorly with enlargement of the left ventricle. Right-­
sided apical impulses signify dextrocardia, tension pneumothorax, or
left-­sided thoracic space-­occupying lesions (e.g., diaphragmatic hernia).
Thrills are the palpable equivalent of murmurs and correlate with
the area of maximal auscultatory intensity of the murmur. It is important to palpate the suprasternal notch and neck for aortic bruits, which
may indicate the presence of aortic stenosis. Right lower sternal border
and apical systolic thrills are characteristic of ventricular septal defect
(VSD) and mitral insufficiency, respectively. Diastolic thrills are occasionally palpable in the presence of atrioventricular valve stenosis. The
timing and localization of thrills should be carefully noted. Although
the presence of a thrill is usually linked to a murmur of grade IV or
greater, after a patient has had cardiac surgery, the presence of scar
within the chest may eliminate the ability to feel a thrill even with a
very loud murmur.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 471 u History and Physical Examination in Cardiac Evaluation

2741

Table 471.3  Cardiac Manifestations of Systemic Diseases
SYSTEMIC DISEASE
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS
Sepsis

CARDIAC COMPLICATIONS
Hypotension, myocardial dysfunction, pericardial effusion, pulmonary
hypertension

COVID-­19

Myocarditis, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C)

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis

Pericarditis, rarely myocarditis

Systemic lupus erythematosus

Pericarditis, Libman-­Sacks endocarditis, coronary arteritis, coronary
atherosclerosis (with steroids), congenital heart block

Scleroderma

Pulmonary hypertension, myocardial fibrosis, cardiomyopathy

Dermatomyositis

Cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, heart block

Kawasaki disease

Coronary artery aneurysm and thrombosis, myocardial infarction,
myocarditis, valvular insufficiency

Sarcoidosis

Granuloma, fibrosis, amyloidosis, biventricular hypertrophy, arrhythmias

Lyme disease

Arrhythmias, myocarditis

Löffler hypereosinophilic syndrome

Endomyocardial disease

INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM
Refsum disease

Arrhythmia, sudden death

Hunter or Hurler syndrome

Valvular insufficiency, heart failure, hypertension

Fabry disease

Mitral insufficiency, coronary artery disease with myocardial infarction

Glycogen storage disease IIa (Pompe disease)

Short P-­R interval, cardiomegaly, heart failure, arrhythmias

Carnitine deficiency

Heart failure, cardiomyopathy

Gaucher disease

Pericarditis

Homocystinuria

Coronary thrombosis

Alkaptonuria

Atherosclerosis, valvular disease

Morquio-­Ullrich syndrome

Aortic incompetence

Scheie syndrome

Aortic incompetence

CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS
Arterial calcification of infancy

Calcinosis of coronary arteries, aorta, heart failure, hypertension

Marfan syndrome

Aortic and mitral insufficiency, dissecting aortic aneurysm, mitral valve
prolapse

Congenital contractural arachnodactyly

Mitral insufficiency or prolapse

Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome

Mitral valve prolapse, dilatated aortic root

Osteogenesis imperfecta

Aortic incompetence

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum

Peripheral arterial disease

NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDERS
Friedreich ataxia

Cardiomyopathy

Duchenne dystrophy

Cardiomyopathy, heart failure

Tuberous sclerosis

Cardiac rhabdomyoma

Familial deafness

Occasionally arrhythmia, sudden death

Neurofibromatosis

Pulmonic stenosis, pheochromocytoma, coarctation of aorta

Riley-­Day syndrome

Episodic hypertension, postural hypotension

Von Hippel-­Lindau disease

Hemangiomas, pheochromocytomas

ENDOCRINE-­METABOLIC DISORDERS
Graves disease

Tachycardia, arrhythmias, heart failure

Hypothyroidism

Bradycardia, pericardial effusion, cardiomyopathy, low-­voltage
electrocardiogram

Pheochromocytoma

Hypertension, myocardial ischemia, myocardial fibrosis,
cardiomyopathy

Carcinoid

Right-­sided endocardial fibrosis
Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2742 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 471.3  Cardiac Manifestations of Systemic Diseases—cont’d
SYSTEMIC DISEASE

CARDIAC COMPLICATIONS

HEMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Sickle cell anemia

High-­output heart failure, cardiomyopathy, pulmonary hypertension

Thalassemia major

High-­output heart failure, hemochromatosis

Hemochromatosis (first or second degree)

Cardiomyopathy

OTHERS
Appetite suppressants (fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine)

Cardiac valvulopathy, pulmonary hypertension

Cockayne syndrome

Atherosclerosis

Jervell and Lange-­Nielsen syndrome

Prolonged Q-­T interval, sudden death

Kearns-­Sayre syndrome

Heart block

LEOPARD syndrome (lentiginosis)

Pulmonic stenosis, prolonged Q-­T interval

Progeria

Accelerated atherosclerosis

Osler-­Weber-­Rendu disease

Arteriovenous fistula (lung, liver, mucous membrane)

Romano-­Ward syndrome

Prolonged Q-­T interval, sudden death

Weill-­Marchesani syndrome

Patent ductus arteriosus

Werner syndrome

Vascular sclerosis, cardiomyopathy

LEOPARD, Multiple lentigines, electrocardiographic conduction abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormal genitals, retardation of growth, sensorineural
deafness.

Possible
pathogenic
variant

Cardiac and extracardiac phenotype, family history,
Previous genetic testing (including prenatal)

Test parents
Suspect aneuploidy
(trisomy 13, 18, 21,
Turner)

High suspicion for
DiGeorge, William

Severe CHD, or CHD
+ extracardiac
abnormality

High clinical suspicion of
CHD as part of a defined
syndrome

Karyotype
(or FISH if
emergent)

FISH

Chromosomal
microarray

(Targeted
sequencing)

If negative:
If negative:
Test and counsel
other family
members

Known
pathogenic variant

WES

Variant of
unknown
significance

Fig. 471.1 Genetics screening algorithm for congenital heart disease (CHD) patients. FISH, Fluorescence in situ hybridization; WES, whole exome

sequencing. (From Simmons MA, Brueckner M. The genetics of congenital heart disease . . . understanding and improving long-­term outcomes in
congenital heart disease: a review for the general cardiologist and primary care physician. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2017;29:520–528, Fig 2.)

Auscultation is an art that improves with practice. The diaphragm of
the stethoscope is placed firmly on the chest for high-­pitched sounds;
a lightly placed bell is optimal for low-­pitched sounds. The physician
should initially move the stethoscope across the chest, concentrating
on the characteristics of the heart sounds; their variation with respiration; and the presence of clicks, rubs, or gallops. Repeat the process,
concentrating on murmurs, their maximum location, and their radiation. In some CHDs, such as atrial septal defect (ASD), the murmur
is nonspecific and sounds identical to many functional murmurs; it

is the abnormality of the second heart sound that points to a pathologic condition. The patient should ideally be supine, lying quietly, and
breathing normally. The first heart sound (S1) is best heard at the apex,
whereas the second heart sound (S2) should be evaluated at the upper
left and right sternal borders. S1 is caused by closure of the atrioventricular valves (mitral and tricuspid) and can be either single or split.
S2 is caused by closure of the semilunar valves (aortic and pulmonary)
(Fig. 471.4). During inspiration, the decrease in intrathoracic pressure
results in increased filling of the right side of the heart, which leads to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 471 u History and Physical Examination in Cardiac Evaluation

2743

Table 471.4  Pulse Rates at Rest
AGE

LOWER LIMITS OF NORMAL
(beats/min)

AVERAGE (beats/min)

UPPER LIMITS OF NORMAL
(beats/min)

Newborn

70

125

190

1-­11 mo

80

120

160

2 yr

80

110

130

4 yr

80

100

120

6 yr

75

100

115

8 yr

70

90

110

10 yr

70

90

110

FEMALES

MALES

FEMALES

MALES

FEMALES

MALES

12 yr

70

65

90

85

110

105

14 yr

65

60

85

80

105

100

16 yr

60

55

80

75

100

95

18 yr

55

50

75

70

95

90

an increased right ventricular ejection time and thus delayed closure of
the pulmonary valve; inspiration decreases pulmonary venous return,
decreasing filling of the left ventricle and moving closure of the aortic
valve earlier. Consequently, splitting of the second heart sound widens during inspiration and narrows during expiration.
S2 can appear to be single during expiration, because we can only hear
two sounds if they are separated by 20-­30 msec. The presence of a normally split S2 is strong evidence against the diagnosis of ASD, defects
associated with pulmonary arterial hypertension, severe pulmonary
valve stenosis, aortic and pulmonary atresia, and truncus arteriosus.
Wide S2 splitting is noted in ASD, pulmonary stenosis (where the pulmonary second sound is soft), Ebstein anomaly, total anomalous pulmonary venous return, and right bundle branch block. An accentuated
pulmonic component of S2 with narrow splitting is a sign of pulmonary
hypertension. A single S2 occurs in pulmonary or aortic atresia or severe
stenosis, truncus arteriosus, and, often, transposition of the great arteries.
A third heart sound (S3) is best heard with the bell at the apex in
mid-­diastole, during passive ventricular filling. An S3 can be pathologic
but may be normal in children, often accentuated in patients with fever
and tachycardia. A fourth heart sound (S4), occurring in conjunction with atrial systole and the final stages of ventricular filling, may
be heard just before the S1 in late diastole. An S4 is always pathologic
and an indication of decreased ventricular compliance, as occurs in
patients with ventricular dysfunction (e.g., in dilated cardiomyopathy).
An S3 may merge with an S4, a finding known as a summation gallop.
Ejection clicks, which are heard in early systole, are usually caused
by a mildly to moderately stenotic aortic or pulmonary valve or to a
dilated ascending aorta or pulmonary artery. They are heard so close
to S1 that they may be mistaken for a split S1. However, ejection clicks
are heard at the upper left or right sternal borders, whereas a split S1
is heard at the lower left sternal border or apex. Aortic ejection clicks
are best heard at the left middle to right upper sternal border and are
constant in intensity. They occur in conditions where the aortic valve
(mild to moderate aortic stenosis) is stenotic or the aorta is dilated
(e.g., tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus). Pulmonary ejection clicks
are associated with mild to moderate pulmonary stenosis and are best
heard at the left middle to upper sternal border and vary with respiration, often disappearing with inspiration. A good place to hear ejection
clicks is right over the sternum, since bone conducts high-­frequency
sound much better than the muscle of the intercostal spaces. A midsystolic click heard at the apex, often preceding a late systolic murmur,
suggests mitral valve prolapse.
Murmurs should be described according to their intensity, pitch,
timing (systolic or diastolic), variation in intensity, time to peak
intensity, location of maximal intensity, and radiation to other areas.

Auscultation for murmurs should be carried out starting at the upper
right sternal border then moving slowly across the upper precordium,
down the left and right sternal borders, and out to the apex and to the
left axilla. Auscultation should also always be performed in the right
axilla and over both sides of the back, as many CHD murmurs radiate to these locations. Systolic murmurs are classified as ejection, holosystolic or pansystolic, or late systolic according to the timing of the
murmur in relation to S1 and S2. The intensity of systolic murmurs is
graded from I to VI: I, barely audible; II, medium intensity; III, loud
but no thrill; IV, loud with a thrill; V, very loud but still requiring positioning of the stethoscope at least partly on the chest; and VI, so loud
that the murmur can be heard with the stethoscope off the chest. In
patients who have undergone prior heart surgery, a murmur of grade
IV or greater may be heard in the absence of a thrill because of scar tissue, which does not transmit vibrations well, within the chest.
Systolic ejection murmurs start a short time after a well-­heard S1,
increase in intensity, peak, and then decrease in intensity; they usually
end before S2. In patients with severe pulmonary stenosis, however, the
murmur may extend beyond the first component of S2, thus obscuring it. Pansystolic or holosystolic murmurs begin simultaneously with
S1 and continue throughout systole, on occasion becoming gradually
decrescendo. It is important to remember that after closure of the atrioventricular valves (S1), a brief period occurs during which ventricular
pressure increases but the semilunar valves remain closed (isovolumic
contraction; see Fig. 471.4). Thus holosystolic murmurs (heard during
both isovolumic contraction and the ejection phases of systole) cannot be caused by flow across the semilunar valves because these valves
are closed during isovolumic contraction! Holosystolic murmurs must
therefore be related to blood exiting the contracting ventricle via either
an abnormal opening (VSD) or atrioventricular (mitral or tricuspid)
valve insufficiency. Systolic ejection murmurs usually imply increased
flow or stenosis across one of the ventricular outflow tracts (aortic or
pulmonic). In infants with rapid heart rates, it is often difficult to distinguish between ejection and pansystolic murmurs. If a clear and distinct
S1 can be appreciated, the murmur is most likely ejection in nature.
A continuous murmur is a murmur that continues from systole
into diastole and indicates continuous flow, such as in the presence of
a PDA or other aortopulmonary communication. This murmur should
be differentiated from a to-­and-­fro murmur, where the systolic component of the murmur ends at or before S2 and the diastolic murmur
begins after S2 with semilunar valve closure (aortic stenosis and insufficiency; pulmonary stenosis and insufficiency). A late systolic murmur
begins well beyond S1 and continues until the end of systole and is usually heard after a midsystolic click in patients with mitral valve prolapse
and insufficiency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65

75th
50th

0

1

2

3

4

5

6 7
Mo

8

75
Diastolic BP (K4)

Systolic BP

95th
90th

90th

65

75th
50th

55

2

3

4

5

6 7
Mo

8

9 10 11 12

90th
65
75th

60
55

50th

50
45
1

2

3

4

5

6 7
Mo

8

9 10 11 12

87 101 106 106 106 105 105 105 105 105 105 105 105
68 65 63 63 63 65 66 67 68 68 69 69 69
51 59 63 66 68 70 72 73 74 76 77 78 80
4
4
5
5
6
7
8
9
9 10 10 11 11

B

90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

0

1

2

3

4

5

6 7
Mo

8

9 10 11 12

76
68
54
4

98 101 104 105 106 106 106 106 106 106 105 105
65 64 64 65 65 66 66 66 67 67 67 67
55 56 58 61 63 66 68 70 72 74 75 77
4
4
5
5
6
7
8
9
9 10 10 11

125

95th
90th

120

75th

120

75th

Systolic BP

95th
90th

130

125

130

Systolic BP

1

95th

60

0

115
50th

110

115
105

100

100

95

95
90
2

3

4

5

6

85

7
Yr

8

9

1

10 11 12 13

80

95th
90th

75

75th

70
50th

65

2

3

4

5

6

7
Yr

8

9

10 11 12 13
95th
90th

85
Diastolic BP (K4)

1

60

80

75th

75
70

50th

65
60
55

55

50

50
90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

50th

110

105

90

Diastolic BP (K4)

50th

70

45

C

75th

75

95th

50

A

95th
90th

0

70

90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65

9 10 11 12

Diastolic BP (K4)

Systolic BP

2744 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

1

2

3

4

5

6

7
Yr

8

9

1

10 11 12 13

90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

105 106 107 108 109 111 112 114 115 117 119 121 124
69 68 68 69 69 70 71 73 74 75 76 77 79
80 91 100 108 115 122 129 135 141 147 153 159 165
11 14 16 18 22 25 29 34 39 44 50 55 62

2

3

4

5

6

7
Yr

8

9

10 11 12 13

105 105 106 107 109 111 112 114 115 117 119 122 124
67 69 69 69 69 70 71 72 74 75 77 78 80
77 89 98 107 115 122 129 135 142 148 154 160 165
11 13 15 18 22 25 30 35 40 45 51 58 63

D

Fig. 471.2 Age-­specific percentiles of blood pressure (BP) measurements: birth to 13 yr. A, Males from birth to 12 mo of age. B, Females from birth

to 12 mo of age. C, Males 1-­13 yr of age. D, Females 1-­13 yr of age. Korotkoff phase IV (K4) used for diastolic BP. Dias, Diastolic; Ht, height; Perc,
percentile; Sys, systolic; Wt, weight. (From Report of the Second Task Force on Blood Pressure Control in Children—1987. National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD. Pediatrics. 1987;79:1–25. Copyright 1987 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 471 u History and Physical Examination in Cardiac Evaluation
95th
90th

140

140
135

75th

125

Systolic BP

Systolic BP

135
130

50th

120
115
110

125

75th

120
115

50th

105
13

14

15

16

17

Years

18

13

14

15

16

17

18

Years

90

95th

90

85

90th

85

95th

80

75th

80

90th

75

75th

Diastolic BP (K5)

Diastolic BP (K5)

95th
90th

130

110

105

75
50th

70
65

70
50th

65
60

60
13
90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

2745

14

15

16

17

Years
124
77
165
62

126
78
172
68

129
79
178
74

131
81
182
80

134
83
184
84

13

18
136
84
184
86

A

90th
Perc
Sys BP
Dias BP
Ht cm
Wt kg

14

15

16

17

18

127
81
170
72

127
80
170
73

127
80
170
74

Years
124
78
165
63

126
81
168
67

126
82
169
70

B

Fig. 471.3 Age-­specific percentiles of blood pressure (BP) measurements: age 13-­18 yr. A, Males 13-­18 yr of age. B, Females 13-­18 yr of age.
Korotkoff phase V (K5) used for diastolic BP. Dias, Diastolic; Ht, height; Perc, percentile; Sys, systolic; Wt, weight. (From Report of the Second Task
Force on Blood Pressure Control in Children—1987, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD. Pediatrics. 1987;79:1–25. Copyright
1987 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.)

Several types of diastolic murmurs (graded I-­IV) can be identified. A decrescendo diastolic murmur is a blowing murmur usually
along the left sternal border that begins with S2 and diminishes toward
mid-­diastole. When louder and high-­pitched, this murmur is usually
associated with aortic valve insufficiency or pulmonary insufficiency
related to pulmonary hypertension. When softer and low-­pitched, this
murmur is usually associated with pulmonary valve insufficiency in the
absence of pulmonary hypertension. A to-­and-­fro murmur is typically
noted after surgical repair of the pulmonary outflow tract in patients
with tetralogy of Fallot. A rumbling mid-­diastolic murmur at the left
mid and lower sternal border may be caused by increased blood flow
across the tricuspid valve, such as occurs with ASD or, much less often,
because of actual stenosis of this valve. When this murmur is heard at
the apex, it is caused by increased flow across the mitral valve, such as
occurs with large left-­to-­right shunts at the ventricular level (VSDs), at
the great vessel level (PDA, aortopulmonary shunts), or with increased
flow because of mitral insufficiency. When an apical diastolic rumbling
murmur is longer and is accentuated at the end of diastole (presystolic),
it usually indicates anatomic mitral valve stenosis.
The absence of a precordial murmur does not rule out significant
congenital or acquired heart disease. Congenital heart defects, some
of which are ductal dependent, may not demonstrate a murmur if
the ductus arteriosus closes. These lesions include pulmonary or tricuspid valve atresia and transposition of the great arteries. Murmurs
may seem insignificant in patients with ASDs, anomalous pulmonary
venous return, some forms of atrioventricular septal defects, coarctation of the aorta, or anomalous origin of a coronary artery. Careful
attention to other components of the physical examination (growth
failure, cyanosis, peripheral pulses, precordial impulse, heart sounds)
increases the index of suspicion of congenital heart defects in these
patients. In contrast, loud murmurs may be present in the absence of

structural heart disease, for example, in patients with a large noncardiac arteriovenous malformation, mitral regurgitation caused by left
ventricular dilation associated with myocarditis or cardiomyopathy,
and severe anemia.
Many murmurs are not associated with significant hemodynamic
abnormalities. These murmurs are referred to as functional, normal,
insignificant, or innocent. During routine random auscultation, >30%
of children may have an innocent murmur at some time in their lives;
this percentage increases when auscultation is done under nonbasal
circumstances (high cardiac output because of fever, infection, or
anxiety). The most common innocent murmur is a medium-­loud,
medium-­pitched, vibratory or “musical,” relatively short systolic ejection murmur, which is heard best along the left sternal border and has
no significant radiation to the apex, base, or back. It is heard most
frequently in children between 3 and 7 years of age. The intensity of
the murmur often changes with respiration and position and may be
attenuated or even disappear in the sitting or prone position. Innocent
pulmonic murmurs are also common in children and adolescents and
originate from normal turbulence during ejection into the pulmonary
artery. These are higher pitched, brief, early systolic murmurs of grades
I-­II in intensity and are best heard in the second left parasternal space
with the patient in the supine position. Features suggestive of heart disease include murmurs that are holosystolic, grade III or higher, harsh,
located at the left upper sternal border, and associated with an early or
midsystolic click or an abnormal S2.
A venous hum is another example of a common innocent murmur
heard during childhood. Venous hums are produced by turbulence of
blood in the jugular venous system; they have no pathologic significance and may be heard in the neck or anterior portion of the upper
part of the chest. Appreciated as a soft humming sound heard in both
systole and diastole, it can be exaggerated or made to disappear by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

R
60

Blood flow (L/min)

Atrial
sound
4

472.1 Radiologic Cardiac Assessment

P

Aortic closure
Pulmonic closure
Opening snap

QS

1

Left
atrial
pressure

Mitral
valve closes

4

3

2

Daniel Bernstein

Mitral valve
opens

10

100

8

90

6
4

80
Volume

Flow

70

2

60

0

50

25
Right heart
pressure mm Hg

Left ventricular
pressure

T

P

20

Daniel Bernstein

Aortic
pressure

80

20
15
10
5

Pulmonic
valve
opens

Ventricular
volume (mL)

Left heart pressure mm Hg

Aortic valve
opens

0

Laboratory Cardiac
Evaluation

Aortic valve closes

100

40

Chapter 472

Reduced Filling
of Ventricle
(Diastasis)

Isovolumic
Relaxation
Rapid Filling
of Ventricle

Reduced Ejection

Rapid Ejection

Isovolumic Contraction

Atrial
Systole

2746 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Pulmonic valve closes

Right
ventricular
pressure
a

c

v

0

Pulmonary
arterial
pressure

Tricuspid valve opens
Right atrial
(venous) pressure

Tricuspid
valve closes
0

0.2
0.1

0.4
0.3

0.6
0.5

0.8
0.7

Time (sec)

Fig. 471.4 Idealized diagram of the temporal events of a cardiac cycle (the Wiggers diagram).

varying the position of the head, or it can be decreased by lightly compressing the jugular venous system in the neck. These simple maneuvers are sufficient to differentiate a venous hum from the murmurs
produced by organic cardiovascular disease, particularly a PDA.
The lack of significance of an innocent murmur should be discussed with the child’s parents. It is important to offer complete
reassurance because lingering doubts about the importance of a
cardiac murmur may have profound effects on child-­rearing practices, most often in the form of overprotectiveness. An underlying
fear that a cardiac abnormality is present may negatively affect a
child’s self-­image and development. The physician should explain
that an innocent murmur is simply a “noise” and does not indicate
the presence of a cardiac defect. When asked, “Will it go away?”
the best response is to state that because the murmur has no clinical significance, it does not matter whether it “goes away.” Parents
should be warned that the intensity of the murmur might increase
during febrile illnesses, a time when, typically, another physician
may examine the child (e.g., in the emergency department). With
growth, however, innocent murmurs are less well heard and often
disappear completely. If there is a suspicion of structural heart
disease, additional studies are indicated to rule out a congenital
heart defect. However, “routine” electrocardiographic, chest radiographic, and echocardiographic examinations should be avoided in
well children with a clearly innocent murmur.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Despite the widespread easy access to advanced imaging techniques, such
as echocardiography, computed tomography (CT) scan, and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), the chest x-­ray film remains a highly valuable
diagnostic tool and is often the first imaging study performed in a child
suspected of having a cardiac defect. It can provide important information about cardiac size and shape, pulmonary blood flow (vascularity),
pulmonary edema, and associated lung and thoracic anomalies that may
be associated with congenital syndromes (e.g., skeletal dysplasias, extra
or deficient number of ribs, abnormal vertebrae, diaphragmatic hernia,
previous cardiac surgery). Combined with a careful physical examination, the chest radiograph can help the clinician to establish a diagnosis
of congenital heart disease (CHD), as opposed to pulmonary disease,
and to narrow the differential diagnosis to specific categories of CHD
(e.g., left-­to-­right shunt lesions vs obstructive lesions).
The most frequently used measurement of cardiac size is the maximal width of the cardiac shadow in a posteroanterior (PA) chest film
taken mid-­inspiration. A vertical line is drawn down the middle of
the sternal shadow, and perpendicular lines are drawn from the sternal line to the extreme right and left borders of the heart; the sum of
the lengths of these lines is the maximal cardiac width. The maximal
chest width is obtained by drawing a horizontal line between the right
and left inner borders of the rib cage at the level of the top of the right
diaphragm. When the maximal cardiac width is more than half the
maximal chest width (cardiothoracic ratio >50%), the heart is usually
enlarged. Cardiac size should be evaluated only when the film is taken
during inspiration with the patient in an upright position, which can be
difficult to achieve in younger patients. A diagnosis of “cardiac enlargement” on expiratory or prone films is a common cause of unnecessary
referrals and laboratory studies.
The cardiothoracic ratio is a less useful index of cardiac enlargement in infants than in older children because the horizontal position
of the heart may increase the ratio to about 60% in the absence of true
enlargement. Furthermore, the thymus may overlap not only the base
of the heart but also virtually the entire mediastinum, thus obscuring
the true cardiac silhouette.
A lateral chest radiograph may be helpful in infants and in older
children with pectus excavatum or other conditions that result in a narrow anteroposterior (AP) chest dimension. The heart may appear small
in the lateral view and suggest that the apparent enlargement in the
PA projection was caused by either the thymus (anterior mediastinum
only) or flattening of the cardiac chambers as a result of a structural
chest abnormality.
In the PA view, the left border of the cardiac shadow consists of three
convex shadows produced, from above downward, by the aortic knob,
the main and left pulmonary arteries, and the left ventricle (Fig. 472.1).
In cases of moderate to marked left atrial enlargement, the atrium may
be visualized between the pulmonary artery and the left ventricle. The
right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) does not contribute to the shadows formed by the left border of the heart. The aortic knob is not as
easily seen in infants and children as in adults. The side of the aortic
arch (left or right) can often be inferred as being opposite the side of
the midline from which the air-­filled trachea is visualized. This observation is important because a right-­sided aortic arch is often present in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation
Branches of
aorta
Pulmonary
veins
LA

rt
Ao

a

S
V RPA LPA
PA
C

LV

RA

Outflow
tract

RV

Left heart

Right heart
PA view

Aorta
L
PA S

PA

V
RA C

RV

LA

I
V
C

LV

Left heart

Right heart
Lateral view

Fig. 472.1 Idealized diagrams showing normal position of the cardiac

chambers and great blood vessels. IVC, Inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LPA, left pulmonary artery; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery;
RA, right atrium; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle; SVC,
superior vena cava. (Adapted and redrawn from Dotter CT, Steinberg I.
Angiocardiographic interpretation. Radiology. 1949;153:513.)

cyanotic CHD, particularly in tetralogy of Fallot. Three structures contribute to the right border of the cardiac silhouette. In the view from
above, they are the superior vena cava, the ascending aorta, and the
right atrium.
Enlargement of cardiac chambers (i.e., increased chamber volume) or
major arteries and veins results in prominence of the areas in which these
structures are normally outlined on the chest radiograph. In contrast, the
electrocardiogram is a more sensitive and accurate index of ventricular
hypertrophy, which is a thickening of the ventricular wall and may or
may not be associated with dilation of the affected cardiac chamber.
The chest radiograph is also an important tool for assessing the
degree of pulmonary vascularity. Pulmonary overcirculation is usually associated with left-­to-­right shunt lesions, whereas pulmonary
undercirculation is associated with obstruction of the RVOT in cyanotic lesions. The esophagus is closely related to the great vessels, and a
barium esophagogram can help delineate these structures in the initial
evaluation of suspected vascular rings, although this has largely been
supplanted by CT.
Echocardiographic examination best defines the morphologic features of intracardiac chambers, cardiac valves, and intracardiac shunts.
CT is used as an adjunct to echocardiogram to evaluate extracardiac
vascular morphology. MRI is used most often to provide a more quantitative assessment of inflammation as well as ventricular volumes, cardiac function, and shunt and regurgitant fractions than is possible with
echocardiogram.

472.2 Electrocardiography
Daniel Bernstein

DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES

The marked changes that occur in cardiac physiology and chamber dominance during the perinatal transition (see Chapter 470) are

2747

reflected in the evolution of the electrocardiogram (ECG) during the
neonatal period. Because vascular resistance in the pulmonary and
systemic circulations is nearly equal in a term fetus, the intrauterine
work of the heart results in an equal mass of both the right and left ventricles. After birth, systemic vascular resistance (SVR) rises when the
placental circulation is eliminated, and pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR) falls when the lungs expand. These changes are reflected in the
ECG over the first few weeks of life as the right ventricular (RV) wall
begins to thin.
The ECG demonstrates these anatomic and hemodynamic features
principally by changes in QRS and T-­wave morphologic features. Typically, pediatric ECGs include several additional leads rarely used in
adults, such as V3R and V4R, which are mirror images of leads V3 and
V4 and are important in the evaluation of right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH). On occasion, lead V1 is inappropriately positioned too
far leftward to reflect RV forces accurately. This problem is present
particularly in premature infants, in whom the electrocardiographic
electrode gel may produce contact among all the precordial leads. An
additional lead used in children is V7, located more laterally than V6
and useful for assessing left-­sided forces.
During the first postnatal days of life, right axis deviation, large R
waves, and upright T waves in the right precordial leads (V3R or V4R
and V1) are the norm (Fig. 472.2). As PVR decreases in the first few
days after birth, the right precordial T waves become negative. In the
great majority of cases, this change occurs within the first 48 hours of
postnatal life. Upright T waves that persist in leads V3R, V4R, or V1
beyond 1 week of life are an abnormal finding indicating RVH or RV
strain, even in the absence of QRS voltage criteria. The T wave in V1
should never be positive before 6 years of age; however, it may remain
negative into adolescence or early adulthood. This finding represents
one of the most important yet subtle differences between pediatric and
adult ECGs and is a common source of error when adult cardiologists
interpret pediatric ECGs.
In a newborn the mean QRS frontal-­plane axis normally lies in
the range of +110 to +180 degrees, reflecting the codominance of the
fetal right and left ventricles. The right-­sided chest leads reveal a larger
positive (R) than negative (S) wave and may do so for months because
the right ventricle remains relatively thick throughout early infancy.
Left-­sided leads (V5 and V6) also reflect right-­sided dominance in the
early neonatal period, when the R:S ratio in these leads may be <1. A
dominant R wave in V5 and V6, reflecting left ventricular (LV) forces,
quickly becomes evident within the first few days of life (Fig. 472.3). As
the child matures, the QRS axis gradually shifts leftward and the RV
forces slowly regress. Leads V1, V3R, and V4R display a prominent R
wave until 6 months to 8 years of age. Most children have an R:S ratio
>1 in lead V4R until age 4 years. The T waves are inverted in leads V4R,
V1, V2, and V3 during infancy and may remain so into the middle of the
second decade of life and beyond. The processes of RV thinning and LV
growth are best reflected in the QRS-­T pattern over the right precordial
leads. The diagnosis of RVH or left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in a
pediatric patient can be made only with an understanding of the normal developmental physiology of these chambers at various ages until
adulthood is reached. As the left ventricle becomes dominant, the ECG
evolves to the characteristic pattern of older children (Fig. 472.4) and
adults (Fig. 472.5).
Ventricular hypertrophy usually results in increased voltage in
the R and S waves in the chest leads. The height of these deflections
is governed by the proximity of the specific electrode to the surface
of the heart; by the sequence of electrical activation through the ventricles, which can result in variable degrees of cancellation of right vs
left forces; and by hypertrophy of the myocardium.
The diagnosis of pathologic RVH is difficult in the first week of postnatal life because physiologic RVH is a normal finding. Serial tracings
are often necessary to determine whether marked right axis deviation
and potentially abnormal right precordial forces or T waves, or both,
will persist beyond the neonatal period (Fig. 472.6). In contrast, an
adult ECG pattern (see Fig. 472.5) seen in a neonate suggests LVH. The
exception is a premature infant, who may display a more “mature” ECG
than a full-­term infant (Fig. 472.7) as a result of lower PVR secondary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2748 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 472.2 Normal ECG from a 5-­day-­old, term-­gestation infant. The frontal plane QRS axis is 150 degrees. There is prominent voltage in the

precordial leads and a suggestion of right ventricular preponderance but not right ventricular hypertrophy. The QRS duration is 60 ms. (From Gering
LE, Knilans TK, Surawicz B, et al. Normal electrocardiograms in the fetus, infants, and children. In: Surawicz B, Knilans TK. Chou’s Electrocardiography
in Clinical Practice, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008: Fig. 28.2, p. 651).

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 472.3 Normal ECG from a healthy 8-­mo-­old infant. The frontal plane QRS axis is 60 degrees. There is less evidence of right ventricular preponderance than in the newborn tracing, with a smaller R wave in lead V1 and smaller S wave in lead V6. (From Gering LE, Knilans TK, Surawicz B,
et al. Normal electrocardiograms in the fetus, infants, and children. In: Surawicz B, Knilans TK. Chou’s Electrocardiography in Clinical Practice, 6th
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008: Fig. 28.3, p. 652).

to underdevelopment of the medial muscular layer of the pulmonary
arterioles. Some premature infants display a pattern of generalized low
voltage across the precordium.
The ECG should always be evaluated systematically to avoid overlooking a minor but important abnormality. One approach is to begin
with an assessment of rate and rhythm, followed by a calculation of
the mean frontal-­plane QRS axis, measurements of segment intervals, assessment of voltages, and lastly assessment of ST and T-­wave
abnormalities.

normally in the chest, the P-­wave axis should be oriented downward
and to the left (i.e., should be upright in leads I and aVF and inverted
in lead aVR). With atrial inversion (situs inversus), the P wave may be
inverted in lead I. Inverted P waves in leads II and aVF are seen in low
atrial, nodal, or junctional rhythms. The absence of P waves indicates
a rhythm originating more distally in the conduction system. In this
case, the morphologic features of the QRS complexes are important in
differentiating a junctional (usually a narrow QRS complex) from a
ventricular (usually a wide QRS complex) rhythm.

RATE AND RHYTHM

P WAVES

A brief rhythm strip should be examined to assess whether a P wave
always precedes each QRS complex. Using the full 12-­lead ECG, the
P-­wave axis should then be estimated as an indication of whether the
rhythm is originating from the sinus node. If the atria are situated

Tall (>2.5 mm), narrow, and spiked P waves are indicative of right
atrial enlargement and are seen in pulmonary stenosis, Ebstein
anomaly of the tricuspid valve, tricuspid atresia, and sometimes cor
pulmonale. These abnormal waves are most obvious in leads II, V3R,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

2749

Fig. 472.4 Normal ECG from a healthy 3-­yr-­old child. The frontal plane QRS axis is 60 degrees. The R/S ratio in lead V1 is less than 1, and there is

no appreciable S wave in lead V6. The R wave in lead V6 is more prominent than that of the infant, suggesting more left ventricular preponderance
but not left ventricular hypertrophy. (From Gering LE, Knilans TK, Surawicz B, et al. Normal electrocardiograms in the fetus, infants, and children. In:
Surawicz B, Knilans TK. Chou’s Electrocardiography in Clinical Practice, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008: Fig. 28.4, p. 652).

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

VI

II

V5

Fig. 472.5 Electrocardiogram of a normal 17-­yr-­old, a member of the school’s track team. At this age the ECG should be similar to that in a normal

adult: the dominant wave in V1 should be the S wave and there is a normal R-­wave progression, growing taller across the precordium from right to
left. The heart rate is slow at 43 bpm (sinus bradycardia), which can be typical of a performance athlete. Note that all precordial lead T waves are
positive, except for V1. This R-­wave progression pattern in a young infant, where there should be right ventricular dominance, would indicate the
presence of left ventricular hypertrophy.

and V1 (Fig. 472.8A). Similar waves are sometimes seen in thyrotoxicosis. Broad P waves, commonly bifid and sometimes biphasic, are
indicative of left atrial enlargement (Fig. 472.8B). They are seen in
some patients with large left-­to-­right shunts (ventricular septal defect
[VSD], patent ductus arteriosus) and with severe mitral stenosis or
mitral regurgitation. Left atrial enlargement, however, is one of the
most common false-­positive readings generated by computerized
ECG machines. Flat P waves may be encountered in patients with
hyperkalemia.

QRS COMPLEX
Right Ventricular Hypertrophy

For the most accurate assessment of ventricular hypertrophy, pediatric ECGs should include the right precordial leads V3R and V4R.
The diagnosis of RVH depends on demonstration of the following
changes (see Fig. 472.6): (1) a qR pattern in the RV surface leads;
(2) a positive T wave in leads V3R-­V4R and V1-­V3 between ages 6
days and 6 years; (3) a monophasic R wave in V3R, V4R, or V1; (4)
an rsR′ pattern in the right precordial leads with the second R wave

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2750 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 472.6 Electrocardiogram of an infant with right ventricular hypertrophy (tetralogy of Fallot). Note the tall R waves in the right precordial leads
(V1-­V2) and deep S waves in V6. The R-­wave progression (taller in the right precordial leads vs the left) is counter to the normal pattern.

I

aVR

V1

V4

V3R

II

aVL

V2

V5

V4R

III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 472.7 Normal ECG from an 8-­day-­old, 28-­wk-­gestation premature infant. The frontal plane QRS axis is 150 degrees, there is a monophasic R
wave in lead V1, and the R/S ratio is less than 1 in lead V6. This illustrates relative right ventricular preponderance without right ventricular hypertrophy. The QRS duration is less than 40 ms. (From Gering LE, Knilans TK, Surawicz B, Tavel ME. Normal electrocardiograms in the fetus, infants, and
children. In: Surawicz B, Knilans TK. Chou’s Electrocardiography in Clinical Practice, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008: Fig. 28.1, p. 650).

taller than the first; (5) age-­corrected increased voltage of the R wave
in leads V3R-­V4R or the S wave in leads V6-­V7, or both; (6) marked
right axis deviation (>120 degrees in patients beyond the newborn
period); and (7) complete reversal of the normal adult precordial RS
pattern. At least two of these changes should be present to support a
diagnosis of RVH.
Abnormal ventricular loading can be characterized as either pressure
overload (as a result of RVOT obstruction, as in pulmonic stenosis) or
volume overload (as a result of a left-­to-­right shunt as in atrial septal
defect [ASD], semilunar valve regurgitation, or dilated cardiomyopathy). These two types of abnormal loads result in distinct electrocardiographic patterns. The pressure overload pattern is characterized by
tall, pure R waves in the right precordial leads. In older children, the
T waves in these leads are initially upright and later become inverted.
In infants and children <6 years, the T waves in V3R-­V4R and V1 are

abnormally upright. The volume overload pattern (typically seen in
patients with ASD) is characterized by an rsR′ pattern (Fig. 472.9) and
a slightly increased QRS duration (which is known as a minor right
ventricular conduction delay rather than a true bundle branch block).
Patients with mild to moderate pulmonary stenosis may also exhibit an
rsR′ pattern in the right precordial leads.

Left Ventricular Hypertrophy

The following features indicate the presence of LVH (Fig. 472.10): (1)
increased voltage (for age) of the S wave in V3R and V1 or the R wave
in V6-­V7, or both. In older children and adults, the criteria for LVH
(Sokolow index) is a combination of S wave in V1 or V2 plus R wave
in V5 or V6 ≥35 mm and (2) a deep Q wave in the left precordial leads.
Remember that an infant with an ECG that would be considered “normal” for an older child may in fact have LVH; therefore reference to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

II

II

A

2751

VI

RAE
B

LAE

Fig. 472.8 Atrial enlargement. A, Peaked narrow P waves in lead II characteristic of right atrial enlargement (RAE). B, Wide, bifid, M-­shaped P
waves in lead II and biphasic p waves in lead V1 typical of left atrial enlargement (LAE).

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

V3R

Fig. 472.9 Electrocardiogram showing a minor right ventricular conduction delay characterized by an RsR′ pattern in V1. Note that the QRS duration is not prolonged (60 msec) as it would be if this were a right bundle branch block (RBBB).

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 472.10 Electrocardiogram showing left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in a 12-­yr-­old child with aortic stenosis. Note the deep S waves in V1-­V3
and tall R in V5-­V6. In addition, T-­wave inversion is present in lead V6, a sign of left ventricular strain.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2752 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
standard voltages for age is always important. Further evidence for
LVH includes depression of the ST segments and inversion of the T
waves in the left precordial leads (V5, V6, and V7), known as a left ventricular strain pattern—these findings suggest the presence of more
severe hypertrophy.

Bundle Branch Block

A complete right bundle branch block (RBBB; prolonged QRS complex, which is usually upright with an rSR′ in lead V1; wide S wave
in lead V6) may be congenital or may be acquired after surgery for
CHD, especially when a right ventriculotomy has been performed, as
in repair of the tetralogy of Fallot. Left bundle branch block (LBBB;
prolonged QRS complex, which is usually upright with an rSR′ in lead
V6; wide S wave in lead V1) is less common in children; this pattern is
often seen in adults with cardiomyopathy, but much less in children
with cardiomyopathy. LBBB may be seen after surgery on the aortic
or mitral valve caused by surgical injury to one of the left-­sided conduction bundles. Alternatively, a bundle branch block pattern may be
indicative of a bypass tract associated with one of the preexcitation syndromes (see Chapter 484).

P-­R AND Q-­T INTERVALS

The duration of the P-­R interval shortens with increasing heart rate;
assessment of this interval should be based on age-­and rate-­corrected
nomograms. A long P-­R interval is diagnostic of a first-­degree heart
block, the cause of which may be congenital, postoperative (after open
heart surgery), inflammatory (myocarditis, pericarditis, Lyme disease, rheumatic fever), or pharmacologic (digitalis, calcium channel
blockers).
The duration of the Q-­T interval varies with the cardiac rate; a corrected Q-­T interval (Q-­Tc) can be calculated by dividing the measured
Q-­T interval by the square root of the preceding R-­R interval. A normal Q-­Tc should be <0.45. It is often lengthened with hypokalemia and
hypocalcemia; in the former, a U wave may be noted at the end of the
T wave (Fig. 472.11). A significant number of medications can also
lengthen the Q-­T interval, so a careful history of medication exposure
is important in evaluating a patient with a borderline or long QT interval. A congenitally prolonged Q-­T interval may also be seen in children
with one of the long QT syndromes (Fig. 472.12). These patients are
at high risk for ventricular arrhythmias, including a dangerous form
of ventricular tachycardia known as torsades de pointes, and sudden
death (see Chapter 484.5).
Lead 1

ST SEGMENT AND T-­WAVE ABNORMALITIES

Coronary ischemia, leading to typical ST and T-­wave abnormalities
seen in adults, is rare in children. A slight elevation of the ST segment
is often seen in normal teenagers, especially males, and is attributed to
early repolarization of the heart (Fig. 472.13). It can sometimes be difficult to distinguish between ischemic ST segment changes and benign
early repolarization; however, the following characteristics suggest
early repolarization: (1) ST elevation limited to the lateral leads (V5-­
V6), (2) a characteristic notch at the J point (junction between the end
of the QRS and the beginning of the ST segment), and (3) a concave
rather than convex ST segment. Lack of any concerning symptoms is
also critical. Early repolarization often resolves with exercise-­induced
tachycardia. In pericarditis, irritation of the epicardium may cause
elevation of the ST segment, followed by abnormal T-­wave inversion
as healing progresses.
Depression of the ST segment may also occur in coronary ischemia
or in any condition that produces myocardial injury, including severe
anemia, carbon monoxide poisoning, glycogen storage disease of the
heart, myocardial tumors, and mucopolysaccharidoses. An aberrant
origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery may lead
to changes indistinguishable from those of acute myocardial infarction in adults. ECG findings of ischemia may be seen in patients with
Kawasaki disease who have developed coronary artery aneurysms (see
Chapters 208 and 493.1). Similar changes may occur in patients with
other rare abnormalities of the coronary arteries and in those with cardiomyopathy, even in the presence of normal coronary arteries. These
patterns are often misread in young infants because of the unfamiliarity of pediatricians with this “infarct” pattern, and thus a high index of
suspicion must be maintained in infants with dilated cardiomyopathy
or with symptoms compatible with coronary ischemia (e.g., inconsolable crying).

Fig. 472.12 Prolonged Q-­T interval in a patient with long QT syndrome.

Lead 2

Lead 3

AVR

AVL

V4R

V1

V3 1/2

V6

AVF

Fig. 472.11 Electrocardiogram in hypokalemia. Serum potassium, 2.7 mEq/L; serum calcium, 4.8 mEq/L at the time of the tracing. Note the widened TU wave and depression of the ST segment in V4R, V1, and V6.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

2753

VI

Fig. 472.13 Early repolarization seen in the mid-­precordial to lateral leads (V2-­V5) in a teenage boy. These minor ST segment elevations, with typical concave slope and combined with a high J point, suggest this is a benign variant and not true ischemia.

I

2

3

AVR

AVL

V4R

V1

V3

V6

AVF

Fig. 472.14 Electrocardiogram in hyperkalemia. Serum potassium, 6.5 mEq/L. Note the tall, tent-­shaped T waves, especially in leads 1, 2, and V6.

T-­wave inversion may occur in myocarditis and pericarditis, or it
may be a sign of either RVH or LVH and ventricular strain. Hypothyroidism may produce flat or inverted T waves in association with generalized low voltage. In hyperkalemia, the T waves are usually of high

voltage and are tent shaped (Fig. 472.14), although tall T waves can be
an early sign of myocardial infarction.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2754 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

472.3 Hematologic Data in Cardiovascular
Evaluation
Daniel Bernstein
In acyanotic infants with large left-­to-­right shunts, the onset of heart
failure often coincides with the nadir of the normal physiologic anemia
of infancy. Increasing the hematocrit in these patients to >40% may
decrease shunt volume and result in an improvement in symptoms;
however, this form of treatment is generally reserved for infants who
are not otherwise surgical candidates (extremely premature infants or
others in whom surgery is delayed for other reasons). In these select
infants, regular evaluation of the hematocrit and booster transfusions
when appropriate may be helpful in improving growth.
Polycythemia is frequently noted in chronically cyanotic patients
with right-­to-­left shunts. Patients with severe polycythemia, rarely seen
in this age of early surgical repair, are in a delicate balance between the
risks of intravascular thrombosis and a bleeding diathesis. The preparation of cyanotic, polycythemic patients for elective noncardiac surgery,
such as dental extraction, includes evaluation and treatment of abnormal coagulation.
Because of the high viscosity of polycythemic blood (hematocrit
>65%), patients with unrepaired cyanotic CHD are at risk for the development of vascular thromboses, especially of cerebral veins. Dehydration increases the risk of thrombosis, and thus adequate fluid intake
must be maintained during hot weather or intercurrent gastrointestinal
illnesses. Diuretics should be used with caution in these patients and
may need to be decreased if fluid intake is a concern. Polycythemic
infants with concomitant iron deficiency are at even greater risk for
cerebrovascular accidents, thought to be the result of the decreased
deformability of microcytic red blood cells. Iron therapy may reduce
this risk, but surgical repair of the cardiac anomaly is the best therapy.
Severely cyanotic patients who are inoperable should have periodic
determinations of hemoglobin and hematocrit. Increasing polycythemia is often associated with headache, fatigue, dyspnea, or a combination of these conditions. Partial exchange transfusion may be required
to treat symptomatic (most often headache or chest pain) individuals
whose hematocrit has risen to the 65–70% level. This procedure is not
without risk, especially in patients with an extreme elevation in pulmonary vascular resistance. Because these patients do not tolerate wide
fluctuations in circulating blood volume, blood should be replaced
with fresh-­frozen plasma or albumin.

M-­MODE ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

M-­mode echocardiography displays a one-­dimensional slice of cardiac structure varying over time (Fig. 472.15). It is used mostly for the
measurement of cardiac dimensions (wall thickness and chamber size)
and cardiac function (fractional shortening, wall thickening). M-­mode
echocardiography is also useful for assessing the motion of intracardiac structures: the opening and closing of valves and movement of
free walls and septa (Fig. 472.16). The most frequently used index of
cardiac function in children is percent fractional shortening (%FS),
which contrasts to adults, where ejection fraction is the most common
functional measurement. %FS is calculated as (LVED − LVES)/LVED,
where LVED is left ventricular dimension at end diastole and LVES is
left ventricular dimension at end systole. Normal fractional shortening is approximately 28–42%. Other M-­mode indices of cardiac function include the mean velocity of fiber shortening (mean VCF), systolic
time intervals (LVPEP = LV preejection period, LVET = LV ejection
time), and isovolemic contraction time. M-­mode assessments of cardiac function are more susceptible to errors because of differences in
wall motion between different segments of the heart (more frequently
seen in adults with ischemic heart disease, but which can be seen in

LV

AMC

3
Aorta

PPM

LA

PMC

Dec. aorta

A

472.4 Echocardiography

CW

Daniel Bernstein
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) has replaced cardiac catheterization for the diagnosis of most forms of CHD. The echocardiographic
examination can be used to evaluate cardiac structures in congenital
heart lesions using two-­dimensional (2D) and three-­dimensional (3D)
imaging, estimate intracardiac pressures and gradients across stenotic
valves and vessels using echo-­Doppler and color flow Doppler, quantitate cardiac contractile function (both systolic and diastolic), determine the direction of flow across a defect, examine the integrity of the
coronary arteries, and detect the presence of vegetations from endocarditis, pericardial fluid, cardiac tumors, and chamber thrombi.
Echocardiography may also be used to assist in the performance of
interventional procedures, including pericardiocentesis, balloon atrial
septostomy (see Chapter 480.2), ASD or VSD closure, transcatheter
valve implantation, and endocardial biopsy. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is used routinely to monitor ventricular function
in patients during surgical procedures and can provide an immediate
assessment of the results of surgical repair of congenital heart lesions. A
complete TTE examination usually entails a combination of M-­mode
and 2D and 3D imaging, as well as pulsed, continuous, and color Doppler flow studies. Doppler tissue imaging provides a more quantitative
assessment of ventricular systolic and diastolic function.

RV
Sept
um
APM
1 2

RVED
S
Dd

Ds

LVED

1

B
Fig. 472.15 M-­mode echocardiogram. A, Diagram of a sagittal sec-

tion of a heart showing the structures traversed by the echo beam as
it is moved superiorly to positions (1), (2), and (3). B, Echocardiogram
from transducer position (1); this view is the best one for measuring
cardiac dimensions and fractional shortening. Fractional shortening is
calculated as (LVED − LVES)/LVED. AMC, Anterior mitral cusp; APM,
anterior papillary muscle; Dec. aorta, descending aorta; LA, left atrium;
LV, left ventricle; PMC, posterior mitral cusp; PPM, posterior papillary
muscle; RV, right ventricle. CW, Chest wall; Ds, LV dimension in systole;
LVED, LV dimension at end diastole (Dd); RVED, RV dimension at end
diastole.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

2755

PV

RV
TV
RA
RV
IVS
LV

AV

MPA

RPA

LPA

A

A

RV

LV
RV
Ao
LA

B

B
Fig. 472.16 M-­mode echocardiograms. The small figure at the top of

each panel shows the 2D parasternal short-­axis echocardiogram image
from which the M-­modes are derived. The cursor can be seen midway
through the image, indicating the one-­dimensional line through which
the M-­mode is being sampled. A, M-­mode echocardiogram of a normal
mitral valve. Arrow shows the opening of the anterior leaflet in early
diastole (see ECG tracing earlier for reference). B, M-­mode echocardiogram of a normal aortic valve. The opening and closing of the aortic
leaflets in systole are outlined by the two arrows. Ao, Aorta; IVS, interventricular septum; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle.

Fig. 472.18 Normal parasternal short-­axis echocardiographic win-

dows. A, With the transducer angled superiorly and rightward, the aortic valve (AV) is imaged, surrounded by both inflow and outflow portions of the right ventricle (RV). B, With the transducer angled inferiorly
and leftward, the left ventricular chamber is imaged along with a cross-­
sectional view of the mitral valve (arrows). LPA, Left pulmonary artery;
MPA, main pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary valve; RA, right atrium;
RPA, right pulmonary artery; TV, tricuspid valve. LV, left ventricle; RV,
right ventricle.

LA

RA

RV

Ao
RV

LV

LV

LA

Fig. 472.17 Normal parasternal long-­axis echocardiographic win-

dow. The transducer is angulated slightly posteriorly, imaging the left-­
sided cardiac structures. If the transducer were to be angulated more
anteriorly, the right ventricular structures would be imaged. The mitral
valve leaflets can be seen in the partially open position in early diastole
(arrows). The closed aortic valve leaflets can be seen just below the
label Ao (aorta). LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle.

children with congenital and acquired heart disease, especially after
surgical repair).

TWO-­DIMENSIONAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

Two-­dimensional echocardiography provides a real-­time image of
cardiac structures. The contracting heart is imaged using several
standard views, including parasternal long axis (Fig. 472.17), parasternal short axis (Fig. 472.18), apical four-­chamber (Fig. 472.19),
subcostal (Fig. 472.20), and suprasternal (Fig. 472.21), each of which
emphasizes specific structures. Two-­dimensional echocardiography

Fig. 472.19 Normal apical four-­chamber echocardiographic window
showing all four cardiac chambers and both atrioventricular valves
opened in diastole. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium;
RV, right ventricle.

has replaced cardiac angiography for the preoperative diagnosis and
follow-­up of the vast majority of congenital heart lesions. However,
when information from the cardiac examination or other studies is
not consistent with the echocardiogram, or in very complex defects,
cardiac catheterization remains an important tool to confirm the anatomic diagnosis and evaluate the degree of physiologic derangement.
MRI is an extremely valuable adjunct to provide a better quantification of ventricular size and function. Cardiac CT is another modality
that is valuable to assess cardiac and adjacent vascular structures.

DOPPLER ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

Doppler echocardiography displays blood flow based on the
change in frequency imparted to sound waves by the movement of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2756 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

SVC
Ao
MPA
LV
RA
LPA

AO

RV

RPA

A
Fig. 472.20 Normal subcostal echocardiographic window showing

the left ventricular outflow tract. The right-­sided structures are not fully
imaged in this view. Ao, Ascending aorta; LV, left ventricle; RA, right
atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava.

BrA
LCA

AsAo

LSCA

B
Fig. 472.22 Color and pulsed Doppler evaluation of pulmonary

DescAo

arterial flow. A, Color Doppler evaluation of a parasternal short-­axis
view showing normal flow through the pulmonary valve to the main
and branch pulmonary arteries. The color of the Doppler flow is blue,
indicating that the flow is moving away from the transducer (which is
located at the top of the figure, at the apex of the triangular ultrasound
window). Note that the color assigned to the Doppler signal does not
indicate the oxygen saturation of the blood. B, Pulsed-­wave Doppler
flow pattern through the pulmonary valve showing a low velocity of
flow (<1.5 m/sec), indicating the absence of a pressure gradient across
the valve. The envelope of the flow signal is below the line, indicating
that the flow is moving away from the transducer. AO, Aorta; LPA, left
pulmonary artery; MPA, main pulmonary artery; RPA, right pulmonary
artery.

A

Ao
LA
RLPV

LLPV

B
Fig. 472.21 A, Normal suprasternal echocardiographic window

showing the aortic arch and its major branches. B, Normal high parasternal window showing color Doppler imaging of normal pulmonary
venous return to the left atrium (LA) of both right (RLPV) and left (LLPV)
lower pulmonary veins. AsAo, Ascending aorta; BrA, brachiocephalic
artery; DescAo, descending aorta; LCA, left carotid artery; LSCA, left
subclavian artery.

erythrocytes. The speed and direction of blood flow in the line of
the echo beam change the transducer’s reference frequency. This
frequency change can be translated into volumetric flow (L/min)
data for estimating systemic or pulmonary blood flow and into
pressure (mm Hg) data for estimating gradients across valves or
across septal defects or vascular communications such as shunts.
Color Doppler permits highly accurate assessment of the presence
and direction of intracardiac shunts and allows identification of
small or multiple left-­to-­right or right-­to-­left shunts (Fig. 472.22).
The severity of valvular insufficiency can be evaluated qualitatively

Fig. 472.23 Doppler evaluation of a patient who had previously

undergone repair of tetralogy of Fallot and who has mild pulmonary
stenosis and moderate pulmonary regurgitation. The tracing shows the
to-­and-­fro flow across the pulmonary valve, with the signal below the
line representing forward flow in systole (see ECG tracing for reference)
and the signal above the line representing regurgitation during diastole.

with both pulsed and color Doppler (Fig. 472.23). Alterations in
venous Doppler flow patterns can be used to detect abnormalities
of systemic and pulmonary veins, and alterations of atrioventricular valve Doppler flow patterns can be used to assess ventricular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation
diastolic functional abnormalities, particularly the E/A ratio, the
ratio of peak velocity flow in diastole (i.e., the ratio of the early
diastole E wave to the peak velocity flow in late diastole caused by
atrial contraction).
M-­mode, 2D, and Doppler echocardiographic methods of assessing LV systolic and diastolic function (e.g., end-­systolic wall stress,
dobutamine stress echocardiography, Doppler tissue imaging) have
proved useful in the serial assessment of patients at risk for the
development of both systolic and diastolic ventricular dysfunction
and ventricular dyssynchrony (where the coordination of left and
right ventricular contraction is abnormal). Such patients include
those with cardiomyopathies, those receiving anthracycline drugs
for cancer chemotherapy, those at risk for iron overload, and those
being monitored for rejection or coronary artery disease after heart
transplantation.

2757

RA
LA
RV
LV

THREE-­DIMENSIONAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

Real-­time 3D echocardiographic reconstruction is most valuable for
the detailed assessment of cardiac morphology (Fig. 472.24). Details
of valve structure, the size and location of septal defects, abnormalities of the ventricular myocardium, and details of the great vessels,
which may not be as readily apparent using 2D imaging, can often
be appreciated on 3D echocardiography. Reconstruction of the view
that the surgeon will encounter in the operating room makes this
technique a valuable adjunct for preoperative imaging.

TRANSESOPHAGEAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

TEE is a sensitive imaging technique that produces a clearer view
of smaller lesions such as vegetations in endocarditis, especially in
larger patients. It is useful in visualizing posteriorly located structures such as the atria, aortic root, and atrioventricular valves.
TEE is useful as an intraoperative technique for monitoring cardiac function during both cardiac and noncardiac surgery and for
screening for residual cardiac defects after the patient is initially
weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass but before being disconnected from the bypass circuit. This technique has been especially
helpful in evaluating the degree of residual regurgitation or stenosis
after valve repairs and in searching for small muscular VSDs that
may have been missed during the closure of larger defects. It is
always preferable to make the diagnosis of excessive valve regurgitation while the patient is still in the operating room, so that the
repair can be revised or the valve replaced, rather than after surgery,
when the patient is already in the postoperative care unit. However,
hemodynamic measurements made while the chest is open and the
patient is still under anesthesia may be different from those made
under more normal conditions, as when the patient is ready to be
discharged from the hospital.

MV

AV

Fig. 472.24 Three-­dimensional echocardiogram showing a short-­axis

view of the left ventricle. AV, Aortic valve; MV, mitral valve. (Courtesy Dr.
Norman Silverman, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.)

Fig. 472.25 Normal four-­chamber view echocardiogram on a fetus at

20 wk of gestation. The foramen ovale (arrow) can be seen between the
right and left atria. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium;
RV, right ventricle.

FETAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY

Fetal echocardiography can be used to evaluate cardiac structures
and function or disturbances in cardiac rhythm (Fig. 472.25). Obstetricians may detect a possible heart defect when screening during
routine obstetric ultrasonography (e.g., cardiac four-­chamber view)
or may refer the patient because of unexplained hydrops fetalis, a
family history of CHD, or a maternal condition associated with fetal
cardiac pathology, such as gestational diabetes, drug use, or infection. Fetal echocardiography can diagnose most significant congenital heart lesions as early as 17-­19 weeks of gestation; accuracy at
this early stage is limited, however, and families should understand
that these studies cannot totally eliminate the possibility of CHD.
Serial fetal echocardiograms have also demonstrated the importance of flow disturbance in the pathogenesis of CHD; such studies
can show the intrauterine progression of a moderate lesion, such as
aortic stenosis, into a more severe lesion, such as hypoplastic left
heart syndrome (HLHS). M-­mode echocardiography can diagnose
rhythm disturbances in the fetus and can determine the success of
antiarrhythmic therapy administered to the mother. A screening
fetal echocardiogram is recommended for women with a previous
child or first-­degree relative with CHD, for those who are at higher
risk of having a child with cardiac disease (e.g., insulin-­dependent
diabetes, women exposed to teratogenic drugs during early pregnancy), and in any fetus in whom a chromosomal abnormality is
suspected or confirmed.
Early detection provides the opportunity to counsel and educate
the parents about the severity of the cardiac lesion and potential
therapeutic or palliative care options. Referral to a high-­risk perinatal service is then performed for further ultrasound screening for
associated anomalies of other organs and potential amniocentesis
or sequencing of cell-­free DNA in maternal blood for karyotyping.
For fetuses with ductal dependent lesions, delivery can be planned
at a tertiary care center, enhancing safety by avoiding the requirement for postnatal transport of an unstable infant. For fetuses with
complex CHD at high risk for complications immediately at birth
(e.g., HLHS with intact atrial septum), delivery can be arranged
with an operating room and surgeon standing by. In utero treatment of CHD is an experimental procedure, with the most common
procedure being aortic balloon valvuloplasty for HLHS.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2758 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

472.5 Exercise Testing
Daniel Bernstein
The normal cardiorespiratory system adapts to the extensive
demands of exercise with a several-­fold increase in oxygen consumption and cardiac output. Because of the large reserve capacity
for exercise, significant abnormalities in cardiovascular performance may be present without symptoms at rest or during ordinary
activities. When patients are evaluated in a resting state, significant abnormalities in cardiac function may not be appreciated, or
if detected, their implications for quality of life may not be recognized. Permission for children with cardiovascular disease to participate in various forms of physical activity is frequently based on
totally subjective criteria. As the importance of aerobic exercise is
increasingly recognized, even for children with complex congenital
heart lesions, exercise testing can provide a quantitative evaluation
of the child’s ability to participate safely in both competitive and
noncompetitive sports. Exercise testing can also play an important
role in evaluating symptoms and quantitating the severity of cardiac abnormalities. In children with coronary artery abnormalities
(e.g., Kawasaki disease or COVID-­19 with coronary aneurysms),
exercise testing can detect ischemia that might otherwise be
overlooked.
In older children, exercise studies are generally performed on a
graded treadmill apparatus with timed intervals of increasing grade
and speed. In younger children, exercise studies are often performed on a bicycle ergometer. Many laboratories have the capacity to measure both cardiac and pulmonary function noninvasively
during exercise. This allows measurement of both resting and maximal oxygen consumption (Vo2max) and the point at which anaerobic
threshold is reached, which are important indicators of cardiovascular fitness.
As a child grows, the capacity for muscle work is enhanced with
increased body size and skeletal muscle mass. All indices of cardiopulmonary function do not increase in a uniform manner. A major
response to exercise is an increase in cardiac output, principally
achieved through an increase in heart rate, but stroke volume (SV),
systemic venous return, and pulse pressure are also increased. SVR
is greatly decreased as the blood vessels in working muscle dilate in
response to increasing metabolic demands. As the child becomes
older and larger, the response of the heart rate to exercise remains
prominent, but cardiac output increases because of growing cardiac volume capacity and thus SV. Responses to dynamic exercise
are not dependent solely on age. For any given body surface area,
boys have a larger SV than size-­matched girls. This increase is also
mediated by posture. Augmentation of SV with upright, dynamic
exercise is facilitated by the pumping action of working muscles,
which overcomes the static effect of gravity and increases systemic
venous return.
Dynamic exercise testing defines not only endurance and exercise capacity but also the effect of such exercise on myocardial
blood flow and cardiac rhythm. Significant ST segment depression
or elevation reflects abnormalities in myocardial perfusion, such as
might occur during exercise in children with extremely hypertrophied left ventricles. The exercise ECG is considered abnormal if
the ST segment depression is >2 mm and extends for at least 0.06
seconds after the J point (onset of the ST segment) in conjunction
with a horizontal-­, upward-­, or downward-­sloping ST segment. A
decrease in blood pressure before maximal exercise is reached is
regarded as a risk indicator in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Provocation of rhythm disturbances during an exercise
study is an important method of evaluating select patients with
known or suspected rhythm disorders. The effect of pharmacologic
management can also be tested in this manner.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

472.6 Cardiac Imaging Studies
Daniel Bernstein
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) are extremely helpful in the diagnosis and management
of patients with CHD and inflammatory lesions (Table 472.1). These
techniques produce tomographic images of the heart in any projection
(Fig. 472.26 and Fig. 472.27), with excellent contrast resolution of fat, myocardium, and lung, as well as moving blood from blood vessel walls. MRI
is useful in evaluating areas that are less well visualized by echocardiography, such as distal branch pulmonary artery anatomy and anomalies in
systemic and pulmonary venous return.
MRA allows the acquisition of images in several tomographic
planes. Within each plane, images are obtained at different phases of
the cardiac cycle. Thus when displayed in a dynamic “cine” format,
changes in wall thickening, chamber volume, and valve function can
be displayed and analyzed. Blood flow velocity and blood flow volume can be calculated. MRA is an excellent technique for following
patients serially after repair of complex CHD, such as tetralogy of
Fallot. In these patients, MRA can be used to assess RV volume and
mass and to quantify the amount of regurgitation through either
the pulmonary or tricuspid valve. Other MRI techniques, such as
myocardial delayed enhancement and tissue T1 weighting, can be
used to quantify areas of myocardial scar in patients with cardiomyopathy or in patients after CHD repair, especially tetralogy of Fallot.
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy, predominantly a research tool
at present, provides a means of demonstrating relative concentrations of high-­energy metabolites (adenosine triphosphate, adenosine diphosphate, inorganic phosphate, and phosphocreatine) within
regions of the working myocardium.
Computer processing of MRA images allows the noninvasive visualization of the cardiovascular system from inside of the heart or vessels, a technique known as fly-­through imaging. These images allow the
cardiologist to image the interiors of various cardiovascular structures
(Fig. 472.28). These techniques are especially helpful in imaging complex peripheral arterial stenoses.
CT scanning can be used to perform rapid, respiration-­gated cardiac
imaging in children with resolutions down to 0.5 mm. Three-­dimensional
reconstruction of CT images is especially useful in evaluating branch pulmonary arteries, anomalies in systemic and pulmonary venous return,
and great vessel anomalies such as coarctation of the aorta (Fig. 472.29).
Radionuclide angiography may be used to detect and quantify
shunts and to analyze the distribution of blood flow to each lung.
This technique is particularly useful in quantifying the volume
of blood flow distribution between the two lungs in patients with
abnormalities of the pulmonary vascular tree or to quantify the success of balloon angioplasty and intravascular stenting procedures.
Gated blood pool scanning can be used to calculate hemodynamic
measurements, quantify valvular regurgitation, and detect regional
wall motion abnormalities. Thallium imaging can be performed to
evaluate cardiac muscle perfusion. These methods can be used at
the bedside of seriously ill children and can be performed serially,
with minimal discomfort and low radiation exposure.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

472.7 Diagnostic and Interventional Cardiac
Catheterization
Daniel Bernstein
The catheterization laboratory, once the site for initial diagnosis of
CHD, has become the center of high-­technology interventional procedures, allowing for the nonsurgical repair or palliation of heart defects
that once required open heart surgery. Some centers have developed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

2759

Table 472.1  Cardiac MRI Assessment of Myocardial Inflammation
CAUSE

SPECIFIC CAUSE OF MECHANISM

KEY MRI FINDING

Infection

Infectious agents can induce cardiac injury by directly
infecting cardiomyocytes or through cellular or
humoral immune activation
Viral: Enteroviruses, coronaviruses, adenoviruses,
parvovirus B19, Herpesviridae 6, CMV, EBV, HIV,
influenza; SARS-­CoV-­2 can infect cardiomyocytes
by binding to the ACE2 receptor, although immune
dysregulation is likely a more prominent mechanism
of myocardial injury
Bacterial: Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease),
Treponema pallidum, group A streptococcus (likely
postinfectious)
Protozoal: Trypanosoma cruzi (Chagas disease),
Toxoplasma gondii
Parasitic: Echinococcus granulosus, Trichinella spiralis

Viral myocarditis: Linear subepicardial or midwall LGE, commonly
involving the basal inferolateral wall, basal anterior septum,
mid-­inferolateral wall, and basal to mid-­inferior wall, with
corresponding T2 hyperintensity or high T2
Chagas disease: LGE present in up to 70% of patients, most
commonly at the left ventricular apex, apical inferior and lateral
wall, and basal to mid-­inferolateral wall; LGE is usually midwall or
subepicardial and, less commonly, subendocardial or transmural
with apical aneurysms
Bacterial and parasitic myocarditis: Limited data on MRI findings
with no specific pattern
COVID-­19: Findings may be similar to non-­COVID viral
myocarditis, although some studies have indicated a higher
prevalence of diffuse myocardial edema, with global elevation of
T1 and T2 mapping values

Postvaccination

mRNA COVID-­19 vaccines: Proposed mechanisms
include immune activation and dysregulation and
molecular mimicry between viral spike protein and
an unknown cardiac protein

mRNA COVID-­19 vaccination: There are currently limited MRI
data, mostly from case series to date; MRI findings appear
to be typical for viral myocarditis, although the severity and
extent of MRI abnormalities reported have been relatively mild;
axillary lymphadenopathy ipsilateral to the vaccination site may
be present and may be a useful clue, particularly if a history of
recent vaccine administration is not provided

Systemic disease

Several systemic diseases are associated with
myocardial inflammation:
Vasculitides: EGPA, Kawasaki disease
Connective tissue disorders: Systemic sclerosis, SLE,
rheumatoid arthritis, dermatomyositis
Granulomatous disease: Sarcoidosis

EGPA: MRI findings include patchy midwall and subepicardial LGE
with corresponding T2 hyperintensity and subendocardial apical
LGE with or without apical thrombus; concomitant pulmonary
opacities might be present
SLE: Patchy or linear midwall and subepicardial LGE in one
third of patients; elevated T1 and T2 value decrease after
antiinflammatory treatment; higher prevalence of pericardial
and pleural effusion and thickening than in other causes of
myocarditis
Sarcoidosis: Patchy and nodular LGE with associated high T2,
most common at the basal septum and basal inferolateral
segment; associated findings include mediastinal and hilar
lymphadenopathy and pulmonary opacities

Drug related

Hypersensitivity reactions: Penicillin, cephalosporins,
benzodiazepines, tricyclic antidepressants
Toxic reactions: Anthracyclines, amphetamines,
cyclophosphamide
Immune activation or dysregulation: ICI-­related
myocarditis

ICI-­related myocarditis: Diffusely elevated T1 and T2 values in
78% and 43% of patients, respectively; in one study, only 48% of
patients met both T1 and T2 modified Lake Louise criteria; LGE
present in 48% of patients, most commonly subepicardial or
midmyocardial, and predominating in the basal and mid-­inferior
and inferolateral segments

Other

Hypereosinophilic syndrome, cocaine, postradiation
injury, thyrotoxicosis, giant cell myocarditis

Hypereosinophilic syndrome: Similar MRI findings to EGPA, with
higher prevalence of subendocardial LGE
Giant cell myocarditis: MRI appearance is similar to cardiac
sarcoidosis, although LGE tends to be more extensive and right
ventricular involvement more common

ACE2, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme 2; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; EGPA, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; LGE,
late gadolinium enhancement; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
From Sanchez Tijmes F, Thavendiranathan P, Udell JA, et al. Cardiac MRI assessment of nonischemic myocardial inflammation: state of the art review and update on myocarditis
associated with COVID-­19 vaccination. Radiol Cardiothorac Imaging. 2021;3(6):e210252, Table 1.

hybrid catheterization laboratories, combining standard fluoroscopic
imaging with an operating suite, allowing combined approaches to
treat complex congenital heart lesions.

DIAGNOSTIC CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION

Diagnostic catheterization is still performed (1) to assist in the initial
diagnosis of some complex congenital heart lesions (e.g., tetralogy of
Fallot with pulmonary atresia and major aortopulmonary collateral
arteries, pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum and coronary sinusoids, HLHS with mitral stenosis); (2) in cases in which other
imaging studies are equivocal; (3) in patients for whom hemodynamic
assessment is critical (to determine the size of a left-­to-­right shunt in
borderline cases or to determine the presence or absence of pulmonary vascular disease in an older patient with a left-­to-­right shunt);
(4) between stages of repair of complex CHD (e.g., hypoplastic left or
right heart syndromes); (5) for long-­term surveillance of patients with

complex CHD (e.g., after Fontan palliation for single ventricles); (6) for
myocardial biopsy in the diagnosis of cardiomyopathy or in screening
for cardiac rejection after cardiac transplantation; and (7) for electrophysiologic study in the evaluation of cardiac arrhythmias (see Chapter
484).
Cardiac catheterization should be performed with the patient in as
close to a basal state as possible. Conscious sedation or low-­level anesthesia is routine. If a deeper level of general anesthesia is required, careful choice of an anesthetic agent is warranted to avoid depression of
cardiovascular function and subsequent distortion of the calculations
of cardiac output, PVR and SVR, and shunt ratios.
Cardiac catheterization in critically ill infants with CHD should be
performed in a center where a pediatric cardiovascular surgical team
is available in the event that an operation is required immediately
afterward. The complication rate of cardiac catheterization is greatest in critically ill infants; they must be studied in a thermally neutral

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2760 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
environment and monitored closely for hypothermia, hypoglycemia,
acidosis, or excessive blood loss.
Catheterization may be limited to the right-­sided cardiac structures, the left-­sided structures, or both the right and left sides of the
heart. The catheter is passed into the heart under fluoroscopic guidance through a percutaneous entry point in a femoral or jugular vein.
In infants and in a number of older children, the left side of the heart
can be accessed by passing the catheter across a patent foramen ovale
to the left atrium and left ventricle. If the foramen is closed, the left

side of the heart can be catheterized by passing the catheter retrograde
via a percutaneous entry site in the femoral artery or, if necessary, via
a transatrial septal puncture. The catheter can also be manipulated
through abnormal intracardiac defects (ASD, VSD). Blood samples are
obtained for measuring oxygen saturation in each cardiac chamber or
blood vessel, allowing the calculation of shunt volumes. Pressures are
measured for gradients across septal defects or valves and for calculating valve areas. Radiopaque contrast is injected to delineate cardiac and
vascular structures. A catheter with a thermosensor tip (Swan-­Ganz
catheter) can be used to measure cardiac output by thermodilution.
Specialized catheters can be used to measure more sophisticated indices of cardiac function; those with pressure-­transducer tips can measure the first derivative of LV pressure (dP/dt). Conductance catheters
can be used to generate pressure-­volume loops, from which indices
of both contractility (end-­systolic elastance) and relaxation can be

LCA
BV
MPA

AO

LV
RV

LA

Fig. 472.26 Normal sagittal MRI. AO, Aorta; BV, brachiocephalic
vein; LA, left atrium; LCA, left coronary artery; LV, left ventricle; MPA,
main pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. (From Bisset GS III. Cardiac
and great vessel anatomy. In: El-­Khoury GY, Bergman RA, Montgomery
WJ, eds. Sectional Anatomy by MRI/CT. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1990.)

Fig. 472.28 Fly-­through CT imaging in a patient with an aberrant

right subclavian artery. Compression of the trachea by the aberrant artery can be visualized.

Fig 472.27 Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) findings in a patient with mRNA vaccine-associated myocarditis. Patient presented to
hospital 2 days after the second COVID-19 mRNA vaccine with chest pain. Troponin T was elevated at 105 ng/L (normal < 15 ng/L). A, CMRI demonstrated normal left ventricular function. B, T1 mapping suggested myocardial edema in the inferoseptum and inferior segments (arrows) with corresponding nonischemic scar on late gadolinium enhancement imaging (C, arrows). (From Crosier R, Kafil TS, Paterson DI. Imaging for Cardiovascular
Complications of COVID-19: Cardiac Manifestations in Context. Can J Cardiol. 2023;39:779–792. Fig. 7.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 472 u Laboratory Cardiac Evaluation

THERMODILUTION MEASUREMENT OF CARDIAC
OUTPUT

AAo

MPA

The thermodilution method for measuring cardiac output is performed with a flow-­directed, thermistor-­tipped Swan-­Ganz catheter.
A known change in the heat content of the blood is induced at one
point in the circulation (usually the right atrium or inferior vena
cava) by injecting room-­temperature saline, and the resultant change
in temperature is detected at a point downstream (usually the pulmonary artery). This method is used to measure cardiac output in
the catheterization laboratory in patients without shunts. Monitoring cardiac output by the thermodilution method can occasionally be
useful in managing critically ill infants and children in an intensive
care setting after cardiac surgery or in the presence of shock. In this
case, a triple-­lumen catheter is used for both cardiac output determination and measurement of pulmonary artery and pulmonary capillary wedge pressures.

RAA

RPA
LA
DAo

Fig. 472.29 Three-­dimensional reconstruction of CT images from a

neonate with severe coarctation of the aorta. The patent ductus arteriosus can be seen toward the left leading from the main pulmonary artery
to the descending aorta. The tortuous and narrow coarctated segment
is just to the right of the ductus. The transverse aorta is hypoplastic as
well. AAo, Ascending aorta; DAo, descending aorta; LA, left atrium;
MPA, main pulmonary artery; RAA, right atrial appendage; RPA, right
pulmonary artery. (Courtesy Dr. Paul Pitlick, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.)
O2 consumption 160 mL/min
O2 consumption 200 mL/min/M2
O2 capacity
200 mL/L
O2 % saturation
O2 content
mL/L

Pressures
(mm Hg)

(

Left Side
Pressures
(mm Hg)

(

Right Side

Vena cava

Pulmonary vein
95%

75%

Atrium

Atrium
M3

M8

95%

75%

Ventricle
Ventricle

25
3
75%

95%

75%

95%

100
8

Pulmonary artery
Aorta

25
10
M  16

2761

100
60
M  83

“Pulmonary capillaries”

ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY

The major blood vessels and individual cardiac chambers may be
visualized by selective injection of contrast material into specific
chambers or great vessels. Fluoroscopy is used to visualize the
catheter as it passes through the various heart chambers. After the
cardiac catheter is properly placed in the chamber to be studied,
contrast medium is injected with a power injector and cineangiograms are exposed. Modern catheterization labs use digital imaging
technology, allowing for a significant reduction in radiation exposure. Biplane cineangiocardiography allows detailed evaluation of
specific cardiac chambers and blood vessels in two planes simultaneously with the injection of a single bolus of contrast material.
Various angled views (e.g., left anterior oblique, cranial angulation)
are used to display specific anatomic features optimally in individual lesions.
Rapid injection of contrast medium under pressure into the circulation is not without risk, and each injection should be carefully
planned. Contrast agents consist of hypertonic solutions, with some
containing organic iodides, which can cause complications, including nausea, a generalized burning sensation, central nervous system
symptoms, renal insufficiency, and allergic reactions. For patients
with known renal insufficiency who require angiography, there
are protocols to protect the kidneys involving prehydration and
medications. Hypertonicity of the contrast medium may result in
transient myocardial depression and a drop in blood pressure, followed soon afterward by tachycardia, an increase in cardiac output,
and a shift of interstitial fluid into the circulation. This shift can
transiently increase the symptoms of heart failure in critically ill
patients.

INTERVENTIONAL CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION

M8
B.S.A. – 0.8 m2
Pulmonary flow
L/min/M2

5

5

Pulmonary resistance
mm Hg/L/min/M2

2

16

Shunt
L/min/M2

Systemic flow
L/min/M2
Systemic resistance
mm Hg/L/min/M2

L

R

0

R

L

0

Fig. 472.30 Diagram of normal circulatory dynamics with pressure
readings, oxygen content, and percent saturation. B.S.A., body surface
area. (Modified from Nadas AS, Fyler DC. Pediatric Cardiology, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1972.)

derived, although these are almost exclusively used in research studies.
Complete hemodynamics can be calculated, including cardiac output,
intracardiac left-­to-­right and right-­to-­left shunts, and SVR and PVR.
Figure 472.30 depicts normal circulatory dynamics.

Catheter treatment is the standard of practice for most cases of isolated pulmonary or aortic valve stenosis and for recoarctation of the
aorta. A special catheter with a sausage-­shaped balloon at the distal
end is passed through the obstructed valve. Rapid filling of the balloon with a mixture of contrast material and saline solution results
in tearing of the stenotic valve tissue, usually at the site of inappropriately fused raphe. Valvular pulmonary stenosis can be treated
successfully by balloon angioplasty; in most patients, angioplasty
has replaced surgical repair as the initial procedure of choice. The
clinical results of this procedure are similar to those obtained by
open heart surgery, but without the need for sternotomy or prolonged hospitalization. Balloon valvuloplasty for aortic stenosis
has also yielded excellent results, although, as with surgery, aortic
stenosis often recurs as the child grows, and multiple procedures
may thus be required. One complication of both valvuloplasty and
surgery is the creation of valvular insufficiency. This complication
has more serious implications when it occurs on the aortic vs the
pulmonary side of the circulation because regurgitation is less well
tolerated at systemic arterial pressures.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2762 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Stent

Fig. 472.32 Illustration of implantation of a Melody stent-­valve delivered to the pulmonary position by a catheter inserted into the right
femoral vein. (Copyright Medtronic 2017, used with permission.)

Fig. 472.31 Descending aortic angiogram showing intravascular
stent placed in the descending aorta for treatment of recurrent coarctation of the aorta.

Balloon angioplasty is the procedure of choice for patients
with restenosis of coarctation of the aorta after earlier surgery. It
remains controversial whether angioplasty is the best procedure for
native (unoperated) coarctation of the aorta in the infant because of
greater recurrence risk and reports of late aneurysm formation, and
most centers still refer primary coarctation in infants and young
children for surgical repair. However, in older patients with previously undiagnosed coarctation, especially those with decreased LV
function, primary angioplasty with stent placement may be considered. Other applications of the balloon angioplasty technique
include amelioration of mitral stenosis, dilation of surgical conduits
(e.g., RV-­PA conduits), relief of branch pulmonary artery (PA) narrowing, dilation of systemic or pulmonary venous obstructions, and
the pioneering balloon atrial septostomy (Rashkind procedure) for
transposition of the great arteries (see Chapter 480.2).
Interventional catheterization techniques are being adapted for
use in the fetus with lesions such as aortic stenosis to prevent their
progression to more complex lesions such as HLHS. In these procedures, after administration of appropriate anesthesia, a needle is
passed through the maternal abdominal wall, the uterine wall, and
the fetal chest wall and directly into the fetal left ventricle (see Fig.
480.13). A coronary angioplasty balloon catheter is passed through
the needle and across the stenotic aortic valve, which is then dilated.
With the restoration of normal LV blood flow, it is hoped that normal LV growth potential is restored. Midterm results with this
technique in a growing number of patients continue to show mixed
results, with good ventricular growth leading to a two-­ventricle circulation in approximately 25% of highly preselected patients.
In patients with branch pulmonary artery stenoses, intravascular
stents are delivered over a balloon catheter and expanded within the
vessel lumen (Fig. 472.31). Once placed, the stents can often be dilated
to successively greater sizes as the patient grows, although their use
in younger infants and children is limited by the extent they can be
further expanded.

Closure of a small patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is routinely
achieved with catheter-­delivered coils (see Fig. 475.11), whereas a
larger PDA can be closed with a variety of sandwich-­type devices.
Closure of anomalous vascular connections (coronary fistulas, venovenous collaterals in cyanotic heart lesions) can also be
achieved using coils. Secundum ASDs are now routinely closed
with a double disk occluder (e.g., Amplatzer) device (see Fig.
475.3). Versions of these devices are currently in clinical trials for
closure of surgically difficult-­to-­reach muscular VSDs and for the
more common perimembranous VSD. Catheter-­delivered devices
may also be used as an adjunct to complex surgical repairs (e.g.,
dilation or stenting of branch pulmonary artery or pulmonary vein
stenosis). High-­risk patients undergoing the Fontan operation (see
Fig. 479.9) often have a small fenestration created between the right
and left sides of the circulation to serve as a “pop-­off valve” for high
right-­sided pressure in the early surgical period. Patients with these
“fenestrated Fontans” are usually candidates for subsequent closure
of the fenestration with a catheter-­delivered device.
One of the greatest advances in interventional catheterization
over the past decade has been transcatheter valve implantation.
Typically, a porcine valve is sewn into an expandable stent (commercially available), which is then collapsed around a balloon catheter.
The device is positioned across a stenotic or insufficient pulmonary
or aortic valve and the balloon inflated, expanding both the stent
and the tissue valve. The balloon catheter is then removed, leaving
the new valve in place, well anchored by the stent to the walls of
the main pulmonary artery or aorta. At this time, the most common application in children is replacement of the pulmonary valve
(Melody or Harmony Valve) in patients who have had prior surgery
for tetralogy of Fallot (usually because of residual pulmonary insufficiency) (Fig. 472.32). In older adults, the most common application is replacement of a stenotic aortic valve (transcatheter aortic
valve replacement or TAVR). Stent valves have even been placed in
the tricuspid position in children with tricuspid insufficiency. For
older patients with mitral and tricuspid valve insufficiency, a clip
device (Mitraclip) can be delivered by catheter to create a double-­
orifice valve, reducing the amount of insufficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 473 u Epidemiology and Genetic Basis of Congenital Heart Disease

Section 3

Congenital Heart
Disease
Chapter 473

Epidemiology and Genetic
Basis of Congenital Heart
Disease
Daniel Bernstein
Congenital heart disease (CHD) occurs in approximately 0.6–1.3%
of live births. The incidence is higher in stillborns (3–4%), spontaneous abortuses (10–25%), and premature infants (approximately 2%,
excluding patent ductus arteriosus [PDA]). This overall incidence does
not include mitral valve prolapse, PDA of preterm infants, and bicuspid aortic valve (present in 1–2% of adults). Congenital cardiac defects
have a wide spectrum of severity in infants: approximately 2-­3 in 1,000
newborn infants will be symptomatic with heart disease in the first
year of life. The diagnosis is established by 1 week of age in 40–50% of
patients with CHD and by 1 month of age in 50–60%. Approximately
13% of infants with CHD have associated extracardiac malformations.
With advances in both corrective and palliative surgery, 90% of children with CHD survive to adulthood, and in the United States, there
are more adults living with CHD than there are children with CHD.
Despite these advances, CHD remains the leading cause of death in
children with congenital malformations. When patients with repaired
or palliated CHD reach older adulthood, the risk of morbidity and
mortality begins to increase (see Chapter 483.1). Table 473.1 summarizes the relative frequency of the most common congenital cardiac
lesions.
Most congenital defects are well tolerated in the fetus because of
the parallel nature of the fetal circulation. Even the most severe cardiac defects, such as hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), can
usually be well compensated for by the fetal circulation. In HLHS the
entire fetal cardiac output is ejected by the right ventricle via the ductus
arteriosus into both the descending and ascending aortae (the latter
filling in a retrograde fashion), so that fetal organ blood flow is minimally perturbed. Because the placenta provides for gas exchange and
the normal fetal circulation has mixing between more highly and more
poorly oxygenated blood at the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus,
fetal organ oxygen delivery is also not dramatically affected. It is only
after birth, when the fetal pathways begin to close and the umbilical
cord is cut, that the full hemodynamic impact of an anatomic abnormality becomes apparent. One notable exception is the case of severe
regurgitant lesions, most frequently of the tricuspid valve. In these
lesions, such as Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve or severe right
ventricular outflow obstruction (see Chapter 479.7), the parallel fetal
circulation cannot compensate for the severe volume or pressure load
imposed on the right side of the heart. In utero heart failure, often with
fetal pleural and pericardial effusions, and generalized ascites (nonimmune hydrops fetalis) may occur.
Although the most significant transitions in the circulation occur in
the immediate perinatal period, the circulation continues to undergo
changes after birth, and these later changes may also have a hemodynamic impact on cardiac lesions and their apparent incidence. When
pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) falls in the first several weeks of
life, left-­to-­right shunting through intracardiac defects increases and

2763

symptoms and signs become more apparent. Thus in patients with a
ventricular septal defect (VSD), heart failure is often first noticed
between 1 and 3 months of age (see Chapter 475.6) and not in the
immediate newborn period. The severity of various defects can also
change dramatically with growth; some VSDs may become smaller and
even close as the child ages. Alternatively, stenosis of the aortic or pulmonary valve, which may be only moderate in the newborn period,
may become worse if valve orifice growth does not keep pace with
patient growth (see Chapter 476.5). The physician should always be
alert for associated noncardiac congenital malformations, which can
adversely affect the patient’s prognosis (Tables 473.2 and 473.3). Developmental delay of various degrees is also a concern in many patients
with CHD and may have its origins in alterations in fetal blood flow
patterns caused by the heart defect, postnatal hypoxemia, and the
effects of cardiopulmonary bypass during open heart surgery.

ETIOLOGY

The cause of most congenital heart defects is still unknown. Many
cases of CHD are multifactorial and may result from a combination of
genetic predisposition and an as-­yet-­to-­be-­determined environmental stimulus. Overall, variants in approximately 400 genes have been
identified as potentially causative of CHD. Despite these advances,
half of cases still lack a known genetic cause. A small percentage of
congenital heart lesions are related to known chromosomal abnormalities, in particular, trisomies 21, 13, and 18 and Turner syndrome; heart
disease is found in >90% of patients with trisomy 18, 50% of patients
with trisomy 21, and 40% of those with Turner syndrome (see Table
473.3). Ethnic factors may have a role in CHD; certain types of VSDs
(supracristal) are more common in Asian children. There are also
male:female differences for many common forms of CHD. The risk of
CHD increases if a first-­degree relative (parent or sibling) is affected,
again emphasizing the role of genetics, even if the individual genes
have not yet been identified.
A growing list of congenital heart lesions has been associated with
specific chromosomal abnormalities, and several have even been linked
to specific gene defects (see Table 473.3 and Table 473.4). Fluorescence
Table 473.1  Relative Frequency of Major Congenital
Heart Lesions*
LESION

% OF ALL LESIONS

Ventricular septal defect

35–30

Atrial septal defect (secundum)

6–8

Patent ductus arteriosus

6–8

Coarctation of aorta

5–7

Tetralogy of Fallot

5–7

Pulmonary valve stenosis

5–7

Aortic valve stenosis

4–7

d-­Transposition of great arteries

3–5

Hypoplastic left ventricle

1–3

Hypoplastic right ventricle

1–3

Truncus arteriosus

1–2

Total anomalous pulmonary
venous return

1–2

Tricuspid atresia

1–2

Single ventricle

1–2

Double-­outlet right ventricle

1–2

Others

5–10

*Excluding patent ductus arteriosus in preterm neonates, bicuspid aortic valve,
physiologic peripheral pulmonic stenosis, and mitral valve prolapse.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2764 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 473.2  Genes and Loci Associated with Congenital Heart Disease
SYNDROME

GENE(S)

LOCI

CARDIAC DISEASE

CONGENITAL
HD (%)

Alagille

JAG 1
NOTCH2

20p12.2
1p12-­p11

PPS, TOF, PA

>90

Bile duct paucity, posterior
embryotoxon, butterfly
vertebrae, renal defects

CFC

BRAF
KRAS
MAP2K1
MAP2K2

7q34
12p12.1
15q22.31
19p13.3

PVS, ASD, HCM

75

Curly hair, sparse eyebrows,
feeding problems,
developmental delay,
intellectual disability

Cantu

ABCC9

12p12.1

PDA, BAV, HCM, CoA,
PE, AS

75

Hypertrichosis at birth,
macrocephaly, narrow thorax,
coarse facies, macroglossia,
broad hands, advanced bone
age

Char

TFAP2B

6p12.3

PDA, VSD

58

Wide-­set eyes, down-­slanting
palpebral fissures, thick lips,
hand anomalies

CHARGE

CHD7

8q12

TOF, PDA, DORV,
AVSD, VSD

75–85

Coloboma, choanal atresia,
genital hypoplasia, ear
anomalies, hearing loss,
developmental delay, poor
growth, intellectual disability

Costello

HRAS

11p15.5

PVS, ASD, VSD, HCM,
arrhythmias

44–52

Short stature, feeding problems,
broad facies, bitemporal
narrowing, redundant skin,
intellectual disability

22q11.2DS

TBX1

22q11.2
deletion

Conotruncal defects,
VSD, IAA, ASD, VR

74–85

Cleft palate, bifid uvula,
velopharyngeal insufficiency,
microcephaly, hypocalcemia,
immune deficit, psychiatric
disorder, learning disability

Ellis-­van Creveld

EVC
EVC2

4p16.2
4p16.2

Common atrium

60

Skeletal dysplasia, short limbs,
polydactyly, short ribs,
dysplastic nails, respiratory
insufficiency

Holt-­Oram

TBX5

12q24.1

VSD, ASD, AVSD,
conduction defects

50

Absent, hypoplastic, or
triphalangeal thumbs;
phocomelia; defects of radius;
limb defects more prominent
on left

Kabuki

KMT2D
KDM6A

12q13
Xp11.3

CoA, BAV, VSD, TOF,
TGA, HLHS

50

Growth deficiency, wide
palpebral fissures, large
protuberant ears, fetal finger
pads, intellectual disability,
clinodactyly

Noonan

PTPN11
SOS1
RAF1
KRAS
NRAS
RIT1
SHOC2
SOS2
BRAF

12q24.13
2p22.1
3p25.2
12p12.1
1p13.2
1q22
10q25.2
14q21.3
7q34

Dysplastic PVS, ASD,
TOF, AVSD, HCM,
VSD, PDA

75

Short stature, hypertelorism,
down-­slanting palpebral
fissures, ptosis, low posterior
hairline, pectus deformity,
bleeding disorder, chylothorax,
cryptorchidism

VACTERL
association

Unknown

VSD, ASD, HLHS, PDA,
TGA, TOF, TA

53–80

Vertebral anomalies, anal
atresia, tracheoesophageal
fistula, renal anomalies, radial
dysplasia, thumb hypoplasia,
single umbilical artery

Williams-­Beuren

7q11.23
deletion (ELN)

7q11.23

SVAS, PAS, VSD, ASD

80

Unusual facies, thick lips,
strabismus, stellate iris pattern,
intellectual disability

Carpenter

RAB23

6p11.2

VSD, ASD, PDA, PS,
TOF, TGA

50

Craniosynostosis, brachydactyly,
syndactyly, polydactyly, obesity

OTHER CLINICAL FINDINGS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 473 u Epidemiology and Genetic Basis of Congenital Heart Disease

2765

Table 473.2  Genes and Loci Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
CONGENITAL
HD (%)

SYNDROME

GENE(S)

LOCI

CARDIAC DISEASE

Coffin-­Siris

ARID1B
SMARCB1
ARID1A
SMARCB1
SMARCA4
SMARCE1

6q25
22q11
1p36.1
22q11.23
19p13.2
17q21.2

ASD, AVSD, VSD, MR,
PDA, PS, DEX, AS

20–44

OTHER CLINICAL FINDINGS
Developmental delay, coarse
facies, hypoplastic distal
phalanges, short stature,
intellectual disability

Cornelia de
Lange

NIPBL
SMC1L1
SMC3

5p13
Xp11.22
10q25

PVS, VSD, ASD, PDA

33

Microbrachycephaly, synophrys,
arching eyebrows, growth
retardation, intellectual
disability, micromelia

Goldenhar

Unknown

VSD, PDA, TOF, CoA,
conotruncal defects

32

Hemifacial microsomia,
epibulbar dermoids, microtia,
hemivertebrae

Mowat-­Wilson

ZEB2

2q22.3

VSD, CoA, ASD, PDA,
PAS

54

Short stature, microcephaly,
Hirschsprung disease,
intellectual disability, seizures

Rubinstein-­Taybi

CBP
EP300

16p13.3
22q13.2

PDA, VSD, ASD, HLHS,
BAV

33

Microcephaly, growth
retardation, down-­slanting
palpebral fissures, low-­set
malformed ears, prominent
or beaked nose, intellectual
disability, broad thumbs and
toes

Smith-­Lemli-­
Opitz

DHCR7

11q12-­13

AVSD, HLHS, ASD,
PDA, VSD

50

Microcephaly, ptosis, genital
anomalies, renal anomalies,
broad nasal tip with anteverted
nostrils, intellectual disability,
syndactyly

Adams-­Oliver

ARHGAP31
DOCK6
RBPJ
EOGT
NOTCH1
DLL4

3q13
19p13.2
4p15.2
3p14.1
9q34.3
15q15.1

ASD, VSD, CoA, HLHS,
DORV

20

Aplasia cutis congenita, terminal
transverse defects of hands,
fingers, toes, feet

Baller-­Gerold

RECQL4

8q24.3

VSD, TOF, subaortic
disease

25

Craniosynostosis, micrognathia,
small mouth, radial aplasia/
hypoplasia, imperforate anus,
renal anomalies

Beckwith-­
Wiedemann

CDKNIC

11p15.4

VSD, HLHS, PS

6.5

Macrosomia, macroglossia,
omphalocele, risk of
malignancy

Coffin-­Lowry

RSK2

Xp22.2

LVNC, MVP, AVA

5–14

Growth deficiency, coarse facies,
everted lower lip, hypodontia,
intellectual disability

Duane-­radial ray
(Okihiro)

SALL4

20q13.2

ASD, PVS, VSD

<10

Unilateral or bilateral Duane
anomaly, hypoplasia of
thumbs, hypoplastic radius and
ulna, renal malformations, ear
anomalies

Fragile X

FMR1

Xq27.3

MVP, aortic dilation

<10

Macrocephaly, intellectual
disability, hand flapping,
speech abnormality,
autism spectrum disorder,
macroorchidism, seizures,
prominent forehead, large ears

Nance-­Horan

NHS

Xp22.13

TOF, VSD, PDA

<10

Congenital cataracts,
strabismus, peg-­shaped
supernumerary teeth, other
dental anomalies, prominent
ears, brachymetacarpalia
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2766 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 473.2  Genes and Loci Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
CONGENITAL
HD (%)

SYNDROME

GENE(S)

LOCI

CARDIAC DISEASE

OTHER CLINICAL FINDINGS

Peter’s Plus

B3GALTL

13q12.3

ASD, VSD, PVS, BPV,
subvalvular AS

<30

Short limb growth deficiency,
intellectual disability, autism
spectrum disorder, prominent
forehead, cupid’s bow upper
lip, cleft lip ± cleft palate,
Peter’s anomaly, cataracts,
hydronephrosis

Roberts

ESC02

8p21.1

ASD, AS

<20

Growth deficiency of prenatal
onset, cleft lip ± cleft palate,
hypertelorism, sparse hair,
hypomelia with variable
limb reduction defects,
cryptorchidism

Robinow

RDR2 (AR)
WNT5A (AD)

9q22

RVOTO

29 AD
13 AR

Macrocephaly, frontal bossing,
prominent eyes, small
upturned nose, short forearms,
hemivertebrae, hypoplastic
phalanges of hands and toes,
hypoplastic genitalia

Saethre-­Chotzen

TWIST

7p21p22

VSD

<10

Craniosynostosis, brachycephaly,
high flat forehead,
hypertelorism, ptosis, partial
cutaneous syndactyly, broad
great toes, strabismus

Short rib
polydactyly
type I

DYNC2H1

11q22.3

TGA, DORV, DOLV,
AVSD, HRH

<25

Short stature, postaxial
polydactyly of hands or feet,
short horizontal ribs, small
iliac bones, polycystic kidneys,
early death from respiratory
insufficiency

Simpson-­Golabi-­
Behmel

GPC3

Xq26.2

TGA, VSD, PVS, CoA,
AS, PDA, BAV, CM

26

Macrosomia, coarse
face, macroglossia,
hepatosplenomegaly,
nephromegaly, variable
cognitive disability

Sotos

NSD1

5q35.3

ASD, PDA, VSD

21

Excessive size, large hands and
feet, prominent forehead,
hypotonia, variable intellectual
disability, scoliosis, advanced
bone age

Townes-­Brocks

SALL1

16p12.1

ASD, TOF, VSD, TA, PA,
PDA

14–25

Auricular anomalies, preauricular
tags, hearing loss, thumb
hypoplasia/polydactyly,
imperforate anus, renal
agenesis, multicystic kidney,
microphthalmia

22q11.2DS, 22q11.2 deletion syndrome; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; AS, aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; AVA, aortic valve anomaly; AVSD,
atrioventricular septal defect; BAV, bicuspid aortic valve; BPV, bicuspid pulmonary valve; CFC, cardiofaciocutaneous; CHARGE, coloboma, heart defects, choanal atresia, retarded
growth and development, genital anomalies, and ear anomalies; CM, cardiomyopathy; CoA, coarctation of the aorta; DEX, dextrocardia; DOLV, double-­outlet left ventricle;
DORV, double-­outlet right ventricle; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HD, heart disease; HLHS, hypoplastic left heart; HRH, hypoplastic right heart; IAA, interruption of aortic
arch; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction; MR, mitral regurgitation; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; PA, pulmonary atresia; PAS, pulmonary artery stenosis; PDA, patent ductus
arteriosus; PE, pericardial effusion; PPS, peripheral pulmonary stenosis; PS, pulmonary stenosis; PVS, pulmonary stenosis; RVOTO, right ventricular outflow tract obstruction; SVAS,
supravalvular aortic stenosis; TA, truncus arteriosus; TGA, transposition of great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; VACTERL, association of vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac
defects, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal and limb anomalies; VR, vascular ring; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
From Pierpont ME, Brueckner M, Chung WK, et al. Genetic basis for congenital heart disease: revisited: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2018;138(21):e653–e711, Table 5.

in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis allows rapid screening of suspected cases if a specific chromosomal abnormality is suspected.
Chromosome microarray tools, including array comparative genome
hybridization and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays,
have identified copy number variations (microdeletions or microduplications) or SNPs in many patients with CHD and suspicion of a
congenital anomaly syndrome. These variants are submicroscopic and
thus not visible on routine chromosome analysis. Comparative genome
hybridization has in many cases replaced routine karyotyping in the

clinical workup of newborns with CHD. Overall, 25% of cases of CHD
can be associated with a gene alteration using these methodologies.
Whole exome and whole genome sequencing are available for clinical
genetic evaluations. The advantage of whole genome sequencing is that
it allows the assessment of noncoding DNA sequences, which could
participate in the regulation of gene expression of cardiac developmental gene pathways (Table 473.5).
A well-­characterized genetic cause of CHD is the deletion of a large
region (1.5-­3 Mb) of chromosome 22q11.2, known as the DiGeorge

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 473 u Epidemiology and Genetic Basis of Congenital Heart Disease

2767

Table 473.3  Chromosomal Aneuploidies and Copy Number Variants Associated with Congenital Heart Disease
PERCENT WITH
CONGENITAL HD

HEART ANOMALY

I. ANEUPLOIDES (IDENTIFIABLE BY ROUTINE KARYOTYPE)
Trisomy 8 mosaicism
Widely spaced eyes, broad nasal bridge, small
jaw, high arched palate, cryptorchidism, renal
anomalies, skeletal/vertebral anomalies

25

VSD, PDA, CoA, PVS, TAPVR, TrA

Trisomy 9/mosaicism

Prenatal and postnatal growth restriction,
microcephaly, deep-­set eyes, low-­set ears,
severe intellectual disability

65

PDA, LSVC, VSD, TOF/PA, DORV

Trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome)

Cleft lip and palate, scalp defects, hypotelorism,
microphthalmia or anophthalmia, colobomata
of irides, holoprosencephaly, microcephaly,
deafness, severe intellectual disability, rib
abnormalities, polydactyly, omphalocele, renal
abnormalities, hypospadias, cryptorchidism,
uterine abnormalities

57–80

ASD, VSD, PDA, HLHS, laterality
defects, atrial isomerism

Trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome)

IUGR, polyhydramnios, micrognathia, short
sternum, hypertonia, rocker-­bottom feet,
overlapping fingers and toes, TEF, CDH,
omphalocele, renal anomalies, biliary atresia,
severe intellectual disability

80–90

ASD, VSD, PDA, TOF, DORV, TGA,
CoA, BAV, BPV, polyvalvular
nodular dysplasia

Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)

Hypotonia, hyperextensibility, epicanthal folds,
up-­slanting palpebral fissures, single palmar
transverse crease, clinodactyly of fifth finger,
brachydactyly, variable intellectual disability,
premature aging

40–50

AVSD, VSD, ASD, (TOF, TGA less
common)

Monosomy X (Turner syndrome,
45,X)

Lymphedema of hands and feet, widely
spaced hypoplastic nipples, webbed neck,
primary amenorrhea, short stature, normal
intelligence, or mild learning disability

23–35

CoA, BAV, AS, HLHS, aortic
dissection

CHROMOSOME CHANGE

MAIN FEATURES

II. CHROMOSOME ABNORMALITIES (IDENTIFIABLE ON KARYOTYPE AND CHROMOSOMAL MICROARRAY)
3p25 deletion
Prenatal and postnatal growth deficiency,
33
VSD, AVSD, tricuspid atresia
polydactyly, microcephaly, intellectual
disability, renal anomalies
Deletion 4p16.3 (Wolf-­Hirschhorn
syndrome)

Microcephaly, widely spaced eyes, broad
50–65
nasal bridge (Greek helmet appearance),
downturned mouth, micrognathia, preauricular
skin tags, severe intellectual disability,
seizures, poor growth

ASD, VSD, PDA, LSVC, aortic
atresia, dextrocardia, TOF,
tricuspid atresia

Deletion 4q

Growth restriction, intellectual disability, cleft
palate, broad nasal bridge, micrognathia,
abnormal ears, genitourinary defects

50

VSD, PDA, AS, ASD, TOF, CoA

Deletion 5p (cri-­du-­chat)

Catlike cry, prenatal and postnatal growth
restriction, round face, widely spaced eyes,
epicanthal folds, single palmar transverse
crease, severe intellectual disability

30–60

VSD, ASD, PDA

Deletion 9p syndrome

Craniosynostosis, trigonocephaly, up-­slanting
palpebral fissures, abnormal ear pinnae,
scoliosis, micropenis, cryptorchidism,
intellectual disability

35–50

VSD, PDA, PVS

Deletion 10p

Frontal bossing, short down-­slanting palpebral
fissures, small low-­set ears, micrognathia, cleft
palate, short neck, urinary/genital and upper-­
limb anomalies

42

BAV, ASD, VSD, PDA, PVS, CoA

Duplication 10q24-­qter

Prenatal growth restriction, intellectual
disability, camptodactyly, renal anomalies,
cryptorchidism

50

AVSD, VSD

70

PDA, VSD, ASD, BAV, Ebstein
anomaly, noncompaction
cardiomyopathy

III. COPY NUMBER VARIANTS (IDENTIFIABLE BY CHROMOSOMAL MICROARRY)
1p36 deletion
Growth deficiency, intellectual disability,
microcephaly, deep-­set eyes, low-­set ears,
hearing loss, hypotonia, seizures, CNS defects,
genital anomalies

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2768 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 473.3  Chromosomal Aneuploidies and Copy Number Variants Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
PERCENT WITH
CONGENITAL HD

HEART ANOMALY

Short stature, microcephaly, colobomas,
microphthalmia, hearing loss, seizures,
mild intellectual disability, autism spectrum
disorder, skeletal malformations

N/A

PDA, VSD, ASD, TrA, TOF

1q21.1 duplication

Large head size, hemivertebrae, variable
intellectual disability, variable autistic features,
hypospadias, clubfoot

N/A

TOF, TGA, PVS

1q41q42 microdeletion

Growth restriction, intellectual disability,
microcephaly, diaphragmatic hernia, seizures,
short limbs

40

BAV, ASD, VSD, TGA

1q43q44 microdeletion

Prenatal and postnatal poor growth, intellectual
disability, limited speech, microcephaly, deep-­
set eyes, microcephaly, large low-­set ears, cleft
palate, agenesis of corpus callosum

N/A

VSD, CoA, HLHS

2q31.1 microdeletion

Prenatal and postnatal poor growth, large
ventricles, microcephaly, narrow forehead,
down-­slanting palpebral fissures, cleft palate/
cleft lip, limb defects, hypoplastic genitalia

25

VSD, ASD, PDA

2q37 microdeletion

Short stature, obesity, intellectual disability,
sparse hair, arched eyebrows, epicanthal
folds, thin upper lip, small hands and feet,
clinodactyly

30

VSD, ASD, CoA, hypoplastic aortic
arch

Deletion 7q11.23 (Williams-Beuren
syndrome)

Infantile hypercalcemia, skeletal and renal
anomalies, cognitive deficits, “social”
personality, elfin facies

53–85

Supravalvar AS and PS, PPS

8p23.1 deletion

Microcephaly, poor growth, deep-­set eyes,
malformed ears, small chin, genital anomalies
in males, intellectual disability

50–75

AVSD, PVS, VSD, TOF

9q34.3 Subtelomeric deletion
(Kleefstra syndrome)

Short stature, obesity, intellectual disability,
microcephaly, behavior abnormalities, brain
anomalies, hypertelorism, arched eyebrows,
midface hypoplasia

31–44

ASD, VSD, TOF, pulmonary arterial
stenosis

Deletion 11q (Jacobsen
syndrome)

Growth restriction, developmental delay,
thrombocytopenia, platelet dysfunction,
widely spaced eyes, strabismus, broad nasal
bridge, thin upper lip, prominent forehead,
intellectual disability

56

HLHS, AS, VSD, CoA, Shone
complex

15q24 microdeletion

Prenatal and postnatal growth restriction,
intellectual disability, abnormal corpus
callosum, microcephaly, high forehead,
down-­slanting palpebral fissures, tapered
eyebrows, abnormal ear pinnae, hearing loss,
hypospadias, scoliosis, coloboma, strabismus

40

PDA, pulmonary arterial stenosis,
PVS

16p11.2p12.2 microdeletion

Hypotonia, intellectual disability, long narrow
face, deep-­set eyes, low-­set malformed ears

33

TOF, BAV, pulmonary atresia

17q21 microdeletion

Abnormal hair pigmentation, up-­slanting
palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, bulbous
nasal tip, strabismus, ptosis, long slender
fingers, hip dislocation, renal anomalies,
spine deformities, cryptorchidism, global
developmental delay

27

PVS, ASD, VSD, BAV

Deletion 20p12 (Alagille
syndrome)

Bile duct paucity, cholestasis, skeletal or ocular
anomalies, broad forehead, widely spaced
eyes, underdeveloped mandible

85–94

Peripheral PA hypoplasia, TOF,
PVS (left-­sided heart lesions and
septal defects less common)

75

IAA-­B, TrA, isolated aortic arch
anomalies, TOF, conoventricular
VSD

CHROMOSOME CHANGE

MAIN FEATURES

1q21.1 deletion

22q11.2DS (DiGeorge,
Hypertelorism, micrognathia, low-­set posteriorly
velocardiofacial, and conotruncal
rotated ears, thymic and parathyroid
anomaly face syndrome)
hypoplasia, hypocalcemia, feeding/
speech/learning/behavioral disorders,
immunodeficiency, palate/skeletal/renal
anomalies, learning disability

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 473 u Epidemiology and Genetic Basis of Congenital Heart Disease

2769

Table 473.3  Chromosomal Aneuploidies and Copy Number Variants Associated with Congenital Heart Disease—cont’d
PERCENT WITH
CONGENITAL HD

HEART ANOMALY

Very variable phenotype, some with
velopharyngeal insufficiency, cleft palate,
hearing loss, minor facial anomalies, mild
learning disability to normal learning ability,
hypotonia, scoliosis, frequent infections

15

TOF, HLHS, VSD, PVS, TrA

Normal growth, intellectual disability,
dolichocephaly, dysplastic ears, pointed chin,
large fleshy hands, hypotonia

>25

PDA, VSD, ASD, TAPVR

CHROMOSOME CHANGE

MAIN FEATURES

22q11.2 duplication

22q13 microdeletion (Phelan-­
McDermid syndrome)

22q11.2DS, 22q11.2 deletion syndrome; AS, aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; AVSD, atrioventricular septal defect; BAV, bicuspid aortic valve; BPV, bicuspid pulmonary
valve; CDH, congenital diaphragmatic hernia; CoA, coarctation of the aorta; DORV, double-­outlet right ventricle; HD, heart disease; HLHS, hypoplastic left heart syndrome;
IAA-­B, interrupted aortic arch type B; IUGR, intrauterine growth retardation; LSVC, persistent left superior vena cava; N/A, not available; PA, pulmonary artery; PDA, patent ductus
arteriosus; PPS, peripheral pulmonary stenosis; PS, pulmonary stenosis; PVS, pulmonic valve stenosis; TAPVR, total anomalous pulmonary venous return; TEF, tracheoesophageal
fistula; TGA, d-­transposition of the great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; TOF/PA, tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia; TrA, truncus arteriosus; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
From Pierpont ME, Brueckner M, Chung WK, et al. Genetic basis for congenital heart disease: revisited: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2018;138(21):e653–e711, Appendix Table.

Table 473.4  Disease Genes for Nonsyndromic Congenital Cardiovascular Disease
GENE

CARDIOVASCULAR MALFORMATION

NONSYNDROMIC (NS) OR SYNDROMIC (S)

TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS
CITED2

ASD, VSD

NS

GATA4

ASD, VSD, AVSD, PVS, TOF

NS

GATA6

PTA, TOF

NS

MED13L

TGA

NS

NR2F2

AVSD, AS, CoA, VSD, HLHS, TOF

NS

NKX2-­5

ASD, atrioventricular conduction delay, TOF,
HLHS

NS

NKX2.6

PTA

NS

TBX20

ASD, VSD, MS, DCM

NS

ZFPM2/FOG2

TOF, DORV

NS

CELL SIGNALING AND ADHESION PROTEINS
ACVR1/ALK2
AVSD

NS

CRELD1

ASD, AVSD

NS

GJA1

HLHS, VSD, PA

S (oculodentodigital dysplasia) and NS

JAG1

TOF, PVS, PAS

S (Alagille syndrome) and NS

NOTCH1

BAV, AS, HLHS, TOF, PVS

S (Adams-­Oliver syndrome) and NS

PDGFRA

TAPVR

NS

SMAD6

BAV, CoA, AS

NS

TAB2

BAV, AS, TOF

NS

STRUCTURAL PROTEINS
ACTC1

ASD, HCM, DCM, LVNC

NS

DCHS1

MVP

NS

ELN

SVAS

S (Williams-­Beuren syndrome) and NS

MYH6

ASD, HCM, DCM

NS

MYH7

Ebstein anomaly, LVNC, HCM, DCM

NS

MYH11

PDA, TAA

NS

AS, Aortic valve stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; AVSD, atrioventricular septal defect; BAV, bicuspid aortic valve; CoA, coarctation of aorta; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; DORV,
double-­outlet right ventricle; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HLHS, hypoplastic left heart syndrome; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy; MS, mitral valve
stenosis; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; NS, nonsyndromic; PA, pulmonary atresia; PAS, pulmonary artery stenosis; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PTA, persistent truncus arteriosus;
PVS, pulmonary vein stenosis; S, syndromic; SVAS, supravalvar aortic stenosis; TAA, thoracic aortic aneurysm; TAPVR, total anomalous pulmonary venous return; TGA, transposition
of great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; and VSD, ventricular septal defect.
From Pierpont ME, Brueckner M, Chung WK, et al. Genetic basis for congenital heart disease: revisited: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2018;138(21):e653–e711, Table 8.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2770 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 473.5  Clinical Genetic Tests
GENOMIC VS
TARGETED

ANEUPLOIDIES AND
CHROMOSOMAL
REARRANGEMENTS

COPY NUMBER
VARIATION

SNPs AND
INDELs

EXAMPLE OF CLINICAL USE

Karyotype

Genomic

+++

+

−

Confirmation of trisomy 21

Array CGH

Genomic

++

+++

−

Multiple congenital anomalies
without obvious syndromic
association

FISH

Targeted

+

+

−

Suspected 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome

Gene panel testing

Targeted

−

+

+++

Suspected monogenic disease with
a small differential diagnosis

Exome sequencing

Genomic

−

−

+++

Broad genetic differential diagnosis
without obvious syndromic
association, or previous negative
panel testing

Genome sequencing

Genomic

+

+

+++

Broad genetic differential diagnosis
without obvious syndromic
association, or previous negative
panel testing and need for rapid
turnaround time

Sensitivity of tests for the types of genetic variation are indicated as not detected (−), low (+), medium (++), or high (+++). Array CGH indicates comparative genomic hybridization
using arrays; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; INDEL, insertion or deletion; and SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism.
From Pierpont ME, Brueckner M, Chung WK, et al. Genetic basis for congenital heart disease: revisited: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2018;138(21):e653–e711, Table 1.

critical region. At least 30 genes have been mapped to the deleted
region; Tbx1, a transcription factor involved in early outflow tract
development, is one gene that has been implicated as a possible cause
of DiGeorge syndrome. The estimated prevalence of 22q11.2 deletions
is 1 in 4,000 live births; these occur in 2% of all patients with CHD.
Cardiac lesions associated with 22q11.2 deletions are most often seen
in association with either DiGeorge syndrome or Shprintzen (velocardiofacial) syndrome. The acronym CATCH 22 has been used to summarize the major components of these syndromes: Cardiac defects,
Abnormal facies, Thymic aplasia, Cleft palate, and Hypocalcemia. The
specific cardiac anomalies are conotruncal defects (tetralogy of Fallot,
truncus arteriosus, double-­outlet right ventricle, subarterial VSD) and
branchial arch defects (coarctation of the aorta, interrupted aortic
arch, right aortic arch). Congenital airway anomalies such as tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia are sometimes present. In addition to
extracardiac defects, studies in adults with repaired tetralogy of Fallot
have linked the presence of a 22q11.2 microdeletion to increased all-­
cause mortality. Although the risk of recurrence is extremely low in
the absence of a parental 22q11.2 deletion, the risk rises to 50% if one
parent carries the deletion. More than 90% of patients with the clinical
features of DiGeorge syndrome have a deletion at 22q11.2. A second
genetic locus on the short arm of chromosome 10 (10p13p14) has also
been identified, the deletion of which shares some, but not all, phenotypic characteristics with the 22q11.2 deletion; patients with del(10p)
have an increased incidence of sensorineural hearing loss.
Other structural heart lesions associated with specific chromosomal
abnormalities include familial secundum atrial septal defect (ASD)
associated with heart block (the transcription factor Nkx2.5 on chromosome 5q35), familial ASD without heart block (the transcription
factor GATA4), Alagille syndrome (Jagged1 on chromosome 20p12),
and Williams syndrome (elastin on chromosome 7q11). Of interest,
patients with VSDs and atrioventricular septal defects have been found
to have multiple Nkx2.5 pathogenic variants in cells isolated from diseased heart tissues, but not from normal heart tissues or from circulating lymphocytes, indicating a potential role for somatic rather than
germline changes leading to mosaicism in the pathogenesis of congenital heart defects. Tables 473.2 to 473.4 are a compilation of known
genetic causes of CHD.
The most progress in identifying the genetic origin of cardiovascular disease has been made in the genetic cardiomyopathies, and in

particular, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Over 1,000 different
pathogenic variants in over a dozen genes have been implicated, most
of which encode proteins of the cardiac sarcomere, either the contractile thick filament (myosin) or associated regulatory subunits (e.g., troponin or myosin binding protein C), although variants in metabolic/
mitochondrial genes are also common in those presenting with HCM
in infancy and early childhood. Variants of the cardiac β-­myosin heavy-­
chain gene MYH7 and the myosin-­binding protein C gene are the most
common (Table 473.6), with additional common variants including cardiac troponin T and I, α-­tropomyosin, regulatory and essential myosin
light chains, titin, and α-­myosin heavy chain. Some patients (∼15%) may
carry variants in more than one sarcomeric gene. Routine clinical laboratory tests are available for most of these genes, so that patients with
clinical findings of HCM or children of parents who have been diagnosed with HCM should be tested. However, not all genes causing HCM
have been identified, so a negative test does not eliminate a genetic cause.
Progress has also been made in identifying the genetic basis of
dilated cardiomyopathy, which is familial in 20–30% of cases. Autosomal dominant inheritance is most often encountered, and similar to HCM, multiple genes have been identified (see Table 473.3).
X-­linked inheritance accounts for 5–10% of cases of familial dilated
cardiomyopathy. Pathogenic variants in the dystrophin gene are the
most common in this group, causing Duchenne or Becker muscular
dystrophy. Variants in the gene encoding tafazzin are associated with
Barth syndrome and for some cases of isolated noncompaction of the
left ventricle (LVNC). Autosomal recessive inheritance is associated
with a variant in cardiac troponin I. Mitochondrial myopathies may
be caused by alterations of enzymes of the electron transport chain
encoded by nuclear DNA or enzymes of fatty acid oxidation encoded
by mitochondrial DNA. Table 473.6 is a compilation of the most common genetic causes of cardiomyopathy.
The genetic basis of heritable arrhythmias, most notably the long
QT syndromes, has been linked to pathogenic variants of genes coding
for subunits of cardiac potassium and sodium channels (Table 473.7).
Other heritable arrhythmias include arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, familial atrial fibrillation, familial complete heart block,
and Brugada syndrome. Table 473.7 is a compilation of the most common genetic causes of arrhythmias.
Of all cases of CHD, 2–4% are associated with known environmental
or adverse maternal conditions and teratogenic influences, including

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 473 u Epidemiology and Genetic Basis of Congenital Heart Disease

2771

Table 473.6  Genetics of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathies
CARDIOMYOPATHY

CHROMOSOMAL LOCATION

GENE

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

14q1

β-­Myosin heavy chain

15q2

α-­Tropomyosin

1q31

Troponin T

19p13.2-­19q13.2

Troponin I

11p13-­q13

Myosin-­binding protein C

12q23

Cardiac slow myosin regulatory light chain

13p21

Ventricular slow myosin essential light chain

2q31

Titin

3p25

Caveolin-­3

Mitochondrial DNA

tRNA-­glycine

Mitochondrial DNA

tRNA-­isoleucine

7q36.1

AMP-­activated protein kinase

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with Wolff-­
Parkinson-­White syndrome

OTHER GENETIC DISEASES CAUSING CARDIAC HYPERTROPHY
Familial amyloid disease
18q12.1

Transthyretin (TTR)

Noonan syndrome

12q24.1, 2p22.1, 3p25, 12p12.1

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 11 (PTPN11),
son of sevenless homolog 1 (SOS1), RAF1
protooncogene, GTPase KRAS

Fabry disease

Xq22

α-­Galactoside A (GLA)

Danon disease

Xq24

Lysosomal-­associated membrane protein 2
(LAMP2)

Hereditary hemochromatosis

6p21.3

Hereditary hemochromatosis protein (HFE)

Pompe disease

17q25

Acid α-­glucosidase (GAA)

Xp21

Dystrophin

Xp28

Tafazzin

19p13.2-­19q13.2

Troponin I

Dilated cardiomyopathy
X-­linked

Autosomal recessive

Autosomal dominant: Genes encoding multiple proteins have been identified, including cardiac actin; desmin; δ-­sarcoglycan; β-­myosin heavy chain; cardiac troponin C and T;
α-­tropomyosin; titin; metavinculin; myosin-­binding protein C; muscle LIM protein; α-­actinin-­2; phospholamban; Cypher/LIM binding domain 3; α-­myosin heavy chain; SUR2A
(regulatory subunit of KATP channel); and lamin A/C.
Isolated noncompaction of the left ventricle: Autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-­linked, and mitochondrial inheritance patterns have been reported. Genes that have been
implicated include those for α-­dystrobrevin, Cypher/ZASP, lamin A/C, tafazzin, MIB1, and LIM domain-­binding protein 3 (LDB3).
Partially adapted from Dunn KE, Caleshu C, Cirino AL, et al. A clinical approach to inherited hypertrophy: the use of family history in diagnosis, risk assessment, and management.
Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2013;6:118–131.

maternal diabetes mellitus, maternal phenylketonuria, or systemic
lupus erythematosus; congenital rubella syndrome; and maternal
ingestion of drugs (lithium, ethanol, warfarin, thalidomide, antimetabolites, vitamin A derivatives, anticonvulsant agents). Associated noncardiac malformations noted in identifiable syndromes may be seen in
as many as 25% of patients with CHD.
Gender differences in the occurrence of specific cardiac lesions
have been identified. Transposition of the great arteries and left-­sided
obstructive lesions are slightly more common in males (65%), whereas
ASD, VSD, PDA, and pulmonic stenosis are more common in females.
No ethnic differences in the occurrence of congenital heart lesions as a
whole have been noted, although there are some exceptions: supracristal VSD in children of Asian background and transposition of the great
arteries, which has a higher occurrence in White infants.

GENETIC COUNSELING

Parents who have a child with CHD require counseling regarding the
probability of a cardiac malformation occurring in subsequent children
(Table 473.8 and see Chapter 98.1). Except for syndromes caused by a
pathogenic variant of a single gene, many forms of CHD, but not all,
are still relegated to a multifactorial inheritance pattern, which should

result in a low risk of recurrence. When more genetic etiologies are
identified, these risks are constantly updated; therefore consultation
with a cardiac geneticist or genetic counselor is important.
The degree of severity may vary, as may the presence of associated
defects. Careful echocardiographic screening of first-­degree relatives
will often uncover mild forms of CHD that were clinically silent. For
example, the incidence of bicuspid aortic valve is more than double
(5% vs 2% in the general population) in the relatives of children with
left ventricular outflow obstruction (aortic stenosis, coarctation of the
aorta, HLHS). Consultation with a knowledgeable genetic counselor is
the most reliable way of providing the family with up-­to-­date information regarding the risk of recurrence.
Fetal echocardiography improves the rate of detection of congenital
heart lesions in at-­risk patients (see Chapter 472.4). This type of ultrasound is much more comprehensive than the screening ultrasound
performed by an obstetrician and is usually performed and interpreted
by a pediatric cardiologist specializing in fetal echocardiography. The
resolution and accuracy of fetal echocardiography are excellent but are
not perfect; families should be counseled that a normal fetal echocardiogram does not guarantee the absence of CHD. Congenital heart
lesions may evolve in the course of the pregnancy; moderate aortic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2772 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 473.7  Genetics of Arrhythmias
ARRHYTHMIA

CHROMOSOMAL LOCATION

GENE(S) IMPLICATED

Complete heart block

19q13

Not known

LQT1 (autosomal dominant)

11p15.5

KVLQT1 (K+ channel)

LQT2 (autosomal dominant)

7q35

HERG (K+ channel)

LQT3 (autosomal dominant)

3p21

SCN5A (Na+ channel)

LQT4 (autosomal dominant)

4q25-­27

Not known

LQT5 (autosomal dominant)

21q22-­q22

KCNE1 (K+ channel)

LQT6

21q22.1

KCNE2 (K+ channel)

LQT7

17q23

KCNJ2 (K+ channel)

LQT8

12p13.3

CACNAIC (L type Ca2+ channel)

LQT9

3p25

CAV-­3 (caveolin-­3, Na+ current)

LQT10

11q23

SCN4B (Na+ channel)

LQT11

7q21

AKAP9 (A-­kinase anchoring protein)

LQT12

20q11.21

SNTA1 (A1-­synthrophin)

LQT13

11q24.3

KCNJ5 (K+ channel)

11p15.5
21q22.1

KVLQT1 (K+ channel), KCNE1 (K+ channel)

Long QT syndrome

Jervell and Lange-­Nielsen syndrome
(autosomal recessive, congenital deafness)

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD): 11 genes are now associated with ARVD (ARVD1 through ARVD11) usually with autosomal
dominant inheritance, but with variable penetrance. These genes include TGFβ3 (transforming growth factor β), RYR2 (ryanodine receptor),
LAMR1 (laminin receptor-­1), PTPLA (protein tyrosine phosphatase), DSP (desmoplakin), PKP2 (plakophilin-­2), DSG2 (desmoglein), and DSC2
(desmocollin).
Familial atrial fibrillation (autosomal dominant)

10q22-­q24, 6q14-­16

Not known

11p15.5

KVLQT1 (K+ channel)

11p15.5

KCNQ1 (K+ channel)

21q22

KCNE2 (K+ channel)

17q23.1-­q24.2

KCNJ2 (K+ channel)

7q35-­q36

KCNH2 (K+ channel)

Brugada syndrome (right bundle branch block,
ST segment elevation, unexpected sudden
death)

3p21-­p24

SCN5A (Na+ channel), rarely CACNA1C,
HCN4, TRPM4

3p22-­p24

GPD1L (glycerol-­3-­phosphate dehydrogenase)

Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia

1q43

RYR2 (autosomal dominant)

1p13.1

CASQ2 (autosomal recessive)

stenosis with a normal-­sized left ventricle at 18 weeks of gestation may
progress to aortic atresia with a hypoplastic left ventricle by 34 weeks
because of decreased flow through the atria, ventricle, and aorta in the
latter half of gestation. This progression has prompted initial clinical
trials of interventional treatment, such as fetal aortic balloon valvuloplasty, for the prevention of HLHS (see Chapter 472.7). In addition
to diagnosing CHD in utero and subsequent parental counseling, the

benefit of fetal ultrasound is that it allows for careful planning of perinatal care, especially in cases where immediate intervention in the neonatal period is warranted.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 474 u Evaluation and Screening of the Infant or Child with Congenital Heart Disease

2773

Table 473.8  Recurrence Risks for Isolated (Nonsyndromic) Congenital Heart Disease
DEFECT

FATHER AFFECTED (%)

MOTHER AFFECTED (%)

ONE SIBLING AFFECTED (%)

TWO SIBLINGS AFFECTED (%)

ASD

1.5–3.5

4–6

2.5–3

8

AVSD

1–4.5

11.5–14

3–4

10

VSD

2–3.5

6–10

3

10

AS

3–4

8–18

2

6

PVS

2–3.5

4–6.5

2

6

TOF

1.5

2–2.5

2.5–3

8

CoA

2–3

4–6.5

2

6

PDA

2–2.5

3.5–4

3

10

HLHS

21†

2–9*

6

TGA

2†

1.5

5

L-­TGA

3–5†

5–6

NR

EA

NR

6

1

3

TrA

NR

NR

1

3

TA

NR

NR

1

3

PA

NR

NR

1

3

*Eight percent recurrence risk for HLHS; up to 22% recurrence risk for any congenital HD.
†Recurrence when one parent is affected, irrespective of sex; used in the absence of sex-­stratified risks.

AS, Aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; AVSD, atrioventricular septal defect; CoA, coarctation of the aorta; EA, Ebstein anomaly; HLHS, hypoplastic left heart syndrome; L-­TGA,
congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries; NR, not reported/insufficient data; PA, pulmonary atresia; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PVS, pulmonary valve stenosis;
TA, tricuspid atresia; TGA, d-­transposition of the great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; TrA, truncus arteriosus; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
From Cowan JR, Ware SM. Genetics and genetic testing in congenital heart disease. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42(2): 373–393, Table 5.

Chapter 474

Congenital heart disease

Evaluation and Screening
of the Infant or Child with
Congenital Heart Disease

Observation/pulse oximetry

Daniel Bernstein
The initial evaluation for suspected congenital heart disease
(CHD) involves a systematic approach with two major components
(Fig. 474.1). First, congenital cardiac defects can be divided into
two major groups based on the presence or absence of cyanosis,
which can be determined by physical examination aided by pulse
oximetry. Second, these groups can usually be further subdivided
based on whether the chest radiograph shows evidence of increased,
normal, or decreased pulmonary vascular markings. Next, the electrocardiogram (ECG) can be used to determine whether right, left,
or biventricular hypertrophy exists. The character of the heart
sounds and the presence and character of any murmurs further
narrow the differential diagnosis. The final diagnosis is then confirmed by echocardiography, cardiac computed tomography (CT)
or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and/or cardiac catheterization. In a cyanotic or otherwise sick newborn, echocardiographic
exam, if available, should not be delayed while awaiting these other
modalities.

Acyanotic

Chest X-ray

Cyanotic

Increased
pulmonary
blood flow

Normal
pulmonary
blood flow

Decreased
pulmonary
blood flow

Increased
pulmonary
blood flow

Left-to-right shunts
ASD
AV septal defect
VSD
PDA
AP Window

Obstructive lesions
Pulmonic stenosis
Cor triatriatum
Mitral stenosis
Aortic stenosis
Coarctation of the aorta

R sided obstructive
lesions with shunt
Tetralogy of Fallot
Pulmonary atresia
Tricuspid atresia
Ebstein anomaly

Mixing lesions
Transposition of the
great arteries
Single ventricle
Hypoplastic L or R heart
Truncus arteriosus
Total anomalous
pulmonary venous return

Fig. 474.1 A general algorithmic approach to the initial diagnosis of

congenital heart disease, based on observation/pulse oximetry and chest
x-­ray, to separate patients into four major physiologic subgroups of congenital heart disease. This schematic is a broad, but useful, diagnostic
overview; only the most common forms of congenital heart disease are
included. A patient’s initial presentation may sometimes straddle two of
these physiologic groups and can evolve between them over the first week
or two of life. For example, in a patient with a VSD, the pulmonary blood
flow will be relatively normal in the newborn period and only increase as
the pulmonary vascular resistance begins to drop. Similarly, a patient with a
mixing lesion may not show pulmonary overcirculation at birth. ASD, Atrial
septal defect; AV, atrioventricular; VSD, ventricular septal defect; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus, AP, aortopulmonary; L, left; R, right

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2774 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Routine pulse oximetry screening is recommended for all newborns to detect unsuspected critical cyanotic CHD; lesions include
hypoplastic left heart syndrome, pulmonary atresia, tetralogy of
Fallot, total anomalous pulmonary venous return, transposition
of the great arteries, tricuspid atresia, truncus arteriosus, neonatal
coarctation of the aorta, and aortic arch hypoplasia/atresia. Many
of these lesions are ductal dependent, and if the ductus arteriosus
closes, severe cardiac decompensation will ensue. In addition, pulse
oximetry may detect respiratory disorders and primary pulmonary
hypertension. Screening is performed between 24 and 48 hours of
life and before discharge in asymptomatic newborns. The neonate
passes if the oxygen saturation is 95% or greater in the right hand
or either foot AND the difference is 3% or less between the right
hand and foot. The screen is failed if the saturation is less than
90% in either the right hand or foot. If it is between 90% and 94%
OR there is more than a 3% difference between the right arm and
foot, the screen should be repeated once in 1 hour. If the saturation is 90–94% OR there is a 3% difference after the third screen,
urgent echocardiography is indicated. In addition, a careful reexamination of the pulses and blood pressure in the upper and lower
extremity and cardiac auscultation are indicated in children with an
initial positive screen.

ACYANOTIC CONGENITAL HEART LESIONS

Acyanotic congenital heart lesions can be classified according to
the predominant physiologic load that they place on the heart.
Although many congenital heart lesions induce more than one
physiologic disturbance, it is helpful to focus on the primary load
abnormality for purposes of classification. The most common
lesions are those that produce a volume load, and the most common of these are the left-­to-­right shunt lesions. Atrioventricular
(AV) valve regurgitation and dilated cardiomyopathies are other
causes of increased volume load. The second major class of lesions
causes an increase in pressure load, most often secondary to ventricular outflow obstruction (pulmonic or aortic valve stenosis) or
narrowing of a great vessel (branch pulmonary artery stenosis or
coarctation of the aorta). The chest radiograph and ECG are useful tools for differentiating between these major classes of volume­and pressure-­overload lesions while awaiting confirmation with
echocardiography.

Lesions Resulting in Increased Volume Load

The most common lesions resulting in increased volume load are
those that cause left-­to-­right shunting (see Chapter 475): atrial
septal defect (ASD), ventricular septal defect (VSD), atrioventricular septal defects (previously known as AV canal or endocardial
cushion defects), and patent ductus arteriosus. The pathophysiologic
common denominator in this group is the presence of a communication between the systemic and pulmonary sides of the circulation, which results in shunting of fully oxygenated blood back into
the lungs for a second passage. This shunt can be quantitated by
calculating the ratio of pulmonary-­to-­systemic blood flow (Qp:Qs).
Thus a 3:1 shunt implies three times the normal pulmonary blood
flow, which is a moderately large shunt likely to cause symptoms of
heart failure.
The direction and magnitude of the shunt across such a communication depend on the size of the defect, the relative pulmonary
and systemic pressures and vascular resistances, and the compliances of the two chambers connected by the defect. These factors
are dynamic and may change dramatically with age; intracardiac
defects may grow smaller with time; pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR), which is high in the immediate newborn period, decreases
to normal adult levels by several weeks of life; and chronic exposure of the pulmonary circulation to high pressure and blood flow

results in a gradual increase in PVR (Eisenmenger physiology; see
Chapter 482.2). Thus a lesion such as a large VSD may be associated with little shunting and few symptoms during the initial first
2 weeks of life. When PVR declines over the next 2-­4 weeks, the
volume of the left-­to-­right shunt increases, and symptoms begin to
appear.
The increased volume of blood in the lungs decreases pulmonary
compliance and increases the work of breathing. Fluid leaks into
the interstitial space and alveoli and causes pulmonary edema. The
infant develops the symptoms we refer to as heart failure, such as
tachypnea, tachycardia, sweating, chest retractions, nasal flaring,
and wheezing. For children with large left-­to-­right shunts, however,
the term heart failure is a misnomer; total left ventricular output
is not decreased but is several times greater than normal, although
much of this output is ineffective because it returns through the
defect back to the lungs. To maintain this high level of left ventricular output, heart rate and stroke volume are increased, in part
mediated by the Frank-­Starling relation as the increased ventricular
volume stretches the cardiac sarcomeres and in part mediated by an
increase in sympathetic nervous system activity. The increase in catecholamine release, combined with the increased work of breathing,
results in an elevation in total body oxygen consumption (caused
by increased β-­
receptor stimulation), often beyond the oxygen
transport ability of the circulation. Sympathetic activation leads to
peripheral vasoconstriction (caused by increased α-­receptor stimulation) and to the additional symptoms of sweating and irritability,
and the imbalance between oxygen supply and demand leads to failure to thrive. Remodeling of the heart occurs, with predominantly
chamber dilation caused by the increased volume load and a lesser
degree of hypertrophy. If left untreated, the PVR eventually begins
to rise, and by several years of age, the shunt volume will decrease
and symptoms will appear to improve. If still uncorrected, the shunt
will eventually reverse to right-­to-­left as the PVR rises (see Chapter 482.2). At this point, the patient may be inoperative if the pulmonary vascular resistance is elevated and fixed (unresponsive to
vasodilators), and heart-­lung transplant may be the only surgical
option.
Additional lesions that impose a volume load on the heart
include the regurgitant lesions (see Chapter 477) and the dilated
cardiomyopathies (see Chapter 488.1). Regurgitation through the
AV valves is most frequently encountered in patients with partial
or complete AV septal defects (AV canal or endocardial cushion
defects). In these lesions, the combination of a left-­to-­right shunt
with AV valve regurgitation increases the volume load on the heart
and often leads to earlier and more severe symptoms than for isolated septal defects. Regurgitation through the tricuspid valve is
seen in Ebstein anomaly (see Chapter 479.7). Regurgitation involving one of the semilunar (aortic or pulmonary) valves also results
in a volume load but is often also associated with some degree of
stenosis, leading to a combined pressure and volume load. Aortic
regurgitation may be encountered in patients with a VSD directly
under the aortic valve (supracristal VSD), leading to two sources
of volume load on the left ventricle.
In contrast to left-­to-­right shunts, in which intrinsic cardiac
muscle contractile function is generally either normal or increased,
heart muscle function can be decreased in the cardiomyopathies.
Cardiomyopathies may affect systolic contractility (dilated cardiomyopathy) or diastolic relaxation (restrictive cardiomyopathy) or
both. Decreased cardiac function results in increased atrial and ventricular filling pressure, and pulmonary edema occurs secondary to
increased capillary pressure. Poor cardiac output leads to decreased
end-­organ blood flow, sympathetic activation, and the symptoms
of poor perfusion and decreased urine output. The major causes of
cardiomyopathy in infants and children include viral myocarditis,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 474 u Evaluation and Screening of the Infant or Child with Congenital Heart Disease
metabolic disorders, and pathogenic gene variants in sarcomeric
and other cardiac structural, functional, and energy production
genes (see Chapter 488).

Lesions Resulting in Increased Pressure Load

The pathophysiologic common denominator of lesions resulting
in increased pressure load is an obstruction to normal blood flow.
The most frequent are obstructions to ventricular outflow: valvular pulmonic stenosis, valvular aortic stenosis, and coarctation of
the aorta (see Chapter 476). Less common are obstructions to ventricular inflow: tricuspid or mitral stenosis, cor triatriatum, and
obstruction of the pulmonary veins. Ventricular outflow obstruction can occur at the valve, below the valve (double-­chambered
right ventricle, subaortic membrane), or above the valve (branch
pulmonary stenosis or supravalvular aortic stenosis). Unless the
obstruction is severe, cardiac output will be maintained and the
clinical symptoms of heart failure will be either subtle or absent.
The heart compensates for the increased afterload by increasing
wall thickness (hypertrophy), but in later stages the affected chamber develops fibrosis and will begin to dilate and can progress to
ventricular failure.
The clinical picture is different when obstruction to outflow is severe,
which is usually encountered in the immediate newborn period. The
infant may become critically ill within several hours of birth. Severe
pulmonic stenosis in the newborn period (critical pulmonic stenosis)
results in signs of right-­sided heart failure (hepatomegaly, peripheral
edema) and cyanosis from right-­to-­left shunting across the foramen
ovale. Severe aortic stenosis in the newborn period (critical aortic
stenosis) is characterized by signs of left-­sided heart failure (pulmonary edema, poor perfusion), often combined with signs of right-­sided
failure (hepatomegaly, peripheral edema), and may progress rapidly to
total circulatory collapse. In older children, severe untreated pulmonic
stenosis leads to symptoms of right-­sided heart failure, but usually not
to cyanosis unless a pathway persists for right-­to-­left shunting (e.g.,
patency of the foramen ovale).
Coarctation of the aorta in older children and adolescents is
usually manifested as upper body hypertension and diminished
pulses in the lower extremities. In the immediate newborn period,
presentation of coarctation can range from decreased pulses in the
lower extremities to total circulatory collapse, depending on the
severity of the narrowing. The clinical presentation of coarctation
may be delayed because of the normally patent ductus arteriosus
in the first few days of life. In these patients, even as the ductus
begins to close, the open aortic end of the ductus serves as a conduit
for blood flow to partially bypass the obstruction; in more severe
coarctations, blood leaving the right ventricle traverses the ductus to directly supply the descending aorta (as it did in the fetus).
These infants then become symptomatic, often dramatically, when
the ductus finally closes, usually within the first few weeks of life.
Differential cyanosis (normal saturation in the right arm and low
saturation in the foot) is a hallmark sign of this condition, and
if picked up on oximetry screen before hospital discharge can be
lifesaving.

CYANOTIC CONGENITAL HEART LESIONS

The cyanotic group of congenital heart lesions can also be further
divided according to pathophysiology. In one major subdivision, pulmonary blood flow is decreased, usually from an obstruction to right
ventricular outflow (tetralogy of Fallot, tetralogy with pulmonary

2775

atresia, or pulmonary atresia with an intact septum) or to an obstruction to right ventricular inflow (tricuspid atresia). In the second
major subdivision, pulmonary blood flow is increased and oxygenated
and deoxygenated blood are mixing (transposition of the great arteries, single ventricle, truncus arteriosus, total anomalous pulmonary
venous return [TAPVR] without obstruction). In the case of TAPVR
with obstruction, pulmonary flow is decreased but because there is no
exit from the pulmonary veins, the lungs appear to be markedly congested. The chest radiograph is a valuable tool for initial differentiation
between these two categories.

Cyanotic Lesions with Decreased Pulmonary Blood
Flow

For cyanosis to occur, these lesions must include both an obstruction to pulmonary blood flow (at the tricuspid valve or pulmonary
valve level) and a pathway by which systemic venous blood can
shunt from right to left and enter the systemic circulation (via a
patent foramen ovale, ASD, or VSD). Common lesions in this group
include tricuspid atresia, tetralogy of Fallot, tetralogy of Fallot with
pulmonary atresia, pulmonary atresia with intact septum (with
atrial-­level shunting), and various forms of single ventricle with
pulmonary stenosis or atresia (see Chapter 457). In these lesions,
the degree of cyanosis depends on the degree of obstruction to
pulmonary blood flow. If the obstruction is mild, cyanosis may be
absent at rest. However, these patients may have hypercyanotic (tet)
spells during conditions of stress. In contrast, if the obstruction is
severe, pulmonary blood flow may be totally dependent on patency
of the ductus arteriosus. When the ductus closes in the first few
days of life, the neonate experiences profound hypoxemia.

Cyanotic Lesions with Increased Pulmonary Blood
Flow

This group of lesions is not associated with obstruction to pulmonary blood flow. Cyanosis is caused by either abnormal
ventricular-­arterial connections or total mixing of systemic venous
(deoxygenated) and pulmonary venous (oxygenated) blood within
the heart (see Chapter 480). Transposition of the great arteries
(or vessels) is the most common of the former group of lesions. In
this condition the aorta arises from the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery arises from the left ventricle. Systemic venous blood
returning to the right atrium is pumped directly back to the body,
and oxygenated blood returning from the lungs to the left atrium
is pumped back into the lungs. The persistence of fetal pathways
(foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus) allows for some degree of
mixing in the immediate newborn period, keeping the systemic saturation from falling until the ductus begins to close; these infants
can then become extremely cyanotic quite precipitously.
Total mixing lesions include cardiac defects with a common atrium
or ventricle, TAPVR, and truncus arteriosus (see Chapter 480). In this
group, deoxygenated systemic venous blood and oxygenated pulmonary venous blood mix completely at some location in the heart, and
as a result, the oxygen saturation is equal in the pulmonary artery and
aorta. If pulmonary blood flow is not obstructed, these infants have
a combination of cyanosis and pulmonary overcirculation leading to
heart failure. In contrast, if pulmonary stenosis is present, these infants
may have cyanosis alone, similar to patients with tetralogy of Fallot.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2776 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
stroke, echocardiographic screening for a PFO is routinely performed,
and device closure of the PFO is a common treatment option.

Chapter 475

Acyanotic Congenital
Heart Disease: Left-­to-­
Right Shunt Lesions

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

475.2 Ostium Secundum Defect
Daniel Bernstein

475.1 Atrial Septal Defect
Daniel Bernstein
Atrial septal defects (ASDs) can occur in any portion of the atrial septum—secundum, primum, or sinus venosus—depending on which
embryonic septal structure has failed to develop normally (Fig. 475.1)
(see Chapter 469). Less often, the atrial septum may be almost absent,
with the creation of a functional single atrium. Isolated secundum
ASDs account for approximately 7% of all congenital heart defects. The
majority of cases of ASD are sporadic; autosomal dominant inheritance
does occur as part of Holt-­Oram syndrome (hypoplastic or absent
thumbs, radii, triphalangism, phocomelia, first-­degree heart block,
ASD) or in families with both secundum ASD and heart block (see
Table 473.2).
An isolated valve-­incompetent patent foramen ovale (PFO) is a common echocardiographic finding during infancy. It is usually of no hemodynamic significance and is not considered an ASD; a PFO may play an
important role if other structural heart defects are present. If another
cardiac anomaly is causing increased right atrial pressure (pulmonary
stenosis or atresia, tricuspid valve abnormalities, right ventricular dysfunction), venous blood may shunt across the PFO into the left atrium
with resultant cyanosis. Because of the anatomic structure of the PFO,
left-­to-­right shunting is unusual outside the immediate newborn period.
In the presence of a large volume load or a hypertensive left atrium
(e.g., secondary to mitral stenosis), the foramen ovale may be sufficiently dilated to result in a significant atrial left-­to-­right shunt. A valve-­
competent but probe-­patent (able to be pushed opened with a catheter)
PFO may be present in 15–30% of adults. An isolated PFO does not
require surgical treatment, although it is a risk for paradoxical (right-­to-­
left) systemic embolization. In adults who have had a thromboembolic

Superior
sinus venosus defect

An ostium secundum defect in the region of the fossa ovalis is the
most common form of ASD and is associated with structurally normal
atrioventricular (AV) valves (see Fig. 475.1). Mitral valve prolapse has
been described in association with this defect but is rarely an important clinical consideration. Secundum ASDs may be single or multiple
(fenestrated atrial septum), and openings ≥2 cm in diameter are common in symptomatic older children. Large defects may extend inferiorly toward the inferior vena cava (IVC) and ostium of the coronary
sinus, superiorly toward the superior vena cava (SVC), or posteriorly.
Females outnumber males 3:1 in incidence. Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR), usually of the right upper pulmonary vein, may be an associated lesion.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The degree of left-­to-­right shunting depends on the size of the defect,
the relative compliance of the right and left ventricles, and the relative vascular resistance in the pulmonary and systemic circulations.
In large defects, a considerable shunt of oxygenated blood flows from
the left to the right atrium (Fig. 475.2). This blood is added to the
usual venous return to the right atrium and is pumped by the right
ventricle to the lungs. With large defects, the ratio of pulmonary-­to-­
systemic blood flow (Qp:Qs) is usually between 2:1 and 4:1. The paucity of symptoms in infants with ASDs is related to the structure of the
right ventricle in early life, when its muscular wall is still thick and less
compliant, thus limiting the left-­to-­right shunt. As the infant becomes
older and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) drops, the right ventricular (RV) wall becomes thinner, and the left-­to-­right shunt across
the ASD increases. The increased blood flow through the right side of
the heart results in enlargement of the right atrium and ventricle and
dilation of the pulmonary artery. The left atrium may also be enlarged
as the increased pulmonary blood flow returns to the left atrium, but
the left ventricle and aorta are normal in size. Despite the large pulmonary blood flow, pulmonary arterial pressure is usually initially normal

Confines of true atrial septum

SVC

Atrioventricular
septal defect
(“ostium primum”)
IVC

Right
atrial
appendage

ASD
CS

Oval fossa
(ostium secundum)
defect

B

Tric
valve

Eust
valve

Inferior
sinus venosus defect

A

Coronary sinus defect

C

D

Fig. 475.1 Atrial septal defects (ASDs). A, Schematic diagram outlining the different types of interatrial shunting that can be encountered. Note

that only the central defect is suitable for device closure. B, Left, Subcostal right anterior oblique view of a secundum ASD (asterisk) that is suitable
for device closure. Right, Specimen as seen in a similar view, outlining the landmarks of the defect. C, Left, Transesophageal echocardiogram with
color flow before device closure. Right, Taken after release of an Amplatzer device. D, Montage of echocardiographic interatrial communications
that are not secundum ASDs (asterisks) and therefore not suitable for device closure. Top left, Coronary sinus defect caused by unroofing; top right,
superior sinus venosus defect; bottom left, inferior sinus venosus defect; bottom right, ASD in the setting of an atrioventricular septal defect. AO,
Aorta; CS, coronary sinus; Eust, eustachian; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; SVC, superior vena cava; Tric,
tricuspid. (From Webb GD, Smallhorn JF, Therrien J, et al. Congenital heart disease in the adult and pediatric patient. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow
RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019, Fig 75.17, p. 1536.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 475 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Left-­to-­Right Shunt Lesions
because of the absence of a high-­pressure communication between the
pulmonary and systemic circulations. PVR remains low throughout
childhood, although it may begin to increase in adulthood and may
eventually result in reversal of the shunt and clinical cyanosis (Eisenmenger syndrome).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A child with an ostium secundum ASD is often asymptomatic; the
lesion is often discovered during routine physical examination. Even
an extremely large secundum ASD rarely produces clinically evident
heart failure in childhood. However, on closer evaluation, younger
children may show subtle signs of failure to thrive, and older children
may have varying degrees of exercise intolerance. Often, the degree of
limitation may go unnoticed by the family until after repair, when the
child’s growth or activity level greatly increases.
The physical findings of an ASD are usually characteristic but fairly
subtle and require careful examination of the heart, paying special attention to the heart sounds. Examination of the chest may reveal a mild
left precordial bulge. An RV systolic lift may be palpable at the left sternal border. Sometimes a pulmonic ejection click can be heard. In most
patients with an ASD, the characteristic finding is that the second heart
sound (S2) is widely split and fixed in its splitting during all phases of
respiration. Normally, the duration of RV ejection varies with respiration,
with inspiration increasing RV volume and delaying closure of the pulmonary valve, widening the S2 split. With an ASD, RV diastolic volume
is constantly increased because of the shunt, and ejection time is prolonged throughout all phases of respiration. A systolic ejection murmur
is heard; it is usually no greater than a grade 3/6, medium pitched, without harsh qualities, seldom accompanied by a thrill, and best heard at the
left middle and upper sternal border. It is produced by the increased flow
across the RV outflow tract into the pulmonary artery. Because the atria
are at low pressure, flow across the ASD itself does not cause an audible
murmur. A short, rumbling mid-­diastolic murmur produced by the
increased volume of blood flow across the tricuspid valve (see Fig. 475.2)
is often audible at the lower-­left sternal border. This finding, which may
be subtle and is heard best with the bell of the stethoscope, usually indicates a Qp:Qs ratio of at least 2:1.

DIAGNOSIS

The chest radiograph shows varying degrees of enlargement of the
right ventricle and atrium, depending on the size of the shunt. The
pulmonary artery is enlarged, and pulmonary vascularity is increased.
These signs vary and may not be conspicuous in mild cases. Cardiac

2777

enlargement is often best appreciated on the lateral chest radiograph
because the right ventricle protrudes anteriorly as its volume increases.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows RV volume overload: the QRS
axis may be normal or exhibit right axis deviation, and a minor RV
conduction delay (rsR′ pattern in the right precordial leads) may be
present (Fig. 475.3). Right ventricular hypertrophy would be unusual

100

3

85

70
6

6

3

3
3

80
100
6
85

70

Fig. 475.2 Physiology of atrial septal defect (ASD). Circled numbers

represent oxygen saturation (So2) values. The numbers next to the arrows represent volumes of blood flow (in L/min/m2). This illustration
shows a hypothetical patient with a pulmonary-­to-­systemic blood flow
ratio (Qp:Qs) of 2:1. Desaturated blood enters the right atrium from the
vena cava at a volume of 3 L/min/m2 and mixes with an additional 3 L
of fully saturated blood shunting left to right across the ASD; the result
is an increase in So2 in the right atrium. Six liters of blood flow through
the tricuspid valve and cause a mid-­diastolic flow rumble. So2 may be
slightly higher in the right ventricle because of incomplete mixing at the
atrial level. The full 6 L flow across the right ventricular outflow tract and
cause a systolic ejection flow murmur. Six liters return to the left atrium,
with 3 L shunting left to right across the defect and 3 L crossing the
mitral valve to be ejected by the left ventricle into the ascending aorta
(normal cardiac output).

I

aVR

V1

V4

V3R

II

aVL

V2

V5

V4R

5 years
III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 475.3 Electrocardiogram in a child with an atrial septal defect showing rSR′ pattern (minor RV conduction delay) pattern in the right precordial
leads.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2778 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
in the absence of pulmonary hypertension or other lesions (e.g., valvar
pulmonic stenosis).
The echocardiogram shows findings characteristic of RV volume
overload, including an increased RV end-­diastolic dimension and flattening and abnormal motion of the ventricular septum (see Fig. 475.1).
A normal septum moves posteriorly during systole and anteriorly
during diastole (synchronous with the left ventricular contractions).
With RV overload and normal PVR, septal motion is either flattened or
reversed—that is, anterior movement in systole. The location and size
of the ASD are readily appreciated by two-­dimensional (2D) scanning,
with a characteristic brightening of the echo image seen at the edge
of the defect caused by the increased reflectivity of ultrasound at the
tissue-­blood interface (T-­artifact). The shunt is confirmed by pulsed
and color flow Doppler. The normal entry of all pulmonary veins into
the left atrium should be confirmed given the potential for anomalous
return of the right upper pulmonary vein.
Patients with the classic features of a hemodynamically significant
ASD on physical examination and chest radiography in whom echocardiographic identification of an isolated secundum ASD is made
need not undergo diagnostic catheterization before repair, with the
exception of an older patient, in whom PVR may be a concern. If pulmonary vascular disease is suspected, cardiac catheterization confirms
the presence of the defect and allows measurement of the shunt ratio
and pulmonary pressure and resistance.
If catheterization is performed, usually at the time of device closure,
the oxygen content of blood from the right atrium will be much higher
than that from the SVC (see Fig. 475.2). This feature is not specifically
diagnostic because it may occur with PAPVR to the right atrium, with
a ventricular septal defect (VSD) in the presence of tricuspid insufficiency, with AV septal defects associated with left ventricular–to–
right atrial shunts, and with aorta–to–right atrial communications
(ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm). Pressure in the right side of
the heart is usually normal, but small to moderate pressure gradients
(<25 mm Hg) may be measured across the RV outflow tract because
of functional pulmonary stenosis related to excessive blood flow. If the
pressure gradient across the pulmonary valve is greater, pathologic pulmonary stenosis is likely present. In children and adolescents, PVR is
almost always normal. The shunt is variable and depends on the size
of the defect, but it may be of considerable volume. Cineangiography,
performed with the catheter through the defect and in the right upper
pulmonary vein, demonstrates the defect and confirms the location
of the right upper pulmonary venous drainage (normal or aberrant
into the SVC). Pulmonary angiography demonstrates the defect on
the levophase (return of contrast to left side of the heart after passing
through the lungs).

after ASD repair in adults. For most patients, the procedure of choice
is percutaneous catheter device closure using an atrial septal occlusion
device, implanted transvenously in the cardiac catheterization laboratory (Fig. 475.4). The results are excellent, and patients are usually discharged from the hospital the following day. The incidence of serious
complications (e.g., device erosion) is very low and can be decreased
by identifying high-­risk patients, such as those with a deficient rim of
septum in the area where the device would be anchored. Echocardiography can usually determine whether a patient is a good candidate for
device closure. In patients with small secundum ASDs and minimal
left-­to-­right shunts without RV enlargement, the consensus is that closure is usually not required. Infants with small to moderate-­sized ASDs
can be watched closely, because these defects will often grow smaller in
the first year of life. It is unclear whether the persistence of a small ASD
into adulthood increases the risk for stroke enough to warrant prophylactic closure of these defects in all patients, including those with no
history of stroke.

PROGNOSIS

Small to moderate-­sized ASDs detected in term infants may grow
smaller or close spontaneously. Secundum ASDs are well tolerated during childhood, and significant symptoms do not usually
appear until the third decade or later. Pulmonary hypertension,
atrial dysrhythmias, tricuspid or mitral insufficiency, and heart failure are late manifestations; these symptoms may initially appear

RA

LA

A

COMPLICATIONS

RA

Secundum ASDs are usually isolated, although they may be associated
with PAPVR, pulmonary valvular stenosis, VSD, pulmonary artery
branch stenosis, and persistent left SVC, as well as mitral valve prolapse and insufficiency. Secundum ASDs are associated with autosomal
dominant Holt-­Oram syndrome. The gene responsible for this syndrome, situated in the region 12q21-­q22 of chromosome 12, is TBX5,
a member of the T-­box transcriptional family. A familial form of
secundum ASD associated with AV conduction delay has been linked
to pathogenic variants in another transcription factor, Nkx2.5. Patients
with familial ASD without heart block may carry a variant in the transcription factor GATA4, located on chromosome 8p22-­23 (see Table
473.2).

TREATMENT

Transcatheter device or surgical closure is advised for all symptomatic
patients and for asymptomatic patients with a Qp:Qs ratio of at least
2:1 and those with RV enlargement. The timing for elective closure is
usually after the first year of life and before entry into school. Closure
carried out at open heart surgery is associated with a mortality rate of
<1%. Repair is preferred during early childhood because surgical mortality and morbidity are significantly greater in adulthood; the long-­
term risk of arrhythmia caused by chronic atrial dilation is also greater

LA

B
Fig. 475.4 Intravascular ultrasound imaging of transcatheter occlu-

sion of an atrial septal defect (ASD). A, Catheter (small arrow) has been
advanced across the ASD, and the left-­sided disk of the device (large
arrow) has been extruded from the sheath into the left atrium (LA). B,
The right atrial disk (arrow) has now been extruded into the right atrium
(RA). The two halves of the device are then locked together and the
catheter detached from the occluder device and removed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 475 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Left-­to-­Right Shunt Lesions
during the increased volume load of pregnancy. Infective endocarditis is extremely rare, and antibiotic prophylaxis for isolated secundum
ASDs is not recommended.
The results after surgical or device closure in children with moderate-­
sized to large shunts are excellent. Symptoms, if present, disappear rapidly, and growth is frequently enhanced. Heart size decreases to normal,
and the ECG shows decreased RV volume load. Late right-­sided heart
failure and arrhythmias are less common in patients who have had
early repair, becoming more common in patients who undergo surgery
after 20 years of age. Although early and midterm results with device
closure are excellent, the long-­term effects are not yet known. Reports
of resolution of migraine headaches with aura in patients after device
closure of an ASD or PFO suggest a possible thromboembolic etiology;
however, whether to close such defects is still unclear.

475.3 Sinus Venosus Atrial Septal Defect
Daniel Bernstein
A sinus venosus ASD is situated in the upper part of the atrial septum
in close relation to the entry of the superior vena cava (see Fig. 475.1).
Often, one or more pulmonary veins (usually from the right lung)
drain anomalously into the SVC. The SVC sometimes straddles the
defect; in this case, some systemic venous blood enters the left atrium,
but only rarely does it cause clinically evident cyanosis. The hemodynamic disturbance, clinical picture, ECG, and radiograph are similar to
those seen in secundum ASD. The diagnosis can usually be made by
echocardiography. If questions remain after echocardiogram regarding
pulmonary venous drainage, cardiac CT or MRI is usually diagnostic.
Cardiac catheterization is rarely required, except in adult patients in
whom PVR assessment may be important. Anatomic correction generally requires surgical insertion of a patch to close the defect while
incorporating the entry of any anomalous pulmonary veins into the left
atrium. If the anomalous vein drains high in the SVC, the vein can be
left intact and the ASD closed to incorporate the SVC mouth into the
left atrium. The SVC proximal to the venous entrance is then detached
and anastomosed directly to the right atrial appendage (Warden procedure). This procedure avoids direct suturing of the pulmonary vein,
with less chance of future stenosis. Surgical results are generally excellent. Rarely, sinus venosus defects involve the IVC.

475.4 Partial Anomalous Pulmonary
Venous Return
Daniel Bernstein
One or several pulmonary veins may return anomalously to the SVC
or IVC, right atrium, or coronary sinus and produce a left-­to-­right
shunt of oxygenated blood. Partial anomalous pulmonary venous
return (PAPVR) usually involves some or all of the veins from only
one lung, typically the right. When an associated ASD is present, it is
generally of the sinus venosus type but can be secundum (see Chapters
475.2 and 475.3). When an ASD is detected by echocardiography, one
must always search for associated PAPVR. The history, physical signs,
and electrocardiographic and radiologic findings are indistinguishable from those of an isolated ostium secundum ASD. Occasionally, an
anomalous vein draining into the IVC is visible on chest radiography
as a crescentic shadow of vascular density along the right border of the
cardiac silhouette (scimitar syndrome); in these patients an ASD is
not usually present, but pulmonary sequestration or lung hypoplasia and anomalous arterial supply to that lobe are common findings.
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR) is a cyanotic
lesion and is discussed in Chapter 480.7. Echocardiography generally confirms the diagnosis. MRI and CT are also useful if there is a
question regarding pulmonary venous drainage or in cases of scimitar syndrome. If cardiac catheterization is performed, the presence of
anomalous pulmonary veins is demonstrated by selective pulmonary

2779

arteriography, and anomalous pulmonary arterial supply to the right
lung is demonstrated by descending aortography.
The prognosis for PAPVR is excellent, similar to that for ostium
secundum ASDs. When a significant left-­to-­right shunt is present,
surgical repair is performed. The associated ASD should be closed
in such a way that pulmonary venous return is directed to the left
atrium. A single anomalous pulmonary vein without an atrial communication may be difficult to redirect to the left atrium; if the
shunt is small and the right ventricle is not enlarged, it may be left
unoperated.

475.5 Atrioventricular Septal Defects
(Ostium Primum and Atrioventricular
Canal or Endocardial Cushion Defects)
Daniel Bernstein
The abnormalities encompassed by atrioventricular (AV) septal
defects are grouped together because they represent a spectrum of a
basic embryologic abnormality, a deficiency of the AV septum. In
the normal heart, the tricuspid valve sits slightly lower (more toward
the cardiac apex) than does the mitral valve, and thus a small portion
of septum (the AV septum) separates the left ventricle from the right
atrium. This septum is deficient in all forms of AV septal defect. When
the AV septum is absent and there is also an ostium primum defect,
the main communication is situated in the lower portion of the atrial
septum and overlies the mitral and tricuspid valves. In most cases a
cleft in the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve is also noted. The tricuspid valve is usually functionally normal, although some anatomic
abnormality of the septal leaflet is present. The ventricular septum is
intact.
An AV septal defect, formerly known as an AV canal defect or endocardial cushion defect, consists of a defect of the AV septum and contiguous atrial and ventricular septal defects with a common AV valve. The
severity of the AV valve abnormality varies considerably. In a complete
AV septal defect, a single AV valve is common to both ventricles and
consists of an anterior and a posterior bridging leaflet related to the
ventricular septum, with a lateral leaflet in each ventricle. The anterior
bridging leaflet can be divided into right-­and left-­sided components or
may be single and free floating over the ventricular septum. Complete
AV septal defect is one of the most common forms of congenital heart
disease in children with Down syndrome.
Transitional varieties of these defects also occur and include
ostium primum defects with clefts in the anterior mitral and septal
tricuspid valve leaflets and small VSDs and, less commonly, ostium
primum defects with normal AV valves. In some patients the atrial
septum is intact but a VSD is seen in the inlet septum, similar to
that found in the complete form of AV septal defect. Sometimes,
AV septal defects are associated with varying degrees of hypoplasia
of one of the ventricles, known as either left-­dominant or right-­
dominant AV septal defect. If the affected ventricular chamber is
too small to establish a two-­ventricle circulation, surgical palliation,
aiming for an eventual Fontan procedure, is performed (see Chapters 479.4 and 480.10).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

In ostium primum defects, the basic abnormality is the combination
of a left-­to-­right shunt across the atrial defect and mitral (or occasionally tricuspid) insufficiency. The shunt is usually moderate to large,
the degree of mitral insufficiency is generally mild to moderate, and
pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) is typically normal or only mildly
increased. The physiology of this lesion is therefore similar to that of an
ostium secundum ASD.
In complete AV septal defects, left-­to-­right shunting occurs at both
the atrial and the ventricular level (Fig. 475.5). Additional shunting
may occur directly from the left ventricle to the right atrium (known
as a Gerbode shunt) because of absence of the AV septum. Pulmonary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2780 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
hypertension and an early tendency to increase PVR are common.
AV valvular insufficiency, which may be moderate to severe, further
increases the volume load on one or both ventricles. If the defect is
large enough, some right-­to-­left shunting may also occur at the atrial
and ventricular levels and lead to mild arterial desaturation. With time,
progressive pulmonary vascular disease increases the right-­
to-­
left
shunt so that clinical cyanosis develops (Eisenmenger physiology; see
Chapter 482.2). The risk for development of pulmonary vascular disease is greater in patients with Down syndrome, and therefore surgical

100

3

90
9

70

9
3

6

80
3

6
70

100

85

Fig. 475.5 Physiology of atrioventricular (AV) septal defect. Circled

numbers represent oxygen saturation (So2) values. The numbers next to
the arrows represent volumes of blood flow (in L/min/m2). This illustration shows a hypothetical patient with a pulmonary-­to-­systemic blood
flow ratio (Qp:Qs) of 3:1. Desaturated blood enters the right atrium
from the vena cava at a volume of 3 L/min/m2 and mixes with 3 L of fully
saturated blood shunting left to right across the atrial septal defect; the
result is an increase in So2 in the right atrium. Six liters of blood flow
through the right side of the common AV valve, joined by an additional
3 L of saturated blood shunting left to right at the ventricular level,
further increasing So2 in the right ventricle. The full 9 L flow across the
right ventricular outflow tract into the lungs. Nine liters return to the left
atrium, with 3 L shunting left to right across the defect and 6 L crossing the left side of the common AV valve and causing a mid-­diastolic
flow rumble. Three liters of this volume shunt left to right across the
ventricular septal defect, and 3 L are ejected into the ascending aorta
(normal cardiac output).

correction is usually considered early in these patients, within the first
3-­6 months of life.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Many children with an isolated ostium primum defect are asymptomatic, and the anomaly is discovered during a general physical examination. In patients with moderate shunts and mild mitral insufficiency, the
physical signs are similar to those of the secundum ASD, but with an
additional apical holosystolic murmur caused by mitral insufficiency.
A history of exercise intolerance, easy fatigability, and recurrent
pneumonia may be obtained, especially in infants with large left-­to-­
right shunts and severe mitral insufficiency. In these patients, cardiac
enlargement is moderate or marked and the precordium is hyperdynamic. Auscultatory signs produced by the left-­to-­right shunt include a
normal or accentuated first heart sound (S1); wide, fixed splitting of S2;
a pulmonary systolic ejection murmur sometimes preceded by a click;
and a low-­pitched, mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur at the lower-­left
sternal edge or apex, or both, as a result of increased flow through the
AV valves. Mitral insufficiency may be manifested by a harsh (occasionally very high-­pitched) apical holosystolic murmur that radiates
to the left axilla.
With complete AV septal defects, heart failure and intercurrent pulmonary infection usually appear in infancy. The liver is enlarged, and
the infant often develops respiratory symptoms, feeding intolerance,
and failure to thrive. Cardiac enlargement is moderate to marked, and
a systolic thrill is frequently palpable at the lower-­left sternal border. A
precordial bulge and lift may be present as well. S1 is normal or accentuated. S2 is fixed and widely split if the pulmonary flow is massive. A
low-­pitched, mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur is audible at the lower-­
left sternal border, indicative of increased blood flow across the right
side of the common AV valve, and a pulmonary systolic ejection murmur is produced by the large pulmonary flow. The harsh apical holosystolic murmur of mitral insufficiency may also be present.

DIAGNOSIS

Chest radiographs of children with complete AV septal defects often
show moderate to severe cardiac enlargement caused by the prominence of both ventricles and atria. The pulmonary artery is large, and
pulmonary vascularity is increased.
The ECG in patients with a complete AV septal defect is distinctive
and usually diagnostic. Principal abnormalities include (1) superior
and rightward orientation of the mean frontal QRS axis (−90 to −180
degrees) represented by the QRS being negative in both lead I and lead
aVF, (2) counterclockwise inscription of the superiorly oriented QRS
vector loop (manifested by a Q wave in leads I and aVL), (3) signs of
biventricular hypertrophy or isolated RV hypertrophy, (4) RV conduction delay (rSR′ pattern in leads V3R and V1), (5) normal or tall P
waves, and (6) occasional prolongation of the P-­R interval (Fig. 475.6).

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

Fig. 475.6 Electrocardiogram from an infant with atrioventricular septal defect. Note that the QRS complexes are negative in both leads I and

roughly equipotential in lead III, so the QRS axis is −150 degrees. There is also right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) and a minor right ventricular
conduction delay with an RSR′ pattern in aVR.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 475 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Left-­to-­Right Shunt Lesions
The echocardiogram is diagnostic and shows signs of RV enlargement (Fig. 475.7). There is encroachment of the mitral valve into the
left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT); the abnormally low position of
the AV valves results in a “gooseneck” deformity of the LVOT. In normal hearts the tricuspid valve inserts slightly more toward the apex
than does the mitral valve. In AV septal defects, both valves insert at the
same level because of absence of the AV septum. In complete AV septal
defects, the inlet portion of the ventricular septum is also deficient,
and the common AV valve is readily appreciated. Pulsed and color flow
Doppler echocardiography will demonstrate left-­to-­right shunting at
the atrial, ventricular, or left ventricular–to–right atrial levels and can
be used to semiquantitate the degree of AV valve insufficiency. Echocardiography is useful for determining the insertion points of the chordae of the common AV valve, the relative size of the two ventricles,
and evaluating the presence of associated lesions such as patent ductus
arteriosus (PDA) or coarctation of the aorta.
Cardiac catheterization and angiocardiography are rarely required
to confirm the diagnosis unless pulmonary vascular disease is suspected, as when the diagnosis has been delayed beyond early infancy,
especially in patients with Down syndrome in whom the development
of pulmonary vascular disease may be more rapid. Catheterization
demonstrates the magnitude of the left-­to-­right shunt, the degree of
PVR elevation, and the severity of insufficiency of the common AV
valve. By oximetry, the shunt is usually demonstrable at both the atrial
and the ventricular level. Arterial oxygen saturation is normal or only
mildly reduced unless pulmonary vascular disease is present. Children
with ostium primum defects generally have normal or only moderately
elevated PAP. Conversely, complete AV septal defects are associated
with RV and pulmonary arterial hypertension and, in older patients,
increased PVR (see Chapter 482.2).
Selective left ventriculography will demonstrate deformity of
the common AV valve and distortion of the LVOT caused by the

2781

abnormally apical position of this valve (gooseneck deformity). The
abnormal anterior leaflet of the mitral valve is serrated, and insufficiency is noted. Direct shunting of blood from the left ventricle to the
right atrium may also be demonstrated.

TREATMENT

Ostium primum defects are approached surgically from an incision in
the right atrium. The cleft in the mitral valve is located through the
atrial defect and is repaired by direct suture. The defect in the atrial
septum is usually closed by insertion of a patch prosthesis. The surgical
mortality rate for ostium primum defects is very low.
Surgical treatment of complete AV septal defects is more complex, although highly successful. The postoperative course may be
prolonged in infants with severe cardiac failure and in those with
pulmonary hypertension. Because of the risk of pulmonary vascular disease developing as early as 6-­12 months of age, surgical
intervention must be performed during infancy. Full correction of
these defects can be readily accomplished. Palliation with pulmonary arterial banding is uncommon now and reserved for the small
subset of patients who have other associated lesions that make early
corrective surgery too risky. However, banding may not be effective in patients with a large amount of AV valve regurgitation, as
the higher pressure will only increase the regurgitation. The atrial
and ventricular defects are patched, using either one or two separate
patches, and the AV valves are reconstructed. Uncommon complications include surgically induced heart block requiring placement of
a permanent pacemaker and excessive LVOT narrowing requiring
surgical revision. More common long-­term complications include
residual tricuspid or mitral regurgitation, because full repair of
very abnormal valves is often not possible. This requires long-­term
surveillance because these patients may require replacement with a
prosthetic valve later in life.

PROGNOSIS
RA
LA

RV
LV

A

The prognosis for unrepaired complete AV septal defects depends on
the magnitude of the left-­to-­right shunt, degree of PVR elevation, and
severity of AV valve insufficiency. Before the advent of early corrective surgery, death from cardiac failure during infancy was common,
and patients who survived without surgery usually developed pulmonary vascular disease. Most unoperated patients with ostium primum defects and minimal AV valve involvement are asymptomatic
or have only minor, nonprogressive symptoms until they reach the
third or fourth decade of life, similar to the course of patients with
secundum ASDs. Today, long-­term results after surgical repair are
excellent. Late postoperative complications include atrial arrhythmias and heart block, progressive narrowing of the LVOT requiring
surgical revision, and eventual worsening of AV valve regurgitation
(usually on the left side) requiring reoperation or replacement with
a prosthetic valve.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

475.6 Ventricular Septal Defect
Daniel Bernstein

B
Fig. 475.7 Echocardiograms of atrioventricular (AV) septal defect.

A, Subcostal four-­chamber view demonstrating the common AV valve
(arrows) spanning the atrial and ventricular septal defects. B, Doppler
imaging shows two jets of regurgitation through the left side of the
common AV valve (arrows). LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right
atrium; RV, right ventricle.

Ventricular septal defect is the most common cardiac malformation
and accounts for 25% of cases of congenital heart disease. Defects may
occur in any portion of the ventricular septum, but the most common
are of the membranous type (Fig. 475.8). These defects are in a posteroinferior position, anterior to the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve.
VSDs between the crista supraventricularis and the papillary muscle of
the conus may be associated with pulmonary stenosis and other manifestations of tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1). VSDs superior to
the crista supraventricularis (supracristal) are less common; these are
found just beneath the pulmonary valve and may impinge on an aortic
sinus and cause aortic insufficiency (see Chapter 475.7). Supracristal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2782 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

100

3

85
6

100
6

3

70
3

3

100

80

Fig. 475.8 Different types of ventricular septal defects (VSDs). The

central diagram outlines the location of the various types of defects as
seen from the right ventricle. Two left images show a perimembranous
VSD as seen in the five-­chamber and short-­axis views. Note the defect
is roofed by the aorta and is next to the tricuspid valve. Bottom middle echocardiogram shows a muscular apical defect. Top right image
is a right anterior oblique view in a doubly committed VSD. Bottom
right image is a short axis view showing an outlet VSD with prolapse
of the right coronary cusp. AO, Aorta; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary
artery; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. (From Webb GD, Smallhorn
JF, Therrien J, et al. Congenital heart disease in the adult and pediatric
patient. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart
Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019, Fig 75.21, p. 1514.)

VSDs are more common in patients of Asian descent. VSDs in the midportion or apical region of the ventricular septum are muscular in type
and may be single or multiple (“Swiss cheese” septum).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The physical size of the VSD is a major determinant of the size of the
left-­to-­right shunt. When the defect is large, the level of pulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR) in relation to systemic vascular resistance
(SVR) is the major determinant of the shunt’s magnitude, since the
large defect will essentially equalize pressure between the two ventricles. When a small communication is present (usually <5 mm), the
VSD is deemed to be pressure restrictive, meaning that right ventricular (RV) pressure is normal or only slightly elevated. The higher pressure in the left ventricle drives the shunt left to right, and the size of the
defect limits the magnitude of the shunt. In larger, nonrestrictive VSDs
(usually >10 mm), RV and left ventricular (LV) pressures are equalized.
In these defects the direction of shunting and the shunt magnitude are
determined by the PVR/SVR ratio (Fig. 475.9).
After birth in patients with a large VSD, PVR may remain elevated,
delaying the normal postnatal decrease, and thus the size of the left-­
to-­right shunt may initially be limited. Because of normal involution
of the media of small pulmonary arterioles, PVR begins to fall in the
first few weeks after birth, and the size of the left-­to-­right shunt then
increases. Eventually, a large left-­to-­right shunt develops, and clinical symptoms become apparent. In most cases during early infancy,
PVR is only slightly elevated, and the major contribution to pulmonary hypertension is the large communication allowing exposure of the
pulmonary circulation to systemic pressure and the large pulmonary
blood flow. With continued exposure of the pulmonary vascular bed to
high systolic pressure and high flow, pulmonary vascular obstructive
disease eventually develops. When the PVR/SVR ratio approaches 1:1,
the shunt becomes bidirectional, signs of heart failure abate, and the
patient begins to show signs of cyanosis (Eisenmenger physiology; see
Chapter 482.2), intermittent at first, but then more constant. In rare
infants with a large VSD, more often in those with Down syndrome,
PVR never decreases after birth, and symptoms may remain minimal
until Eisenmenger physiology becomes evident.

Fig. 475.9 Physiology of a moderate-to-large ventricular septal de-

fect. Circled numbers represent oxygen saturation (So2) values. The
numbers next to the arrows represent volumes of blood flow (in L/min/
m2). This illustration shows a hypothetical patient with a pulmonary-­to-­
systemic blood flow ratio (Qp:Qs) of 2:1. Desaturated blood enters the
right atrium from the vena cava at a volume of 3 L/min/m2 and flows
across the tricuspid valve. An additional 3 L of blood shunt left to right
across the VSD, resulting in increased So2 in the right ventricle. Six liters of blood are ejected into the lungs (2:1 shunt). Pulmonary arterial
saturation may be further increased because of incomplete mixing at
the right ventricular level. Six liters return to the left atrium, cross the
mitral valve, and cause a mid-­diastolic flow rumble. Three liters of this
volume shunt left to right across the VSD, and 3 L are ejected into the
ascending aorta (normal cardiac output).

The magnitude of intracardiac shunts is usually described by the
Qp:Qs ratio. If the left-­to-­right shunt is small (Qp:Qs <1.5:1), the cardiac chambers are not appreciably enlarged, and the pulmonary vascular bed is probably normal. If the shunt is large (Qp:Qs >2:1), left
atrial and LV volume overload occurs, and RV and pulmonary arterial
hypertension may be present if the defect is large. The main pulmonary
artery, left atrium, and left ventricle are enlarged.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical findings of patients with a VSD vary according to the size
of the defect and pulmonary blood flow and pressure. Small VSDs
with trivial left-­to-­right shunts and normal pulmonary artery pressure
(PAP) are common. These patients are asymptomatic, and the cardiac
lesion is usually found during routine physical examination. Characteristically, a loud, harsh, or blowing holosystolic murmur is present
and heard best over the lower-­left sternal border, and it is frequently
accompanied by a thrill. In a few cases the murmur ends before the
second heart sound (S2), presumably because of closure of the defect
during late systole. A short, loud, harsh systolic murmur localized to
the apex in a neonate is often a sign of a tiny VSD in the apical muscular septum. These tiny defects most often close during infancy. In
premature infants the murmur of a VSD may be heard early because
PVR decreases more rapidly.
Large VSDs with excessive pulmonary blood flow and pulmonary
hypertension are responsible for signs of congestive heart failure:
dyspnea, feeding difficulties, poor growth, profuse perspiration, and
recurrent pulmonary infections in early infancy. Cyanosis is usually
absent, but duskiness is sometimes noted during infections or crying.
Prominence of the left precordium is common, as are a palpable parasternal lift, a laterally displaced apical impulse and apical thrust, and a
systolic thrill. The holosystolic murmur of a large VSD is generally less
harsh than that of a small VSD and more blowing in nature because of
the absence of a significant pressure gradient across the defect. It is less
likely to be prominent in the newborn period before PVR drops. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 475 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Left-­to-­Right Shunt Lesions
pulmonic component of S2 may be increased as a result of pulmonary
hypertension. The presence of a mid-­diastolic, low-­pitched rumble at
the apex is caused by increased blood flow across the mitral valve and
usually indicates a Qp:Qs ratio ≥2:1. This murmur is best appreciated
with the bell of the stethoscope.

DIAGNOSIS

In patients with small VSDs, the chest radiograph is usually normal,
although minimal cardiomegaly and a borderline increase in pulmonary vasculature may be observed. The ECG is generally normal but
may suggest LV hypertrophy. The presence of RV hypertrophy on ECG
is worrisome and a warning that the defect is not small and that the
patient has pulmonary hypertension or an associated lesion such as
pulmonic stenosis. In large VSDs the chest radiograph shows gross
cardiomegaly with prominence of both ventricles, the left atrium, and
the pulmonary artery (Fig. 475.10). Pulmonary vascular markings are
increased, and frank pulmonary edema, including pleural effusions,
may be present. The ECG shows biventricular hypertrophy; the P
waves may be notched (indicative of left atrial [LA] enlargement).
The 2D echocardiogram shows the position and size of the VSD (see
Fig. 475.8). In small defects, especially those of the muscular septum,
the defect itself may be difficult to image and is visualized only by color
Doppler examination. In defects of the membranous septum, a thin
membrane (called a ventricular septal aneurysm but consisting of
abnormal tricuspid valve tissue) can partially cover the defect and limit
the volume of the left-­to-­right shunt. Echocardiography is also useful
for estimating shunt size by examining the degree of volume overload
of the left atrium and left ventricle; in the absence of associated lesions,
the extent of their increased dimensions is a good reflection of the size
of the left-­to-­right shunt. Pulsed Doppler examination shows whether
the VSD is pressure restrictive by calculating the pressure gradient
across the defect. Such calculation allows an estimation of RV pressure
and helps determine whether the patient is at risk for the development
of early pulmonary vascular disease. The echocardiogram can also be
useful to determine the presence of aortic valve insufficiency or aortic
leaflet prolapse, which can be associated especially with supracristal
VSDs.
The hemodynamics of a VSD can also be demonstrated by cardiac
catheterization, although catheterization currently is performed only
when laboratory data do not fit well with the clinical findings or when
pulmonary vascular disease is suspected. Oximetry demonstrates
increased oxygen content in the right ventricle; because some defects
eject blood almost directly into the pulmonary artery (streaming), the
full magnitude of the oxygen saturation increase may only be apparent when pulmonary arterial blood is sampled. Small, restrictive VSDs
are associated with normal right-­sided heart pressures and PVR. Large,
nonrestrictive VSDs are associated with equal or near-­equal pulmonary
and systemic systolic pressure and variable elevations in PVR. Pulmonary blood flow may be 2-­4 times systemic blood flow. In patients with

such “hyperdynamic pulmonary hypertension,” PAP is at systemic
level, but PVR is only minimally elevated because of the high pulmonary blood flow (resistance is equal to the mean pressure divided by
flow). However, if left untreated until Eisenmenger syndrome is present, systolic and diastolic PAP will be elevated and the degree of left-­
to-­right shunting minimal. In these cases, desaturation of blood in the
left ventricle is usually encountered. The size, location, and number of
ventricular defects can be demonstrated by left ventriculography. Contrast medium passes across the defect(s) to opacify the right ventricle
and pulmonary artery. Administration of 100% oxygen with and without nitric oxide can be used to determine whether PVR, if elevated, is
still reactive and therefore more likely to decrease after surgical repair.

TREATMENT

The natural course of a VSD depends to a large degree on the size of
the defect. A significant number (30–50%) of small defects close spontaneously, most frequently during the first 2 years of life. Small muscular VSDs are more likely to close (up to 80%) than membranous VSDs
(up to 35%). Most defects that close do so before age 4 years, although
spontaneous closure has been reported in adults. VSDs that close often
have ventricular septal aneurysm (accessory tricuspid valve) tissue
covering them that limits the magnitude of the shunt. Most children
with small restrictive defects remain asymptomatic, without evidence
of an increase in heart size, PAP, or PVR; a long-­term risk is infective
endocarditis. Some long-­term studies of adults with unoperated small
VSDs show an increased incidence of arrhythmia, subaortic stenosis,
and exercise intolerance. It is recommended that an isolated, small,
hemodynamically insignificant VSD is not an indication for surgery.
However, with the declining risk of open heart surgery, whether all
VSDs should be closed electively in mid-­childhood is still debated.
It is less common for moderate or large VSDs to close spontaneously, although even defects large enough to result in heart failure may
become smaller, and up to 8% may close completely. More frequently,
infants with large defects have repeated episodes of respiratory infection and heart failure despite optimal medical management. Heart failure may be manifested in many of these infants primarily as failure to
thrive. Pulmonary hypertension occurs as a result of high pulmonary
blood flow. These patients are at risk for pulmonary vascular disease if
the defect is not repaired during early infancy.
Patients with VSD are also at risk for the development of aortic valve
regurgitation, the greatest risk occurring in patients with a supracristal
VSD (see Chapter 475.7), where the position of the defect undermines
support for the right coronary or noncoronary leaflet of the aortic
valve. A small number of patients with VSD develop acquired infundibular pulmonary stenosis, which then protects the pulmonary circulation from the short-­term effects of pulmonary overcirculation and
the long-­term effects of pulmonary vascular disease. In these patients
the clinical picture changes from that of a VSD with a large left-­to-­right
shunt to a VSD with pulmonary stenosis. The shunt may diminish in

Fig. 475.10 A, Preoperative radio-

graph in a patient with a ventricular
septal defect with a large left-­to-­right
shunt and pulmonary hypertension.
Significant cardiomegaly, prominence
of the pulmonary arterial trunk, and
pulmonary overcirculation are evident.
B, Three years after surgical closure
of the defect, heart size is greatly decreased and the pulmonary vasculature
is normal.

A

2783

B

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2784 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
size, become balanced, or even become a net right-­to-­left shunt. These
patients must be carefully distinguished from those in whom an Eisenmenger physiology develops (see Chapter 482.2).
In patients with small VSDs, parents should be reassured of the relatively benign nature of the lesion, and the child should be encouraged
to live a normal life, with no restrictions on physical activity. Surgical repair is not recommended; however, routine follow-­up with the
cardiologist is important. As protection against infective endocarditis, the integrity of primary and permanent teeth should be carefully
maintained; with the latest revision of the American Heart Association
(AHA) guidelines, antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended
for dental visits or surgical procedures (see Chapter 486). These patients
can be monitored by a combination of clinical examination and noninvasive laboratory tests until the VSD has closed spontaneously. Echocardiography is used to estimate PAP, screen for the development of
LVOT pathology (subaortic membrane or aortic regurgitation), and
confirm spontaneous closure.
In infants with a large VSD and heart failure, management is
directed at reducing symptoms and optimizing the patient’s fluid status
so that they are in optimal condition for surgical repair. In infants in
the first year of life, if early treatment is successful, the size of the defect
may sometimes diminish in size with clinical improvement. Selected
patients in this group can be observed closely with echocardiographic monitoring. The clinician must be alert not to confuse clinical
improvement caused by a decrease in defect size with clinical changes
caused by the development of Eisenmenger physiology. Because surgical closure can be carried out at low risk in most infants, medical
management should not be pursued in symptomatic infants after an
initial unsuccessful trial. Because pulmonary vascular disease can usually be prevented when surgery is performed within the first year of life,
even infants with well-­controlled heart failure should not have surgery
delayed inordinately unless there is echocardiographic evidence that
the defect is becoming pressure restrictive.
Indications for surgical closure of a VSD include patients at any age
with large defects in whom clinical symptoms and failure to thrive cannot be controlled medically or in whom the defect is not decreasing in
size; infants between 6 and 12 months of age with moderate to large
defects associated with pulmonary hypertension, even if the symptoms
are controlled by medication; and patients older than 24 months with
a Qp:Qs ratio greater than 2:1. Patients with a supracristal VSD of any
size are usually referred for surgery because of their higher risk for
developing aortic valve regurgitation (see Chapter 475.7). Severe pulmonary vascular disease nonresponsive to pulmonary vasodilators is a
contraindication to closure of a VSD.
Transcatheter closure has been used successfully in treating larger
muscular VSDs, which may be difficult to access by surgery. Perimembranous and intracristal VSD catheter closure is more complex because
of the proximity of the defect to the tricuspid valve and conduction
system; devices have been designed more specifically to address these
issues and are currently being investigated. Preliminary data suggest
that, for carefully selected patients (usually children beyond infancy),
the results appear to be comparable to surgical repair. Hybrid methods
employing a sternotomy with device placement through the anterior
wall of the right ventricle under transesophageal echocardiographic
and fluoroscopic visualization have also been performed in difficult-­
to-­approach defects.

PROGNOSIS

The results of primary surgical repair are excellent, and complications
leading to long-­term problems (residual ventricular shunts requiring
reoperation or device closure and heart block requiring a pacemaker)
are rare. Surgical risks are somewhat higher for defects in the muscular
septum, particularly apical defects and multiple (Swiss cheese–type)
VSDs. Some of these patients may require pulmonary arterial banding if symptomatic, with subsequent debanding and repair of multiple
VSDs at an older age.
After surgical closure of the left-­to-­right shunt, the hyperdynamic
heart becomes quiet, cardiac size decreases toward normal (see Fig.
475.10), thrills and murmurs are absent, and pulmonary artery

hypertension regresses. The patient’s clinical status greatly improves.
Most infants begin to thrive, often quite rapidly after hospital discharge, and cardiac medications are no longer required. Catch-­up
growth occurs in most patients within the next year. In some patients,
after successful surgery, systolic ejection murmurs of low intensity
persist for months. The long-­term prognosis after surgery is excellent.
Patients with a small VSD and those who have undergone surgical closure without residua are considered to be at standard risk for health
and life insurance.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

475.7 Supracristal Ventricular Septal Defect
with Aortic Insufficiency
Daniel Bernstein
A supracristal VSD can be complicated by prolapse of the aortic valve
into the defect and aortic insufficiency, which may eventually develop
in 50–90% of these patients. Although supracristal VSD accounts for
approximately 5% of all patients with VSD, the incidence is higher in
Asian children and in males. The VSD, which may be small or moderate in size, is located anterior to and directly below the pulmonary valve
in the outlet septum, superior to the muscular ridge known as the crista
supraventricularis, which separates the trabecular body of the right
ventricle from the smooth outflow portion. The right or, less often, the
noncoronary aortic cusp prolapses into the defect and may partially or
even completely occlude it. Such occlusion may limit the amount of
left-­to-­right shunting and give the false impression that the defect is
not large. Aortic insufficiency is most often not recognized until after
5 years of age, or even later. Although most common with supracristal
VSDs, aortic insufficiency is occasionally associated with VSDs located
in the membranous septum.
Early heart failure secondary to a large left-­to-­right shunt rarely
occurs, but without surgery, moderate to severe aortic insufficiency and
left ventricular failure may eventually ensue. The murmur of a supracristal VSD is usually heard at the mid-­to upper-­left sternal border, as
opposed to the lower-­left sternal border, and it is sometimes confused
with that of pulmonic stenosis. A decrescendo diastolic murmur will
be appreciated at the upper-­right or mid-­left sternal borders if there is
aortic insufficiency. More advanced degrees of aortic insufficiency will
be associated with a wide pulse pressure and a hyperdynamic precordium. These clinical findings must be distinguished from PDA or other
defects associated with aortic runoff.
The clinical manifestations vary widely, from trivial aortic regurgitation and small left-­to-­right shunts in asymptomatic children to florid
aortic insufficiency and massive cardiomegaly in symptomatic adolescents. Closure of all supracristal ventricular VSDs is usually recommended to prevent the development of aortic regurgitation, even in
an asymptomatic child. Patients who already have significant aortic
insufficiency require surgical intervention to prevent irreversible left
ventricular dysfunction. Surgical options depend on the degree of
damage to the valve, and for mild insufficiency, may include simple
closure of the defect to bolster the valve apparatus without touching the
valve itself, valvuloplasty for more significant degrees of involvement,
and replacement with a prosthesis or homograft or aortopulmonary
translocation (Ross procedure) for severe involvement.

475.8 Patent Ductus Arteriosus
Daniel Bernstein
During fetal life, most of the pulmonary arterial blood is shunted right
to left through the ductus arteriosus into the aorta (see Chapter 470).
Functional closure of the ductus normally occurs soon after birth, usually within the first week of life, but if the ductus remains patent when

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 475 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Left-­to-­Right Shunt Lesions
PVR falls, aortic blood then is shunted left to right into the pulmonary
artery. The aortic end of the ductus is just distal to the origin of the
left subclavian artery, and the ductus enters the pulmonary artery at
its bifurcation. Female patients with patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
outnumber males 2:1. PDA is also associated with maternal rubella
infection during early pregnancy, an uncommon occurrence in the
vaccination era. PDA is a common problem in premature infants
because the smooth muscle in the wall of the preterm ductus is less
responsive to high Po2 and therefore less likely to constrict after birth.
In these infants the shunt through a PDA can cause severe hemodynamic derangements and several major sequelae (see Chapter 131.3).
When a term infant is found to have a PDA, the wall of the ductus is
deficient in both the mucoid endothelial layer and the muscular media,
whereas in the premature infant, the PDA usually has a normal structure. Thus a PDA persisting beyond the first few weeks of life in a term
infant rarely closes spontaneously or with pharmacologic intervention,
whereas if early pharmacologic or surgical intervention is not required
in a premature infant, spontaneous closure occurs in most instances.
A PDA is seen in 10% of patients with other congenital heart lesions
and often plays a critical role in providing a source of pulmonary blood
flow when the right ventricular outflow tract is stenotic or atretic (see
Chapter 479) or in providing systemic blood flow in the presence of
aortic coarctation or interruption (see Chapters 476.6-­476.8) or in
hypoplastic left heart syndrome.
A PDA is a common finding (∼90%) in patients with smooth
muscle dysfunction syndrome (SMDS) caused by a heterozygous
pathogenic variant in ACTA2. Additional features include congenital mydriasis, pulmonary hypertension, aortic and other arterial
aneurysms, moyamoya-­like cerebrovascular disease, and intestinal
hypoperistalsis.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

isolated, uncomplicated PDA is untenable when RV hypertrophy is
present on the ECG.
Radiographic studies in patients with a large PDA show a prominent pulmonary artery with increased pulmonary vascular markings.
Cardiac size depends on the degree of left-­to-­right shunting; it may be
normal or moderately to greatly enlarged. The chambers involved are
the left atrium and left ventricle. The aortic knob may be normal or
prominent.
On echocardiogram the cardiac chambers will be normal in size
if the ductus is small. With large shunts, LA and LV dimensions are
increased. The ductus can easily be visualized directly and its size
estimated. Color and pulsed Doppler examinations demonstrate systolic or diastolic (or both) retrograde turbulent flow in the pulmonary
artery and aortic retrograde flow in diastole in the presence of a large
shunt (Fig. 475.11).
The clinical signs and echocardiographic findings are sufficiently
distinctive to allow an accurate diagnosis by noninvasive methods in
most patients. In rare patients with atypical findings, cardiac catheterization may be indicated for confirmation of diagnosis. Cardiac catheterization will demonstrate either normal or increased pressure in
the right ventricle and pulmonary artery, depending on the size of the
ductus. The presence of oxygenated blood shunting into the pulmonary
artery confirms the left-­to-­right shunt. The catheter may pass from the
pulmonary artery through the ductus into the descending aorta. Injection of contrast medium into the ascending aorta shows opacification
of the pulmonary artery from the aorta and identifies the ductus.
Other conditions can produce systolic and diastolic murmurs in the
pulmonic area in an acyanotic patient (see Chapter 471). An aorticopulmonary window defect may rarely be clinically indistinguishable
from a patent ductus, although in most cases the murmur is only systolic and is loudest at the right rather than the left upper sternal border

Because of the higher aortic pressure postnatally, blood shunts left to
right through the ductus, from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. The
extent of the shunt depends on the size of the ductus and on the PVR/
SVR ratio. If the PDA is small, pressures within the pulmonary artery,
the right ventricle, and the right atrium are normal. If the PDA is large,
PAP may be elevated to systemic levels during both systole and diastole. Thus patients with a large PDA are at high risk for the development of pulmonary vascular disease if left unoperated.

RV
MPA

DIAGNOSIS

If the left-­to-­right shunt is small, the ECG is normal; if the ductus is
large, LV or biventricular hypertrophy is present. The diagnosis of an

AV

RA

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A small PDA is usually asymptomatic and is usually diagnosed by the
presence of a heart murmur. A large PDA will result in heart failure
similar to that encountered in infants with a large VSD. Stunting of
physical growth may be a major manifestation in infants with large
shunts. A small PDA is associated with normal peripheral pulses, and
a large PDA results in bounding peripheral arterial pulses and a wide
pulse pressure, caused by runoff of blood into the pulmonary artery
during diastole. Although normal in size when the ductus is small, the
heart is moderately or grossly enlarged in cases with a large communication; in these patients the apical impulse is prominent and, with
cardiac enlargement, is heaving. A thrill, maximal in the second left
interspace, is often present and may radiate toward the left clavicle,
down the left sternal border, or toward the apex. It is usually systolic
but may also be palpated throughout the cardiac cycle. The classic continuous murmur is described as “machinery-­like” in quality. It begins
soon after onset of S1, reaches maximal intensity at the end of systole,
and wanes in late diastole. It may be localized to the second left intercostal space or radiate down the left sternal border or to beneath the
left clavicle. When PVR is increased, the diastolic component of the
murmur may be less prominent or absent. In patients with a large left-­
to-­right shunt, a low-­pitched mitral mid-­diastolic murmur may be
audible at the apex as a result of the increased volume of blood flow
across the mitral valve.

2785

LA

DescAo

A

B
Fig. 475.11 Echocardiogram in a newborn with a small to moderate-­
size patent ductus arteriosus. A, Color Doppler evaluation in a parasternal short-­axis view shows flow (arrow) from the aorta into the main pulmonary artery. B, Doppler evaluation demonstrates retrograde diastolic
flow into the pulmonary artery. AV, Aortic valve; DescAo, descending
aorta; LA, left atrium; MPA, main pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RV,
right ventricle.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2786 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
(see Chapter 475.9). A sinus of Valsalva aneurysm that has ruptured
into the right side of the heart or pulmonary artery, a coronary AV fistula, and an aberrant left coronary artery with massive collaterals from
the right coronary display dynamics similar to that of a PDA with a
continuous murmur and a wide pulse pressure. Truncus arteriosus with
torrential pulmonary flow also can present with aortic runoff physiology. A peripheral AV fistula also results in a wide pulse pressure, but
the distinctive precordial murmur of a PDA is not present. VSD with
aortic insufficiency, repaired tetralogy of Fallot, and combined aortic
and mitral insufficiency (usually from rheumatic fever) may be confused with a PDA, but the murmurs should be differentiated by their
to-­and-­fro rather than continuous nature. In a to-­and-­fro murmur
there is a quiet segment between the systolic and diastolic components,
whereas in a continuous murmur there is flow disturbance throughout the cardiac cycle (even if the murmur is louder during systole than
diastole). The combination of a large VSD and a PDA result in findings
more like those of an isolated VSD. Echocardiography should be able
to eliminate these other diagnostic possibilities.

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Spontaneous closure of the ductus after infancy is extremely rare.
Patients with a small PDA may live a normal span with few or no cardiac symptoms, but late manifestations may occur. In patients with a
large PDA, cardiac failure most often occurs in early infancy but may
occur later in life, even with a moderate-­sized communication.
Infective endarteritis may be seen at any age. Pulmonary or systemic
emboli may occur. Rare complications include aneurysmal dilation of
the pulmonary artery or the ductus, calcification of the ductus, noninfective thrombosis of the ductus with embolization, and paradoxical emboli. Pulmonary hypertension (Eisenmenger syndrome) usually
develops in patients with a large PDA who do not undergo ductal closure (see Chapter 482.2).

TREATMENT

Irrespective of age, patients with a PDA require either catheter or surgical closure. In patients with a small PDA, the rationale for closure
is prevention of bacterial endarteritis or other late complications. In
patients with a moderate to large PDA, closure is accomplished to treat
heart failure and prevent the development of pulmonary vascular disease. Once the diagnosis of a moderate to large PDA is made, treatment
should not be unduly postponed after adequate medical therapy for
cardiac failure has been instituted.
Transcatheter PDA closure is routinely performed in the cardiac
catheterization laboratory (Fig. 475.12). Small PDAs are generally
closed with intravascular coils. Moderate to large PDAs may be closed

with an umbrella-­like or pluglike device or with a catheter-­introduced
sac into which several coils are released. Surgical closure of a PDA can
be accomplished by a standard left thoracotomy or using thoracoscopic
minimally invasive techniques. The case fatality rate with interventional or surgical treatment is considerably less than 1%; thus closure
of the ductus is indicated even in asymptomatic patients. Pulmonary
hypertension is not a contraindication to surgery at any age if it can
be demonstrated at cardiac catheterization that the shunt flow is still
predominantly left to right and that severe pulmonary vascular disease
is not present. After closure, symptoms of cardiac failure rapidly disappear. Infants who had failed to thrive usually have immediate improvement in physical development. The pulse and blood pressure return
to normal, and the machinery-­like murmur disappears. A functional
systolic murmur over the pulmonary area may persist; it may represent
turbulence in a persistently dilated pulmonary artery. The radiographic
signs of cardiac enlargement and pulmonary overcirculation disappear
over several months, and the ECG becomes normal.

PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS IN LOW
BIRTHWEIGHT INFANTS
See Chapter 126.1.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

475.9 Aortopulmonary Window Defect
Daniel Bernstein
An aortopulmonary window defect consists of a communication
between the ascending aorta and the main pulmonary artery. The
presence of pulmonary and aortic valves and an intact ventricular
septum distinguishes this anomaly from truncus arteriosus (see
Chapter 480.8). An aortopulmonary window is an associated lesion
in patients with smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome (see Chapter
475.8). Symptoms of heart failure appear during early infancy; occasionally, minimal cyanosis is present. The defect is usually large, and
the cardiac murmur is usually systolic with an apical mid-­diastolic
rumble as a result of the increased blood flow across the mitral valve.
In the rare instance when the communication is smaller and pulmonary hypertension is absent, the findings on examination can mimic
those of a PDA (wide pulse pressure and a continuous murmur at
the upper sternal borders). The ECG shows either LV or biventricular hypertrophy. Radiographic studies demonstrate cardiac enlargement and prominence of the pulmonary artery and intrapulmonary

LSCA

DescAo

A

B

C

Fig. 475.12 Transcatheter closure of a small patent ductus arteriosus using a coil. A, Angiogram of transverse and descending aorta shows small

PDA (arrow). B, Coil (arrow) has been extruded from the sheath and is being positioned in the ductal lumen. C, Angiogram demonstrating total occlusion of PDA by coil (arrow). DescAo, Descending aorta; LSCA, left subclavian artery.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 476 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Obstructive Lesions
vasculature. The echocardiogram shows enlarged left-­sided heart
chambers; the window defect can best be delineated with color flow
Doppler. CT or MR angiography can also be used to visualize the
defect (see Fig. 472.26).
Cardiac catheterization, usually performed in older children to evaluate pulmonary vascular resistance, reveals a left-­to-­right shunt at the level
of the pulmonary artery, as well as hyperkinetic pulmonary hypertension,
because the defect is almost always large. Selective aortography with injection of contrast medium into the ascending aorta demonstrates the lesion,
and manipulation of the catheter from the main pulmonary artery directly
to the ascending aorta is also diagnostic.
An aortopulmonary window defect is surgically corrected during
infancy. If surgery is not carried out in infancy, survivors carry the risk
of progressive pulmonary vascular obstructive disease, similar to that of
other patients who have large intracardiac or great vessel communications.

475.10 Coronary Artery Fistula
Daniel Bernstein
A congenital fistula may exist between a coronary artery and an atrium,
ventricle (especially the right), or pulmonary artery. Sometimes, multiple
fistulas exist. Regardless of the recipient chamber, the clinical signs are
similar to those of PDA, although the machinery-­like murmur may be
more diffuse. If the flow is substantial, the involved coronary artery may
be dilated or aneurysmal. The anatomic abnormality is usually demonstrable by color flow Doppler echocardiography and, during catheterization, by contrast injection into the ascending aorta. Small fistulas may be
hemodynamically insignificant and may even close spontaneously. If the
shunt is large, treatment consists of either transcatheter coil embolization
or, for lesions not amenable to catheter intervention, surgical closure of
the fistula.

475.11 Ruptured Sinus of Valsalva Aneurysm
Daniel Bernstein
When one of the sinuses of Valsalva of the aorta is weakened by congenital
or acquired disease, an aneurysm may form and eventually rupture, usually into the right atrium or ventricle. This condition is rare in childhood.
The onset is usually sudden. The diagnosis should be suspected in a patient
in whom symptoms of acute heart failure develop in association with a
new, loud, to-­and-­fro murmur. Color Doppler echocardiography and cardiac catheterization demonstrate the left-­to-­right shunt at the atrial or ventricular level. Urgent surgical repair is generally required. This condition is
often associated with infective endocarditis of the aortic valve.

Chapter 476

Acyanotic Congenital
Heart Disease:
Obstructive Lesions
476.1 Pulmonary Valve Stenosis with Intact
Ventricular Septum
Daniel Bernstein
Of the various forms of right ventricular (RV) outflow obstruction with
an intact ventricular septum, the most common is isolated valvular

2787

pulmonary stenosis, which accounts for 7–10% of all congenital heart
defects. The valve cusps are deformed to various degrees and, as a
result, the valve opens incompletely during systole. The valve may be
bicuspid or tricuspid and the leaflets partially fused together with an
eccentric outlet. This fusion may be so severe that only a pinhole central opening remains. If the valve is not severely thickened, it produces
a domelike obstruction to RV outflow during systole. Isolated infundibular or subvalvular stenosis, supravalvular pulmonary stenosis, and
branch pulmonary artery stenosis are also encountered. In cases where
pulmonary valve stenosis is associated with a ventricular septal defect
(VSD) but without anterior deviation of the infundibular septum and
overriding aorta, this condition is better classified as pulmonary stenosis with VSD rather than as tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1).
Pulmonary stenosis and an atrial septal defect (ASD) are also occasionally seen as associated defects.
The clinical and laboratory findings reflect the dominant lesion, but
it is important to rule out any associated anomalies. Pulmonary stenosis as a result of valve dysplasia is the most common cardiac abnormality in Noonan syndrome (see Chapter 101.1) and is associated,
in approximately 50% of cases, with a pathogenic variant in PTPN11,
encoding the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-­2 on chromosome 12.
SOS1 gene variants cause an additional 10–15%, and RAF1 and RIT1
genes each account for about 5% of cases. These genes are components
of the RAS/MAPK cell signaling pathway, important for cell division;
however, the mechanism by which these gene changes cause pulmonic
stenosis is unknown. Pulmonary stenosis can also be a component of
LEOPARD syndrome (lentigines, electrocardiographic abnormalities,
ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormalities of genitalia, retardation of growth, deafness syndrome), often associated with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Pathogenic variants in PTPN11, RAF1,
BRAF, and MAP2K1 have been implicated in LEOPARD syndrome.
Pulmonary stenosis, of the valve or more commonly of the branch pulmonary arteries, is a common finding in patients with arteriohepatic
dysplasia, also known as Alagille syndrome (see Chapter 404); pathogenic variants have been found in JAGGED1 or NOTCH2, components
of the Notch signaling pathway.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The obstruction to outflow from the right ventricle to the pulmonary
artery results in increased RV systolic pressure and wall stress, which
lead to hypertrophy of the right ventricle (Fig. 476.1). The severity of
these abnormalities depends on the size of the restricted valve opening. In severe cases, RV pressure may be higher than systemic arterial
systolic pressure, whereas with milder obstruction, RV pressure is only
mildly or moderately elevated. Pulmonary artery pressure (PAP, distal to the obstruction) is either normal or decreased. Arterial oxygen
saturation will be normal even in cases of severe stenosis, unless an
intracardiac communication such as a VSD or ASD is allowing blood
to shunt from right to left. However, when severe pulmonic stenosis
occurs in a neonate, decreased RV compliance often leads to cyanosis
as a result of right-­to-­left shunting through a patent foramen ovale
(PFO), a condition termed critical pulmonic stenosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND LABORATORY
FINDINGS

Patients with mild or moderate stenosis usually have no symptoms.
Growth and development are most often normal. If the stenosis is
severe, signs of RV failure such as hepatomegaly, peripheral edema,
and exercise intolerance may be present. In a neonate or young infant
with critical pulmonic stenosis, signs of RV failure may be more prominent; cyanosis is often present because of right-­to-­left shunting at the
foramen ovale.
With mild pulmonary stenosis, central venous pressure is normal.
The heart is not enlarged, the apical impulse is normal, and the RV
impulse is not palpable. A sharp pulmonic ejection click (caused by
doming of the valve) is heard immediately after the first heart sound
(S1) at the left upper sternal border and over the sternum, more
prominently during expiration. The second heart sound (S2) is split,
with a pulmonary component of normal intensity that may be slightly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2788 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

110 / 70

20 / 10

5

8
110 / 5
80 / 8

Fig. 476.2 Radiograph of patient with valvular pulmonary stenosis
Fig. 476.1 Physiology of valvular pulmonary stenosis. Boxed numbers

and normal aortic root. The heart size is within normal limits, but poststenotic dilation of the pulmonary artery is present.

delayed. A relatively short, low-­or medium-­pitched systolic ejection
murmur is maximally audible over the pulmonic area at the upper left
sternal border and radiates minimally to the lung fields bilaterally. The
electrocardiogram (ECG) is either normal or shows mild right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) (e.g., slightly increased voltages in the
right precordial leads); inversion of the T waves in the right precordial
leads may be the only finding. Note that the T wave in lead V1 should
normally be inverted after the first week of life until at least 6-­8 years of
age. Therefore a positive T wave in V1 in a young child is a sign of RVH
even in the absence of voltage criteria. The only abnormality demonstrable radiographically is usually poststenotic dilation of the pulmonary artery. Two-­dimensional (2D) echocardiography shows RVH and
a slightly thickened pulmonic valve, which domes in systole. Doppler
studies demonstrate a right ventricle–to–pulmonary artery (RV-­PA)
pressure gradient of ≤30 mm Hg.
In moderate pulmonic stenosis, central venous pressure may be
slightly elevated; in older children, a prominent a wave may be noted
in the jugular pulse. An RV lift may be palpable at the lower-­left sternal border. S2 is split, with a delayed and soft pulmonic component.
As valve motion becomes more limited with more severe degrees of
stenosis, both the pulmonic ejection click and the pulmonic S2 may
become inaudible. With increasing degrees of stenosis, the systolic
ejection murmur becomes louder and harsher (higher frequency),
the peak of the murmur is prolonged later into systole, and the murmur radiates more prominently to both lung fields, heard best over
the back.
The ECG reveals RVH, sometimes with a prominent spiked P
wave. Radiographically, the heart can vary from normal size to mildly
enlarged with uptilting of the apex because of the prominence of the
right ventricle; pulmonary vascularity is usually normal or slightly
decreased. The echocardiogram shows a thickened pulmonic valve
with restricted systolic motion. Doppler examination demonstrates an
RV-­PA pressure gradient of 30-­60 mm Hg. Mild tricuspid regurgitation

may be present and allows for Doppler confirmation of RV systolic
pressure.
In severe pulmonary stenosis, mild to moderate cyanosis may be
noted in patients with an interatrial communication (ASD or PFO).
In the absence of any intracardiac shunt, cyanosis is absent. Hepatic
enlargement and peripheral edema, if present, are an indication of RV
failure. Elevation of central venous pressure is common and is identified as a large presystolic jugular a wave. The heart is moderately or
greatly enlarged, and a conspicuous parasternal RV lift is present and
frequently extends to the left midclavicular line. The pulmonic component of S2 is usually inaudible. A loud, long, and harsh systolic ejection murmur, usually accompanied by a thrill, is maximally audible
in the pulmonic area and may radiate over the entire precordium, to
both lung fields, and to the back. The peak of the murmur occurs later
in systole as valve opening becomes more restricted. The murmur frequently encompasses the aortic component of S2 but is not preceded by
an ejection click.
The ECG shows marked RVH, frequently accompanied by a tall,
spiked P wave. Radiographic studies confirm the presence of cardiac
enlargement with prominence of the right ventricle and right atrium.
Prominence of the main pulmonary artery (MPA) segment may be
seen as a sign of poststenotic dilation (Fig. 476.2). Intrapulmonary vascularity is decreased. The 2D echocardiogram shows severe deformity
of the pulmonary valve and RVH (Fig. 476.3). In the late stages of the
disease, systolic dysfunction of the right ventricle may be seen, and in
these cases the ventricle becomes dilated, with prominent tricuspid
regurgitation. Doppler studies demonstrate a high gradient (>60 mm
Hg) across the pulmonary valve. The classic findings of severe pulmonary stenosis in older children are rarely seen today because of early
intervention. In the newborn period, signs of critical pulmonic stenosis
are accompanied by cyanosis.
Cardiac catheterization is not generally required for diagnostic
purposes but is undertaken to perform a therapeutic balloon valvuloplasty procedure. Catheterization demonstrates an abrupt pressure
gradient across the pulmonary valve. PAP is either normal or low. The
severity of the stenosis is graded based on the ratio of RV systolic pressure to systemic systolic pressure or the RV-­PA pressure gradient: 10-­
30 mm Hg in mild cases, 30-­60 mm Hg in moderate cases, and >60 mm
Hg or with RV pressure greater than systemic pressure in severe cases.
If cardiac output is low or a significant right-­to-­left shunt exists across
the atrial septum, the pressure gradient may underestimate the degree
of valve stenosis. Selective right ventriculography demonstrates the

represent pressure in mm Hg. Because of the absence of right-­to-­left or
left-­to-­right shunting, blood flow through all cardiac chambers is normal
at 3 L/min/m2. The pulmonary-­to-­systemic blood flow ratio (Qp:Qs) is
1:1. Right atrial pressure is increased slightly as a result of decreased
right ventricular compliance. The right ventricle is hypertrophied, and
systolic and diastolic pressures are increased. The pressure gradient
across the thickened pulmonary valve is 60 mm Hg. The main pulmonary artery pressure is slightly low, and poststenotic dilation is present.
Left-­sided heart pressure is normal. Unless right-­to-­left shunting is occurring through a foramen ovale, the patient’s systemic oxygen saturation will be normal.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 476 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Obstructive Lesions

2789

Flow across valve
MPA
Valve
RV

A

A

B

B

Fig. 476.3 Echocardiogram demonstrating valvar pulmonic stenosis.

A, Subcostal view showing thickened pulmonary valve leaflets (between
crosshatches). B, Doppler study indicating a 95 mm Hg peak pressure
gradient across the stenotic valve. MPA, Main pulmonary artery; RV,
right ventricle.

thickened, poorly mobile valve. In mild to moderate stenosis, doming
of the valve in systole is readily seen. Flow of contrast medium through
the stenotic valve in ventricular systole produces a narrow jet of dye
that fills the dilated MPA. Subvalvular hypertrophy may be present and
may intensify the obstruction.

TREATMENT

Patients with moderate or severe isolated pulmonary stenosis
require relief of the obstruction. Balloon valvuloplasty is the initial
treatment of choice for the majority of patients (Fig. 476.4). Patients
with severely thickened pulmonic valves, especially common in
those with Noonan syndrome, may require surgical intervention.
In a neonate with critical pulmonic stenosis and cyanosis, urgent
treatment by either balloon valvuloplasty or surgical valvotomy is
warranted.
Excellent results are obtained in most patients. The gradient
across the pulmonary valve is greatly reduced or abolished. In the
early period after balloon valvuloplasty, a small to moderate residual
gradient may remain because of muscular infundibular narrowing;
it usually resolves with time. A short, early decrescendo diastolic
murmur may be heard at the midsternal to upper left sternal border as a result of pulmonary valvular insufficiency. The degree of
insufficiency is usually not clinically significant, although it can
occasionally worsen over time as the child grows. No difference in
patient status after valvuloplasty or surgery has been noted at late
follow-­up; recurrence is unusual after successful treatment except
in those patients with extremely dysplastic valves. In the small
minority of patients where the degree of pulmonary regurgitation
is more severe, RV dilation may ensue, and these patients require
careful follow-­up and may require surgical intervention (repair
or valve replacement) or placement of a transcatheter stent-­valve
(e.g., Melody or Harmony valve).

Fig. 476.4 Valvar pulmonary stenosis and balloon valvuloplasty. A,
Right ventricular angiogram showing severely stenotic pulmonary valve
with narrow jet of blood flowing across. B, Inflation of the balloon catheter showing the indentation (arrow) made on the balloon from the
stenotic valve. (Photos courtesy Dr. Jeffrey Feinstein, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.)

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Heart failure occurs only in severe cases and most often during the first
month of life. The development of cyanosis from a right-­to-­left shunt
across a foramen ovale is almost exclusively seen in the neonatal period
when the stenosis is severe. Infective endocarditis is a risk but is not
common in childhood.
Children with mild stenosis can lead a normal life, but their progress should be evaluated at regular intervals. Patients who have small
gradients rarely show progression and do not need intervention, but a
significant gradient is more likely to develop in children with moderate
stenosis as they grow older. Worsening of obstruction over time may
also be caused by the development of secondary subvalvular muscular hypertrophy. In untreated severe stenosis, the course may abruptly
worsen with the development of RV dysfunction and cardiac failure.
Infants with critical pulmonic stenosis require urgent catheter balloon
valvuloplasty or surgical valvotomy. Development of RV failure many
years after pulmonary balloon valvuloplasty is uncommon. Nonetheless, patients should be followed serially for worsening pulmonary
insufficiency and RV dilation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

476.2 Infundibular Pulmonary Stenosis and
Double-­Chamber Right Ventricle
Daniel Bernstein
Infundibular pulmonary stenosis is caused by muscular or fibrous
obstruction in the outflow tract of the right ventricle. The site of
obstruction may be close to the pulmonary valve or well below it; an

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2790 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
infundibular chamber may be present between the right ventricular cavity and the pulmonary valve. In many cases, a VSD may have
been present initially and later closed spontaneously. When the pulmonary valve is also stenotic, the combined defect is primarily classified as valvular stenosis with secondary infundibular hypertrophy. The
hemodynamics and clinical manifestations of patients with isolated
infundibular pulmonary stenosis are similar, for the most part, to those
described for isolated valvular pulmonary stenosis (see Chapter 476.1).
A common variation in RV outflow obstruction below the pulmonary valve is that of a double-­chambered right ventricle. In this
condition, a muscular band is present in the mid-­RV region; the band
divides the chamber into two parts and creates obstruction between
the inlet and outlet portions. An associated VSD is often noted, and
these may close spontaneously. Obstruction is not usually seen early
in life but may progress rapidly in a similar manner to the progressive
infundibular obstruction observed with tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1).
The diagnosis of isolated RV infundibular stenosis or double-­
chambered right ventricle is usually made by echocardiography. The
ventricular septum must be evaluated carefully to determine whether
an associated VSD is present. When the obstruction is moderate to
severe, surgery is indicated. After surgery, the pressure gradient is abolished or greatly reduced, and the long-­term outlook is excellent.

476.3 Pulmonary Stenosis in Combination
with an Intracardiac Shunt
Daniel Bernstein
Valvular or infundibular pulmonary stenosis, or both, may be associated with either an ASD or a VSD. In these patients the clinical features depend on the degree of pulmonary stenosis, which determines
whether the net shunt is from left to right or from right to left. Neonates with severe pulmonary stenosis (termed critical pulmonary stenosis) usually have right-­to-­left shunting through the foramen ovale
(see Chapter 476.1).
The presence of a large left-­to-­right shunt at the atrial or ventricular
level is evidence that the pulmonary stenosis is mild. These patients
have symptoms similar to those of patients with an isolated ASD or
VSD. With increasing age, worsening of the RV outflow obstruction
may limit the shunt and result in a gradual improvement in symptoms.
Eventually, particularly in patients with pulmonary stenosis and VSD,
a further increase in obstruction may lead to right-­to-­left shunting
and cyanosis. When a patient with a VSD has evidence of decreasing
heart failure and increased RV forces on the ECG, one must differentiate between the development of increasing pulmonary stenosis vs the
onset of pulmonary vascular disease (Eisenmenger syndrome; see
Chapter 482.2).
These anomalies are readily repaired surgically. Defects in the
atrial or ventricular septum are closed, and the pulmonary stenosis is
relieved by resection of infundibular muscle or pulmonary valvotomy,
or both, as indicated. Patients with a predominant right-­to-­left shunt
can have symptoms similar to those of patients with tetralogy of Fallot
(see Chapter 479.1).

476.4 Peripheral Pulmonary Stenosis
Daniel Bernstein
Single or multiple constrictions may occur anywhere along the major
branches of the pulmonary arteries and may range from mild to severe
and from localized to extensive. Frequently, these defects are associated with other types of congenital heart disease, including valvular
pulmonic stenosis, tetralogy of Fallot, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA),
VSD, ASD, and supravalvular aortic stenosis. A familial tendency has
been recognized in some patients with peripheral pulmonic stenosis.

Peripheral pulmonary stenosis is a common cardiac sequelae of congenital rubella syndrome. The combination of supravalvular aortic
stenosis with pulmonary arterial branch stenosis, idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy, elfin facies, and intellectual disability is known as
Williams syndrome, a condition associated with hemizygous microdeletion of ∼25-­27 genes (Williams-­Beuren syndrome critical region:
WBSCR1), including ELN, LIMK1, GTF21, and GTF21RD1 in region
7q11.23 on chromosome 7. Peripheral pulmonary stenosis is also associated with Alagille syndrome, which may be associated with a pathogenic variant in the JAGGED1 or NOTCH2 genes.
A mild constriction has little effect on the pulmonary circulation.
With multiple severe constrictions, pressure is increased in the right
ventricle and in the pulmonary artery proximal to the site of obstruction. When the anomaly is isolated, the diagnosis is suspected by the
presence of murmurs in widespread locations over the chest, either
anteriorly or posteriorly. These murmurs are usually systolic ejection
in quality but may be continuous. Most often, the physical signs are
dominated by the associated anomaly, such as valvar pulmonary stenosis or tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1).
In the immediate newborn period, a mild and transient form of
peripheral pulmonic stenosis may be present. Physical findings are
generally limited to a soft systolic ejection murmur, which can be
heard over either or both lung fields. It is the absence of other physical findings of valvular pulmonic stenosis (RV lift, soft pulmonic S2,
systolic ejection click, murmur loudest at upper left sternal border)
that supports this diagnosis. This murmur usually disappears by age
1-­2 months.
If the stenosis is severe, the ECG shows evidence of RVH and right
atrial hypertrophy, and the chest radiograph shows cardiomegaly and
prominence of the MPA. The pulmonary vasculature is usually normal;
in some cases, small intrapulmonary vascular shadows are seen that
represent areas of poststenotic dilation. Echocardiography is limited
in its ability to visualize the distal branch pulmonary arteries. Doppler
examination demonstrates the acceleration of blood flow through the
stenoses and, if tricuspid regurgitation is present, allows an estimation
of RV systolic pressure. MRI and CT are extremely helpful in delineating distal obstructions. If moderate to severe disease is suspected, the
diagnosis is usually confirmed by cardiac catheterization.
Severe obstruction of the MPA and its primary branches can be
relieved during corrective surgery for associated lesions such as
the tetralogy of Fallot or valvular pulmonary stenosis. If peripheral
pulmonic stenosis is isolated, it may be treated by catheter balloon
dilation, sometimes with placement of an intravascular stent (see
Fig. 472.31).

476.5 Aortic Stenosis
Daniel Bernstein
Congenital aortic stenosis accounts for approximately 5% of cardiac
malformations recognized in childhood and is more frequent in males
(3:1). A bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is one of the most common congenital heart lesions overall, identified in 1–2% of adults. If isolated,
it is not even counted in the overall incidence (0.8% of live births) of
congenital heart disease. There is a high incidence of family clustering,
with multiple individuals affected with BAV or other left-­sided heart
lesions. BAV may be encountered in conjunction with other left-­sided
heart lesions (coarctation of the aorta, aortopathy, mitral stenosis,
Shone complex, and hypoplastic left heart syndrome) or in conjunction with syndromes such as Loeys-­Dietz, Down, Turner, and velocardiofacial (DiGeorge). Several genes have been implicated in BAV,
including NOTCH1, GATA4, GATA5, and SMAD6.
In the most common form, valvular aortic stenosis, the leaflets are
thickened and the commissures are fused to varying degrees. Left ventricular (LV) systolic pressure is increased as a result of the obstruction
to outflow. The LV wall hypertrophies in compensation; as its compliance decreases, end-­diastolic pressure increases as well, impairing
ventricular filling in the more severe cases.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 476 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Obstructive Lesions

Fig. 476.5 Williams syndrome. (From Jones KL, Smith DW. The Williams elfin facies syndrome: a new perspective. J Pediatr. 1975;86:718.)

Subvalvular (subaortic) stenosis with a discrete fibromuscular shelf
(subaortic membrane) below the aortic valve is also an important form
of left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction. This lesion is frequently associated with other forms of congenital heart disease such as
mitral stenosis and coarctation of the aorta (Shone complex) and may
progress in severity with age, sometimes rapidly. Subvalvular aortic stenosis may also become apparent after successful surgery for other congenital heart defects (coarctation of the aorta, PDA, VSD), may develop
in association with mild lesions that have not been surgically repaired,
or may occur as an isolated abnormality. Subvalvular aortic stenosis
may also be caused by a markedly hypertrophied ventricular septum
in association with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (see Chapter 488.2).
Supravalvular aortic stenosis, the least common type, may be sporadic, familial, or associated with Williams syndrome, which includes
developmental delay (IQ range: 41-­80), elfin facies (full face, broad forehead, flattened bridge of the nose, long upper lip, and rounded cheeks)
(Fig. 476.5), and idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy. Additional features include loquacious personality, hypersensitivity to sound, spasticity, hypoplastic nails, dental anomalies (partial anodontia, microdontia
enamel hypoplasia), joint hypermobility, nephrocalcinosis, hypothyroidism, and poor weight gain. Narrowing of the coronary artery ostia
can occur in patients with supravalvar aortic stenosis and should be
carefully evaluated. Stenosis of other arteries, particularly the branch
pulmonary arteries, may also be present. Williams syndrome is caused
by hemizygous microdeletion of ∼25 genes in the WBSCR1 at 7q11.23
on chromosome 7 (see Chapter 476.2).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms in patients with aortic stenosis depend on the severity of the
obstruction. Severe aortic stenosis that occurs in early infancy is termed
critical aortic stenosis and is associated with LV failure and signs of
low cardiac output. Heart failure, cardiomegaly, and pulmonary edema
are severe, the pulses are weak in all extremities, and the skin may be
pale or grayish. Urine output may be diminished. If cardiac output is
significantly decreased, the intensity of the murmur at the right upper

2791

sternal border may be minimal. The endocardial surface may be fibrotic
and stiff (endocardial fibroelastosis) in the most severe cases.
Outside of the newborn period, most infants and children with less
severe forms of aortic stenosis remain asymptomatic and display normal growth and development. The murmur is usually discovered during routine physical examination. Rarely, fatigue, chest pain, dizziness,
or syncope with exercise may develop in an older child with previously
undiagnosed severe obstruction to LV outflow. Sudden death has been
reported with aortic stenosis but usually occurs in patients with severe
LVOT obstruction in whom the diagnosis and surgical relief have been
delayed.
The physical findings are dependent on the degree of obstruction to
LV outflow. In mild stenosis, the pulses, heart size, and apical impulse
are all normal. With increasing degrees of severity, the pulses become
diminished in intensity and the heart may be enlarged, with an LV apical thrust. Mild to moderate valvular aortic stenosis is usually associated with an early systolic ejection click, best heard at the left sternal
border and over the sternum. Unlike the click in pulmonic stenosis,
its intensity does not vary with respiration. Clicks are unusual in more
severe aortic stenosis or in discrete subaortic stenosis. If the stenosis
is severe, S1 may be diminished because of decreased compliance of
the thickened left ventricle. Normal splitting of S2 is present in mild to
moderate obstruction. In patients with severe obstruction, the intensity of the aortic component of S2 is diminished, and S2 may be split
paradoxically (becoming wider in expiration). A fourth heart sound
(S4) may be audible as a result of decreased LV compliance.
The intensity, pitch, and duration of the systolic ejection murmur are
other indications of severity. The louder, harsher (higher pitch), and
longer the murmur, the greater the degree of obstruction. The murmur will also peak later in systole with increase severity. The typical
murmur is audible maximally at the right upper sternal border and
radiates to the neck and the left midsternal border. It is usually accompanied by a thrill in the suprasternal notch and, in older patients, over
the carotids. In patients with subvalvular aortic stenosis, the murmur
may be maximal along the left sternal border or even at the apex. A
soft, decrescendo diastolic murmur is present in patients who also have
aortic insufficiency, not uncommon with a bicuspid aortic valve or in
patients who have had surgery or balloon valvuloplasty. Occasionally,
an apical short mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur is audible; this murmur should raise suspicion of associated mitral valve stenosis. Careful attention to both upper-­and lower-­extremity peripheral pulses is
essential. Patients with mild aortic stenosis will have normal pulses;
as the severity increases, the pulses will become more diminished.
Discrepancy between upper-­and lower-­extremity pulses or a delay in
femoral pulses (radio-­femoral delay) suggests associated coarctation of
the aorta. Discrepancy between the right and left arm pulses in the
presence of normal femoral pulses is a sign of possible supravalvar aortic stenosis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis can usually be made on the basis of the physical examination, and the severity of obstruction confirmed by laboratory tests. If
the pressure gradient across the aortic valve is mild, the ECG is likely
to be normal. The ECG may occasionally be normal even with mild
to moderate obstruction, but evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy
(LVH) and LV strain (inverted T waves in left precordial leads) is generally present if moderate to severe stenosis is long-­standing. The chest
radiograph frequently shows a prominent ascending aorta. Heart size
is typically normal or slightly increased. Valvular calcification is noted
only in older children and adults. Echocardiography identifies both
the site and the severity of the obstruction. Two-­dimensional imaging shows LVH and the thickened and abnormally moving aortic valve
(Fig. 476.6). The echocardiogram will also demonstrate the number of
valve leaflets and their morphology, which leaflets are fused, and the
presence of a subaortic membrane or supravalvar stenosis. Associated
anomalies of the mitral valve or aortic arch (coarctation of the aorta)
or a VSD or PDA are present in up to 20% of cases. In the absence of
LV failure, the shortening fraction of the left ventricle may be increased
because the ventricle is hypercontractile. In infants with critical aortic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2792 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

LV

Ao

LA

A

B
Fig. 476.6 Echocardiogram showing valvar aortic stenosis with regur-

gitation. A, In this parasternal long-­axis view, the stenotic aortic valve
can be seen doming in systole. The crosshatch marks delineate the aortic annulus. B, Doppler study shows the presence of aortic regurgitation
(arrow). Ao, Aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle.

stenosis, the LV shortening fraction is often decreased and may be quite
poor. The endocardium may appear bright, indicative of the development of endocardial fibrous scarring, known as endocardial fibroelastosis. Doppler studies show the specific site of obstruction and
determine the peak and mean systolic LVOT gradients. When severe
aortic obstruction is associated with LV dysfunction, the Doppler-­
derived valve gradient may greatly underestimate the severity of the
obstruction because of the low cardiac output across the valve.
Cardiac catheterization is usually not required for diagnostic purposes, but it is usually performed in conjunction with aortic balloon
valvuloplasty. Left heart catheterization demonstrates the magnitude
of the pressure gradient from the left ventricle to the aorta. The aortic pressure curve is abnormal if the obstruction is severe. In patients
with severe obstruction and decreased LV compliance, left atrial pressure is increased and pulmonary hypertension may be present. When
a critically ill infant with LVOT obstruction undergoes cardiac catheterization, LV function is often greatly decreased. As with the echocardiogram, the gradient measured across the stenotic aortic valve may
underestimate the degree of obstruction because of low cardiac output.
Measurement of cardiac output by thermodilution and calculation of
the aortic valve area may be helpful.

TREATMENT

Balloon valvuloplasty is indicated for children with moderate to severe
valvular aortic stenosis to prevent progressive LV dysfunction and the
risk of syncope and sudden death. Valvuloplasty should be advised
when the catheter-­derived peak-­to-­peak systolic gradient between the
left ventricle and aorta exceeds 60-­70 mm Hg at rest, assuming normal
cardiac output, or for lesser gradients when symptoms or electrocardiographic changes are present. For more rapidly progressive subaortic
obstructive lesions, a gradient of 40-­50 mm Hg or the presence of aortic insufficiency is considered an indication for surgery. Balloon valvuloplasty is the procedure of choice even in the neonatal period. Surgical

treatment is usually reserved for extremely dysplastic aortic valves that
are not amenable to balloon therapy or in patients who also have subvalvar or supravalvar aortic stenosis.
Discrete subaortic stenosis can be surgically resected without damage to the aortic valve, the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve, or the
conduction system. This type of obstruction is not usually amenable
to catheter treatment. Relief of supravalvular stenosis is also achieved
surgically, and the results are excellent if the area of obstruction is discrete and not associated with a hypoplastic aorta. In association with
supravalvular aortic stenosis, one or both coronary arteries may be stenotic at their origins because of a thick supraaortic fibrous ridge. For
patients who have aortic stenosis in association with severe tunnel-­like
subaortic obstruction, the LVOT can be enlarged by “borrowing” space
anteriorly from the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) (the Konno
procedure).
Regardless of whether surgical or catheter treatment has been carried out, aortic insufficiency or calcification with restenosis is likely to
occur years or even decades later and eventually require reoperation
and often aortic valve replacement. Thus these patients require regular
follow-­up with a cardiologist. When recurrence develops, it may not
be associated with early symptoms. Signs of recurrent stenosis include
electrocardiographic signs of LVH, an increase in the Doppler echocardiographic gradient, deterioration in echocardiographic indices
of LV function, and recurrence of signs or symptoms during graded
treadmill exercise. Evidence of significant aortic regurgitation includes
symptoms of heart failure, cardiac enlargement on radiograph, and
LV dilation on echocardiogram. The choice of reparative procedure
depends on the relative degree of stenosis and regurgitation.
When aortic valve replacement is necessary, the choice of procedure often depends on the age of the patient. Homograft valves tend
to calcify more rapidly in younger children, but they do not require
chronic anticoagulation. Mechanical prosthetic valves are much longer
lasting but require anticoagulation, which can be difficult to manage in
young children, and they are not available in sizes appropriate for the
youngest patients. In adolescent females who are nearing childbearing age, consideration of the teratogenic effects of anticoagulants may
warrant the use of a homograft valve. None of these options is perfect
for a younger child who requires valve replacement because neither
homograft nor mechanical valves grow with the patient. An alternative operation is aortopulmonary translocation (Ross procedure);
it involves removing the patient’s own pulmonary valve and using it
to replace the abnormal aortic valve. A homograft is then placed in
the pulmonary position. The potential advantage of this procedure is
the possibility for growth of the translocated living “neoaortic” valve
and the increased longevity of the homograft valve when placed in the
lower-­pressure pulmonary circulation. The long-­term success of this
operation, especially in young children, is still being investigated.
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (or implantation) (TAVR)
uses porcine or bovine (Melody or Sapien) valve tissue sewn into a
self-­expanding frame. These devices can be implanted in the cardiac
catheterization laboratory using a femoral or carotid approach, or
transapically through the chest wall, or in a hybrid procedure after a
surgical thoracotomy. Initially used mainly in adults who were too ill
to be candidates for standard surgical replacement, TAVR is gaining
acceptance for carefully selected children who are not good surgical candidates. Short-­term outcomes are equivalent to surgical valve
replacement. Long-­term complications include possible valve regurgitation or perivalvular leaks.

PROGNOSIS

Neonates with critical aortic stenosis may have severe heart failure and
deteriorate rapidly to a low-­output shock state. Emergency surgery or
balloon valvuloplasty is lifesaving, but the mortality risk is not trivial.
Neonates who die of critical aortic stenosis frequently have significant
LV endocardial fibroelastosis. Those who survive may develop signs of
LV diastolic dysfunction (restrictive cardiomyopathy) and eventually
require cardiac transplantation (see Chapter 492).
In older infants and children with mild to moderate aortic stenosis,
the prognosis is reasonably good, although disease progression over

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 476 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Obstructive Lesions
5-­10 years is common. Patients with aortic valve gradients <40-­50 mm
Hg are considered to have mild disease; those with gradients of 40-­70
mm Hg have moderate disease. These patients usually respond well to
treatment (either surgery or valvuloplasty), although reoperations on
the aortic valve are often required later in childhood or in adult life,
and many patients eventually require valve replacement. In unoperated
patients with severe obstruction, sudden death is a significant risk and
often occurs during or immediately after exercise. Subaortic stenosis
secondary to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is one of the causes of sudden cardiac death in adolescents and young adults.
Patients with moderate to severe degrees of aortic stenosis should
not participate in active competitive sports. In those with milder disease, sports participation is less severely restricted. The status of each
patient should be reviewed at least annually and intervention advised if
progression of signs or symptoms occurs. Prophylaxis against infective
endocarditis is no longer recommended unless a prosthetic or transcatheter (TAVR) valve has been inserted.
Older children and adults with isolated bicuspid aortic valve are at
increased risk for developing dilation of their ascending aorta, even
in the absence of significant stenosis. This risk increases with age, and
the rate of increase is greatest in those with the largest aortic roots. In
children, this dilation is usually mild and remains stable over many
years of observation, but in young adults and older patients, the aorta
can dilate substantially and progressively. Whether these patients have
some undiagnosed form of connective tissue disorder remains to be
determined (this form of dilation is similar to that seen in Marfan syndrome). Patients with Turner syndrome and bicuspid aortic valve also
have an increased risk of aortic dilation. Although dissection and rupture are described complications of severe aortic root dilation in adults,
there are not yet sufficient data to determine these risks in children,
and careful monitoring with echocardiogram, CT, or MRI is warranted.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

D

B

2793

C

E

Fig. 476.7 Metamorphosis of coarctation. A, Fetal prototype with

no flow obstruction. B, Late gestation. The aortic ventricle increases
its output and dilates the hypoplastic segment. Antegrade aortic flow
bypasses the shelf via the ductal orifice. C, Neonate. Ductal constriction initiates the obstruction by removing the bypass and increasing
antegrade arch flow. D, Mature juxtaductal stenosis. The bypass is
completely obliterated, and intimal hypoplasia on the edge of the shelf
is aggravating the stenosis. Collaterals develop. E, Persistence of the
infantile-­type fetal prototype. An intracardiac left-­sided heart obstruction precludes an increase in antegrade aortic flow before or after birth.
Both isthmus hypoplasia and a contraductal shelf are present. Lower-­
body flow often depends on the patency of the ductus. (From Gersony WM. Coarctation of the aorta. In: Adams FH, Emmanouilides GC,
Riemenshneider T, eds. Moss Heart Disease in Infants, Children, and
Adolescents, 4th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1989.)

476.6 Coarctation of the Aorta
Daniel Bernstein
Constrictions of the aorta of varying degrees may occur at any point from
the transverse arch to the iliac bifurcation, but 98% occur just below the
origin of the left subclavian artery at the origin of the ductus arteriosus
(juxtaductal coarctation). The anomaly is responsible for 5–8% of congenital heart disease and occurs twice as often in males as in females.
Coarctation of the aorta is associated with a bicuspid aortic valve in >70%
of patients; mitral valve abnormalities (a supravalvular mitral ring or parachute mitral valve) and subaortic stenosis are other associated lesions.
When this group of left-­sided obstructive lesions occurs together, they
are referred to as Shone complex. Coarctation of the aorta is found in up
to 20% of patients with Turner syndrome (see Chapters 99.4 and 626.1);
∼5–12% of females with coarctation have Turner syndrome.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Coarctation of the aorta can occur as a discrete juxtaductal obstruction or as tubular hypoplasia of the transverse aorta starting at one of
the head or neck vessels and extending to the ductal area (previously
referred to as preductal or infantile-­type coarctation; Fig. 476.7). Often,
both components are present. It is postulated that coarctation may
be initiated in fetal life by the presence of a cardiac abnormality that
results in decreased blood flow anterograde through the aortic valve
(e.g., bicuspid aortic valve, VSD). Alternatively, it has been theorized
that coarctation may be caused by abnormal extension of contractile
ductal tissue into the aortic wall.
In patients with discrete juxtaductal coarctation, ascending aortic
blood flows through the narrowed segment to reach the descending
aorta, although LV hypertension and hypertrophy result. In the first
few days of life, the PDA may serve to widen the juxtaductal area of
the aorta and provide temporary relief from the obstruction. Net left-­
to-­right ductal shunting occurs in these acyanotic infants. With more

severe juxtaductal coarctation or in the presence of transverse arch hypoplasia, RV blood is ejected through the ductus to supply the descending
aorta. Perfusion of the lower part of the body is then dependent on RV
output. In this situation the femoral pulses are palpable, and differential
blood pressures may not be helpful in making the diagnosis. However,
the ductal right-­to-­left shunting is manifested as differential cyanosis,
with the upper extremities being well oxygenated and the lower extremities cyanotic. This is one of the main reasons for performing upper-­and
lower-­limb oxygen saturation screening in the newborn because subtle
differences in saturation may not be discernable visually. Such infants
may have severe pulmonary hypertension and high pulmonary vascular
resistance. Signs of heart failure are prominent. Occasionally, severely
hypoplastic segments of the aortic isthmus may become completely
atretic and result in an interrupted aortic arch, with the left subclavian
artery arising either proximal or distal to the interruption.
Blood pressure (BP) is elevated in the vessels that arise proximal to
the coarctation; BP and pulse pressure are lower below the constriction.
The hypertension is not caused by the mechanical obstruction alone, but
also involves neurohumoral mechanisms. Unless surgically corrected in
infancy, coarctation of the aorta usually results in the development of an
extensive collateral circulation, chiefly from branches of the subclavian,
superior intercostal, and internal mammary arteries, to create channels for
arterial blood to bypass the area of coarctation. The vessels contributing
to the collateral circulation may become greatly enlarged and tortuous by
early adulthood.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Coarctation of the aorta recognized after infancy may not be associated
with significant symptoms, although these may be revealed on closer
questioning. Some children or adolescents complain about weakness
or pain/claudication (or both) in the legs after exercise, but in many
cases, even patients with severe coarctation are asymptomatic. Older

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2794 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
children are frequently brought to the cardiologist’s attention when
they are found to be hypertensive on routine physical examination.
The classic sign of coarctation of the aorta is a disparity in pulsation
and BP in the arms and legs. The femoral, popliteal, posterior tibial, and
dorsalis pedis pulses are weak (or absent in up to 40% of patients), in contrast to bounding pulses palpated in the arms and carotid vessels. However, in patients with large numbers of collaterals, the pulse and BP may
not be much diminished in the lower extremities; in these cases, diagnosis
depends on palpation of the radial and femoral pulses simultaneously for
the presence of a radial-­femoral delay. Normally, the femoral pulse occurs
slightly before the radial pulse. A radial-­femoral delay occurs when blood
flow to the descending aorta is dependent on collaterals, in which case the
femoral pulse is felt after the radial pulse. In normal persons (except neonates), systolic BP in the legs obtained by the cuff method is usually 10-­20
mm Hg higher than that in the arms. In coarctation of the aorta, BP in the
legs is lower than that in the arms; frequently, it is difficult to obtain. This
differential in BPs is common in patients with coarctation who are older
than 1 year, approximately 90% of whom have systolic hypertension in an
upper extremity >95th percentile for age. It is important to determine the
BP in each arm; a BP higher in the right than the left arm suggests involvement of the left subclavian artery in the area of coarctation. Occasionally,
the right subclavian may arise anomalously from below the area of coarctation and result in a left arm BP that is higher than the right. With exercise,
a more prominent rise in upper arm BP occurs, and the upper-­to lower-­
extremity pressure gradient will increase.
The precordial impulse and heart sounds are usually normal; the presence of a systolic ejection click or thrill in the suprasternal notch suggests
a bicuspid aortic valve (present in 70% of cases). A short systolic murmur
is often heard along the left sternal border at the third and fourth intercostal spaces. The murmur is well transmitted to the left infrascapular
area and occasionally to the neck. With a bicuspid aortic valve, the typical murmur of aortic stenosis can be heard at the upper right and mid-­
left sternal borders. Occasionally, more significant degrees of obstruction
are noted across the aortic valve. The presence of a low-­pitched mid-­
diastolic murmur at the apex suggests mitral valve stenosis. In older
patients with well-­developed collateral blood flow, systolic or continuous
murmurs may be heard over the left and right sides of the chest laterally and posteriorly. In these patients, a palpable thrill can sometimes be
appreciated in the intercostal spaces on the back.
Neonates or infants with more severe coarctation, usually including
some degree of transverse arch hypoplasia, initially have signs of lower-­
body hypoperfusion, acidosis, and severe heart failure. These signs may
be delayed days or weeks until after closure of the ductus arteriosus. If
detected before ductal closure, patients may exhibit differential cyanosis, best demonstrated by simultaneous oximetry of the upper and
lower extremities. On physical examination the heart is large, and a
systolic murmur is heard along the left sternal border.

Diagnosis

Findings on chest x-­ray examination depend on the age of the patient
and on the effects of hypertension and the collateral circulation. Cardiac
enlargement and pulmonary congestion are noted in infants with severe
coarctation. In patients with less severe forms of coarctation, the findings
may not be that striking until after the first decade, when the heart tends to
be mildly or moderately enlarged because of LV prominence. The enlarged
left subclavian artery typically produces a prominent shadow in the left
superior mediastinum. Notching of the inferior border of the ribs from
pressure erosion by enlarged collateral vessels is common by late childhood. In most patients the descending aorta has an area of poststenotic
dilation.
The ECG is usually normal in young children with milder degrees of
coarctation but demonstrates LV hypertrophy in older patients. Neonates and young infants display right or biventricular hypertrophy. The
segment of coarctation can generally be visualized by 2D echocardiography (Fig. 476.8); associated anomalies of the mitral and aortic valve
can also be demonstrated. The descending aorta is hypopulsatile, and
color Doppler demonstrates the specific site of the obstruction. Pulsed
and continuous wave Doppler studies determine the pressure gradient
directly at the area of coarctation; in the presence of a PDA, however,
the severity of the narrowing may be underestimated. CT and MRI

BR
AscAo

LCA
LSCA

A

B
Fig. 476.8 Echocardiogram demonstrating coarctation of the aorta

with hypoplastic transverse arch. A, Suprasternal notch 2D echocardiogram showing marked narrowing beginning just distal to the brachiocephalic artery. B, Color Doppler demonstrates turbulent flow in the
juxtaductal area (arrow). AscAo, Ascending aorta; BR, brachiocephalic
artery; LCA, left carotid artery; LSCA, left subclavian artery.

are valuable noninvasive tools for evaluation of coarctation when the
echocardiogram is equivocal (Fig. 476.9). Cardiac catheterization with
selective left ventriculography and aortography is useful in occasional
patients with additional anomalies and as a means of visualizing collateral blood flow. In cases that are well defined by echocardiography, CT,
or MRI, diagnostic catheterization is not usually required before surgery.

TREATMENT

In neonates with severe coarctation of the aorta, closure of the ductus
often results in hypoperfusion, acidosis, and rapid deterioration. These
patients should be given an infusion of prostaglandin E1 to reopen the
ductus and reestablish adequate lower-­extremity blood flow. Once a
diagnosis has been confirmed and the patient stabilized, surgical repair
should be performed. Older infants with heart failure but good perfusion should be managed with anticongestive measures to improve their
clinical status in preparation for surgical intervention. There is usually
no reason to delay surgical repair waiting for patient growth; successful
repairs have been performed even in small premature infants.
Older children with significant coarctation of the aorta should be
treated relatively soon after diagnosis. Delay is unwarranted, especially after the second decade of life, when there may be decreased
LV function and degenerative changes in the aortic wall. For patients
with significant left ventricular dysfunction, relief of the obstruction
can improve function as afterload on the ventricle is dramatically
decreased; however, if fibrosis has occurred, patients can have residual
left ventricular dysfunction. If cardiac function is normal, satisfactory
repair and long-­term outcome are possible well into mid-­adult life.
Surgery remains the treatment of choice for isolated juxtaductal coarctation of the aorta in neonates, infants, and young children at most centers;
several surgical techniques are used. The area of coarctation can be excised
and a primary reanastomosis performed. Most often, the transverse
aorta is opened and an “extended end-­to-­end” anastomosis performed
to increase the effective cross-­sectional area of the repair. The subclavian

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 476 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Obstructive Lesions

2795

(e.g., nitroprusside, esmolol, captopril) and intestinal decompression; surgical exploration is rarely required for bowel obstruction or infarction.

PROGNOSIS
Sag>Cor 24

A

B

AO

C

D

Fig. 476.9 Coarctation of the aorta. A, CT angiogram of coarctation.

B, 3D reconstruction. Angiograms of the coarctation before (C) and after
(D) stenting (arrows). AO, Aorta. (Adapted from Webb GD, Smallhorn
JF, Therrien J, et al. Congenital heart disease in the adult and pediatric
patient. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart
Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 75.41, p. 1561.)

flap procedure, which involves division of the left subclavian artery and its
incorporation into the wall of the repaired coarctation, has fallen out of
favor because of a higher degree of residual stenosis. Some centers favor a
patch aortoplasty, in which the area of coarctation is enlarged with a roof of
prosthetic material. The use of primary angioplasty for native coarctation
has been effective in older children and adults. In infants ≥3 months of age,
balloon angioplasty has been as effective as surgery but is associated with
higher rates of recoarctation requiring intervention (repeat angioplasty
or surgery) and aortic aneurysm formation. Surgery is the treatment of
choice for the symptomatic neonate. Angioplasty is the treatment of choice
for recoarctation. Primary stent placement in the catheterization laboratory is considered in older children, where the stent can be expanded
if needed to keep up with patient growth and for young adults (see Fig.
476.9). For patients who present with severe LV dysfunction, where surgical intervention may be associated with increased risk, catheter-­based
treatments are often considered.
After surgery, a striking increase in the amplitude of the pulse in the
lower extremities is noted. In the immediate postoperative course, rebound
hypertension can occur and requires medical management. This exaggerated acute hypertension gradually subsides, and in most patients, antihypertensive medications can be discontinued. Residual murmurs are
common and may result from associated cardiac anomalies, a residual
flow disturbance across the repaired area, or collateral blood flow. Rare
operative problems include spinal cord injury from aortic cross-­clamping
(if collaterals are poorly developed), chylothorax, diaphragm injury, and
laryngeal nerve injury. If a left subclavian flap approach is used, the radial
pulse and BP in the left arm are diminished or absent.

POSTCOARCTECTOMY SYNDROME

Postoperative mesenteric arteritis may be associated with acute hypertension and abdominal pain in the immediate postoperative period. The pain
varies in severity and may occur in conjunction with anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, leukocytosis, intestinal hemorrhage, bowel necrosis, and small
bowel obstruction. Relief is usually obtained with antihypertensive drugs

Although restenosis in older patients after coarctectomy is rare, a significant number of infants operated on before 1 year of age require revision
later in childhood. All patients should be monitored carefully for the
development of recoarctation and for aortic aneurysm at the anastomotic
site. Should recoarctation occur, balloon angioplasty is the procedure of
choice. In these patients, scar tissue from a previous surgery may make
reoperation more difficult, yet it makes balloon angioplasty safer because
of the lower incidence of aneurysm formation. Relief of obstruction with
this technique is usually excellent. Intravascular stents are typically used,
especially in adolescents and young adults, with generally excellent results.
Repair of coarctation in the second decade of life or beyond may be
associated with a higher incidence of premature cardiovascular disease,
even in the absence of residual cardiac abnormalities. Early onset of adult-­
type chronic hypertension may occur, even in patients with adequately
resected coarctation.
Abnormalities of the aortic valve are present in a majority of patients.
Bicuspid aortic valves are common but do not generally produce clinical signs unless the stenosis is significant. The association of a PDA
with coarctation of the aorta is also common. VSDs and ASDs may be
suspected by signs of a left-­to-­right shunt; they are exacerbated by the
increased resistance to flow through the left side of the heart. Mitral valve
abnormalities are also occasionally seen, as is subvalvular aortic stenosis.
Severe neurologic damage or even death may rarely occur from associated cerebrovascular disease. Subarachnoid or intracerebral hemorrhage
may result from rupture of congenital aneurysms in the circle of Willis,
rupture of other vessels with defective elastic and medial tissue, or rupture
of normal vessels; these events are secondary to hypertension. Children
with PHACE syndrome (posterior brain fossa anomalies, facial hemangiomas, arterial anomalies, cardiac anomalies and aortic coarctation, eye
anomalies syndrome) may have strokes (see Table 691.5). Abnormalities
of the subclavian arteries may include involvement of the left subclavian
artery in the area of coarctation, stenosis of the orifice of the left subclavian
artery, and anomalous origin of the right subclavian artery.
Untreated, the great majority of older patients with coarctation of
the aorta would succumb between ages 20 and 40 years; some live well
into middle life without serious disability. The common serious complications are related to systemic hypertension, which may result in
premature coronary artery disease, heart failure, hypertensive encephalopathy, or intracranial hemorrhage. Heart failure may be worsened
by associated anomalies. Infective endocarditis or endarteritis is a
significant complication in these adult patients. Aneurysms of the
descending aorta or the enlarged collateral vessels may develop.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

476.7 Coarctation with Ventricular Septal
Defect
Daniel Bernstein
In most cases, coarctation is the major anomaly causing the severe symptoms, and resection of the coarcted segment results in striking improvement. Repair of both the VSD and coarctation is usually performed at the
same operation through a midline sternotomy using cardiopulmonary
bypass.

476.8 Coarctation with Other Cardiac
Anomalies and Interrupted Aortic Arch
Daniel Bernstein
Coarctation often occurs in infancy in association with other major cardiovascular anomalies, including hypoplastic left heart, severe mitral or
aortic valve disease, transposition of the great arteries, and variations of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2796 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
double-­outlet or single-­ventricle. The clinical manifestations depend on
the effects of the associated malformations and on the coarctation itself.
Coarctation of the aorta associated with severe mitral and aortic
valve disease may have to be treated within the context of hypoplastic
left heart syndrome (see Chapter 480.10), even if the LV chamber is not
severely hypoplastic. Such patients usually have a long segment of narrow, transverse aortic arch in addition to an isolated coarctation at the
site of the ductus arteriosus. Coarctation of the aorta with transposition of the great arteries or single ventricle may be repaired alone or
in combination with other corrective or palliative measures.
Complete interruption of the aortic arch is the most severe form of
coarctation and is usually associated with other intracardiac pathology.
Interruption may occur at any level, although it is most often seen between
the left subclavian artery and the insertion of the ductus arteriosus (type
A), followed in frequency by those between the left subclavian and left
carotid arteries (type B), or between the left carotid and brachiocephalic
arteries (type C). In newborns with an interrupted aortic arch, the ductus
arteriosus provides the sole source of blood flow to the descending aorta,
and differential oxygen saturations between the right arm (normal saturation) and the legs (decreased saturation) is noted. When the ductus begins
to close, severe congestive heart failure, lower-­extremity hypoperfusion,
and anuria usually develop, progressing to shock. Patients with an interrupted aortic arch can be supported with prostaglandin E1 to keep the
ductus open before surgical repair. As one of the conotruncal malformations, an interrupted aortic arch, especially type B, can be associated with
DiGeorge syndrome (cardiac defects, abnormal facies, thymic hypoplasia,
cleft palate, hypocalcemia). Cytogenetic analysis using fluorescence in situ
hybridization demonstrates deletion of a segment of chromosome 22q11,
known as the DiGeorge critical region.

476.9 Congenital Mitral Stenosis
Daniel Bernstein
Congenital mitral stenosis is a rare anomaly that can be either isolated
or associated with other defects, the most common being subvalvar and
valvar aortic stenosis and coarctation of the aorta (Shone complex).
The mitral valve may be funnel shaped, with thickened leaflets and
chordae tendineae that are shortened and deformed. Other mitral valve
anomalies associated with stenosis include parachute mitral valve,
caused by a single papillary muscle, and double-­orifice mitral valve.
If the stenosis is moderate to severe, symptoms usually appear within the
first 2 years of life. These infants have failure to thrive and various degrees
of dyspnea and pallor. In some patients, wheezing may be a dominant
symptom, and a misdiagnosis of bronchiolitis or reactive airway disease
may have been made. Heart enlargement because of dilation and hypertrophy of the right ventricle and left atrium is common. Most patients have
rumbling apical diastolic murmurs, but because the pressure gradients
in diastole are not very high, the auscultatory findings may be relatively
obscure. S2 is split with a loud P2 if pulmonary hypertension is present. An
opening snap of the mitral valve may be present. The ECG reveals RVH
and may show bifid or spiked P waves indicative of left atrial enlargement.
Radiographs usually show left atrial and RV enlargement and pulmonary
congestion in a perihilar or venous pattern. The echocardiogram is diagnostic and shows thickened mitral valve leaflets, a significant reduction of
the mitral valve orifice, abnormal papillary muscle structure (or a single
papillary muscle), and an enlarged left atrium with a normal or small left
ventricle. A double-­orifice mitral valve is one variant that can usually be
seen on echocardiogram. Doppler studies demonstrate a mean pressure
gradient across the mitral orifice during diastole. Associated anomalies
such as aortic stenosis and coarctation can be evaluated. Cardiac catheterization is often performed to confirm the transmitral pressure gradient before surgery. An increase in RV, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure can be noted. Angiocardiography shows delayed
emptying of the left atrium and the small mitral orifice.
The results of surgical treatment depend on the anatomy of the valve,
but if the mitral orifice is significantly hypoplastic, reduction of the gradient may be difficult. In some patients, a mitral valve prosthesis is required,

and if the valve orifice is too small, the prosthesis may be placed in the
supramitral position. However, whatever prosthesis is used, it must be
replaced serially as the child grows. These patients must be anticoagulated,
usually with warfarin, and although manageable in older children, complications of excessive and insufficient anticoagulation are more common in
infancy. Transcatheter balloon valvuloplasty has been used as a palliative
procedure with mixed results, except in the situation of rheumatic mitral
stenosis. Recent experience using the percutaneous Melody stent-­valve in
selected patients in the mitral position is encouraging.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

476.10 Pulmonary Venous Hypertension
Daniel Bernstein
A variety of lesions may give rise to chronic pulmonary venous hypertension, which, when extreme, may result in pulmonary arterial hypertension
and right-­sided heart failure. These lesions include congenital mitral stenosis, mitral insufficiency, total anomalous pulmonary venous return
with obstruction, left atrial myxomas, cor triatriatum, individual pulmonary vein stenosis, and supravalvular mitral rings. Early symptoms
can be confused with chronic pulmonary disease such as asthma because
of a lack of specific cardiac findings on physical examination. Subtle signs
of pulmonary hypertension may be present. The ECG shows RVH with
spiked P waves. Radiographic studies demonstrate prominence of the pulmonary veins in the hilar region and enlargement of the right ventricle and
atrium and the main pulmonary artery; the left atrium is normal in size or
only slightly enlarged.
The echocardiogram may demonstrate left atrial myxoma, cor triatriatum, stenosis of one or more pulmonary veins, or a mitral valve abnormality (e.g., supravalvar mitral ring). Cardiac catheterization excludes
the presence of a shunt and demonstrates pulmonary hypertension with
elevated pulmonary arterial wedge pressure. Left atrial pressure is normal
if the lesion is at the level of the pulmonary veins, but it is elevated if the
lesion is at the level of the mitral valve. Selective pulmonary arteriography
usually delineates the anatomic lesion. Cor triatriatum, left atrial myxoma,
and supravalvular mitral rings can all be successfully managed surgically.
The differential diagnosis includes pulmonary venoocclusive disease,
an idiopathic process that produces obstructive lesions in one or more
pulmonary veins. The cause is uncertain, and disease that begins in one
vein can spread to others. Although it is usually encountered in patients
after repair of obstructed total anomalous pulmonary venous return (see
Chapter 480.7), it can occur sporadically or in families in the absence of
congenital heart disease. Pathogenic variants in BMPR2 may be seen in
the familial or sporadic cases. The patient initially presents with symptoms similar to left-­sided heart failure on the basis of congested lungs with
apparent pulmonary edema. Dyspnea, fatigue, and pleural effusions are
common. Left atrial pressure is normal, but pulmonary arterial wedge
pressure is usually elevated. A normal wedge pressure may be encountered
if collaterals have formed, or the wedge recording is performed in an uninvolved segment. Angiographically, the pulmonary veins return normally
to the left atrium, but one or more pulmonary veins are narrowed, either
focally or diffusely. Sporadic or familial cases present with a primary pulmonary hypertension phenotype, with dyspnea and cyanosis. However,
treatment with a primary pulmonary hypertension regimen will precipitate pulmonary edema.
Studies using lung biopsy have demonstrated pulmonary venous
and, occasionally, arterial involvement. Pulmonary veins and venules
demonstrate fibrous narrowing or occlusion, and pulmonary artery
thrombi may be present. Attempts at surgical repair, balloon dilation,
and transcatheter stenting have not significantly improved the generally poor prognosis of these patients. Use of antiproliferative agents
with imatinib with or without bevacizumab has demonstrated success
in preliminary studies. Combined heart-­lung transplantation is often
the only alternative therapeutic option (see Chapter 492.2).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 477 u Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Regurgitant Lesions

Chapter 477

Acyanotic Congenital
Heart Disease:
Regurgitant Lesions
477.1 Pulmonary Valvular Insufficiency and
Congenital Absence of the Pulmonary
Valve
Daniel Bernstein
Pulmonary valvular insufficiency most often accompanies other cardiovascular diseases (surgical repair of pulmonary valve stenosis) or may be
secondary to severe pulmonary hypertension. Some degree of incompetence of the valve is an expected result after surgery for right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction, including pulmonary valvotomy
in patients with valvular pulmonic stenosis or valvotomy with infundibular resection in patients with tetralogy of Fallot. Isolated congenital
insufficiency of the pulmonary valve is rare, and these patients are usually asymptomatic because the insufficiency is generally mild.
The prominent physical sign is a decrescendo diastolic murmur at
the upper and mid-­left sternal border, which has a lower pitch than
the murmur of aortic insufficiency because of the lower pressure
involved. Radiographs of the chest show prominence of the main
pulmonary artery and, if the insufficiency is severe, right ventricular
(RV) enlargement. The electrocardiogram (ECG) is normal or shows
an rSR′ pattern in the right precordial leads (V1, V2) and minimal or
no RV hypertrophy. Pulsed and color Doppler studies demonstrate
retrograde flow from the pulmonary artery into the right ventricle
during diastole. Echocardiography can give qualitative measures of
RV volume; cardiac magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is the
best method for quantifying RV volume, the regurgitant fraction, and
RV systolic function (ejection fraction). Mild pulmonary valvular
insufficiency is generally well tolerated and does not require surgical treatment. When pulmonary insufficiency is moderate to severe
and the right ventricle becomes significantly dilated and/or if tricuspid insufficiency has begun to develop, re-­repair, replacement with a
homograft valve, or transcatheter stent-­valve placement may become
necessary to preserve RV function.
Congenital absence of the pulmonary valve is usually associated
with a ventricular septal defect (VSD), often in the context of tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1). In many of these neonates, the pulmonary arteries become widely dilated and compress the bronchi,
resulting in recurrent episodes of wheezing, pulmonary collapse, and
pneumonitis. The presence and degree of cyanosis are variable. Florid
pulmonary valvular incompetence may not be well tolerated, and death
may occur from a combination of bronchial compression, hypoxemia,
and heart failure. Correction involves plication of the massively dilated
pulmonary arteries, closure of the VSD, and placement of a homograft
across the RVOT.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

477.2 Congenital Mitral Insufficiency
Daniel Bernstein
Congenital mitral insufficiency is rare as an isolated lesion and is
more often associated with other anomalies. It is most frequently

2797

encountered in combination with an atrioventricular septal defect,
either an ostium primum defect or a complete atrioventricular septal defect (see Chapter 475.5) where the insufficient jet is through a
cleft in the mitral valve. Mitral insufficiency is also seen in patients
with dilated cardiomyopathy (see Chapter 488.1) when the left ventricular (LV) function deteriorates, the chamber dilates, and the
valve ring is stretched. In adults, mitral insufficiency can be the
result of ischemic injury to a papillary muscle; this is uncommon in
children. Mitral insufficiency may also be encountered in conjunction with coarctation of the aorta, VSD, corrected transposition of
the great vessels, anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from
the pulmonary artery, or Marfan syndrome. In the absence of other
congenital heart disease, endocarditis or rheumatic fever should be
suspected in a patient with isolated mitral insufficiency.
In mitral insufficiency caused by a congenitally malformed valve,
the mitral valve annulus may be dilated, the chordae tendineae short
and may insert anomalously, and the valve leaflets are deformed.
When mitral insufficiency is severe enough to cause clinical symptoms, the left atrium enlarges as a result of the regurgitant flow, and
the left ventricle becomes dilated and mildly hypertrophied. Pulmonary venous pressure is increased, and the increased pressure can
ultimately result in pulmonary hypertension and RV hypertrophy
and dilation. Mild lesions produce no symptoms; the only abnormal sign is an apical holosystolic murmur of mitral regurgitation. In
contrast, moderate to severe regurgitation results in symptoms that
can appear at any age, including poor growth, frequent respiratory
infections, fatigue on exertion, and episodes of pulmonary edema
or congestive heart failure. Often, a diagnosis of reactive airways
disease will have been made because of the similarity in pulmonary
symptoms, including wheezing, which may be a dominant finding
in infants and young children. The presence of a murmur helps distinguish these two etiologies.
The typical murmur of mitral insufficiency is a moderately high-­
pitched, apical blowing, holosystolic murmur. The murmur radiates
from the apex toward the mid-­left sternal border. If the insufficiency
is moderate to severe, it is usually associated with a low-­pitched,
apical mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur indicative of increased diastolic flow across the mitral valve (physiologic mitral stenosis). The
pulmonic component of the second heart sound will be accentuated
if there is pulmonary hypertension. The ECG usually shows bifid P
waves consistent with left atrial enlargement, signs of LV hypertrophy, and sometimes signs of RV hypertrophy. Radiographic examination shows enlargement of the left atrium, which at times can be
massive. The left ventricle is also enlarged and pulmonary vascularity prominent, especially in the perihilar areas. The echocardiogram demonstrates the enlarged left atrium and left ventricle and
defines the structure of the valve, the presence or absence of a cleft,
and the chordal apparatus. 3D echocardiography is especially useful for this imaging. Color Doppler demonstrates the extent of the
insufficiency, and pulsed Doppler of the pulmonary veins detects
retrograde flow when mitral insufficiency is severe. Cardiac catheterization shows elevated left atrial pressure and left ventricular
end-­diastolic pressure. Pulmonary artery hypertension of varying
severity may be present. Selective left ventriculography demonstrates the severity of mitral regurgitation.
Surgical mitral valvuloplasty can result in striking improvement in symptoms and heart size, but in some patients, installation
of a prosthetic mechanical mitral valve may be necessary. Before
surgery, associated anomalies must be identified, as they will need
to be addressed at the time of valve repair. If the valve requires
replacement, several alternatives are available, including mechanical (used mainly for older children) and bioprosthetic, as well as
the use of the Melody stent-­valve. These can be inserted during a
hybrid procedure (surgery and catheterization). A cardiac catheter
laboratory–inserted device (MitraClip), used mostly in adults, has
been used in a few selected pediatric patients to cinch together the
anterior and posterior mitral valve leaflets, reducing insufficiency
by creating a double-­orifice mitral valve.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2798 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

477.3 Mitral Valve Prolapse
Daniel Bernstein
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) results from an abnormal mitral valve
mechanism that causes billowing of one or both mitral leaflets,
especially the posterior cusp, into the left atrium toward the end
of ventricular systole. The abnormality is predominantly congenital
but may not be recognized until adolescence or adulthood. Primary
mitral valve prolapse is common, is present in 2–3% of the population, is more common in females, and may be sporadic or inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait (less often X-­linked) with variable
expression. Pathogenic variants in DCHS1, LMCD1, TNS1, and
DZIP1 are possible genes associated with nonsyndromic MVP. It is
a common finding in patients with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-­Dietz
syndrome, mitral-­aortic-­skeleton-­skin (MASS) phenotype, familial
myxomatous valvular degeneration, fragile X syndrome, mucopolysaccharidoses, Stickler syndrome, straight back syndrome, pectus
excavatum, scoliosis, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum and can also be associated
with hyperthyroidism. Fibromyxomatous degeneration of the valve
leaflets causes them to be thickened and elongated.
The abnormal signs are auscultatory, although occasional patients
may have chest pain and/or palpitations. The apical murmur is late
systolic and may be preceded by a click, but these signs may vary
in the same patient, and at times, only the click is audible. Sudden
standing, or the strain phase of the Valsalva maneuver, decreases LV
volume, so the click moves closer to S1 and the murmur becomes
longer. Squatting (or the release phase of the Valsalva maneuver)
increases LV volume, so that the click moves away from S1 and the
murmur is shortened. Arrhythmias may occur, primarily unifocal
or multifocal premature ventricular contractions. In young adults,
MVP has been associated with sudden cardiac death secondary to
ventricular arrhythmias.
The ECG is usually normal but may show biphasic T waves, especially in leads II, III, aVF, and V6; the T-­wave abnormalities may
vary at different times in the same patient. The chest radiograph is
normal. The echocardiogram shows a characteristic posterior movement of the posterior mitral leaflet during mid-­or late ventricular
systole or demonstrates pansystolic prolapse of both the anterior
and posterior mitral leaflets. These echocardiographic findings
must be interpreted cautiously because the appearance of minimal
mitral prolapse may be a normal variant. Prolapse is more precisely
defined by single or bileaflet prolapse of >2 mm beyond the long-­
axis annular plane of the valve with or without leaflet thickening.
Prolapse with valve thickening >5 mm is “classic”; a lesser degree is
“nonclassic.” Two-­dimensional echocardiography shows that both
the free edge and the body of the mitral leaflets move posteriorly
in systole toward the left atrium. Doppler is then used to assess the
presence and severity of mitral regurgitation.
This lesion is not progressive in childhood, and specific therapy is
not indicated. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended during surgery and dental procedures (see Chapter 486). This recommendation is
controversial because certain features (regurgitation, thickened redundant leaflets) may increase the risk of endocarditis.
Adults (males more often than females) with MVP are at increased
risk for cardiovascular complications (sudden death, arrhythmia,
cerebrovascular accident, progressive valve dilation, heart failure, and
endocarditis) if they have thickened (>5 mm) and redundant mitral
valve leaflets. Risk factors for morbidity also include poor LV function,
moderate to severe mitral regurgitation, and left atrial enlargement.
MVP with severe valve regurgitation, or heart failure, or significant
arrhythmias may require initial valve repair or replacement. Betablocking agents have been used for patients with palpitations and some
arrhythmias. Most patients are asymptomatic and require no treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

477.4 Tricuspid Regurgitation
Daniel Bernstein
Isolated congenital tricuspid regurgitation is most often associated
with Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve (see Chapter 479.7).
Ebstein anomaly may occur either without cyanosis or with varying degrees of cyanosis, depending on the severity of the tricuspid
regurgitation and the presence of an atrial-­level communication
(patent foramen ovale or atrial septal defect). Older children tend
to have the acyanotic form or only develop cyanosis with exercise,
whereas if detected in the newborn period, Ebstein anomaly is usually associated with severe cyanosis.
In pediatric patients, tricuspid regurgitation is most often associated with congenital heart disease and/or RV dysfunction. When
the right ventricle becomes dilated because of volume overload
(e.g., pulmonary insufficiency) or intrinsic myocardial disease
(dilated cardiomyopathy), the tricuspid annulus also enlarges, with
separation of the leaflets and resultant valve insufficiency. This
form of regurgitation may improve if the cause of the RV dilation
is corrected, or it may require surgical plication of the valve annulus. Tricuspid regurgitation can also be encountered in patients
with congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries (see
Chapter 479) and in patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome
after surgical palliation; in both of these situations the RV is pumping at systemic pressure. Isolated tricuspid regurgitation is also
encountered in newborns with perinatal asphyxia. The cause may
be related to an increased susceptibility of the papillary muscles to
ischemic damage and subsequent transient papillary muscle dysfunction. Lastly, tricuspid regurgitation is seen in up to 30% of children after heart transplantation, which can be a risk factor for graft
dysfunction, but is also seen as a result of valve injury caused by
endomyocardial biopsy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 478

Cyanotic Congenital Heart
Disease: Evaluation of the
Critically Ill Neonate with
Cyanosis and Respiratory
Distress
Daniel Bernstein
See also Chapter 124.
A severely ill neonate with cardiorespiratory distress and cyanosis is a diagnostic challenge. The clinician must perform a rapid
evaluation to determine whether congenital heart disease (CHD)
is a cause so that potentially lifesaving measures can be instituted.
The differential diagnosis of neonatal cyanosis is presented in
Table 121.2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2798 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

477.3 Mitral Valve Prolapse
Daniel Bernstein
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) results from an abnormal mitral valve
mechanism that causes billowing of one or both mitral leaflets,
especially the posterior cusp, into the left atrium toward the end
of ventricular systole. The abnormality is predominantly congenital
but may not be recognized until adolescence or adulthood. Primary
mitral valve prolapse is common, is present in 2–3% of the population, is more common in females, and may be sporadic or inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait (less often X-­linked) with variable
expression. Pathogenic variants in DCHS1, LMCD1, TNS1, and
DZIP1 are possible genes associated with nonsyndromic MVP. It is
a common finding in patients with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-­Dietz
syndrome, mitral-­aortic-­skeleton-­skin (MASS) phenotype, familial
myxomatous valvular degeneration, fragile X syndrome, mucopolysaccharidoses, Stickler syndrome, straight back syndrome, pectus
excavatum, scoliosis, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum and can also be associated
with hyperthyroidism. Fibromyxomatous degeneration of the valve
leaflets causes them to be thickened and elongated.
The abnormal signs are auscultatory, although occasional patients
may have chest pain and/or palpitations. The apical murmur is late
systolic and may be preceded by a click, but these signs may vary
in the same patient, and at times, only the click is audible. Sudden
standing, or the strain phase of the Valsalva maneuver, decreases LV
volume, so the click moves closer to S1 and the murmur becomes
longer. Squatting (or the release phase of the Valsalva maneuver)
increases LV volume, so that the click moves away from S1 and the
murmur is shortened. Arrhythmias may occur, primarily unifocal
or multifocal premature ventricular contractions. In young adults,
MVP has been associated with sudden cardiac death secondary to
ventricular arrhythmias.
The ECG is usually normal but may show biphasic T waves, especially in leads II, III, aVF, and V6; the T-­wave abnormalities may
vary at different times in the same patient. The chest radiograph is
normal. The echocardiogram shows a characteristic posterior movement of the posterior mitral leaflet during mid-­or late ventricular
systole or demonstrates pansystolic prolapse of both the anterior
and posterior mitral leaflets. These echocardiographic findings
must be interpreted cautiously because the appearance of minimal
mitral prolapse may be a normal variant. Prolapse is more precisely
defined by single or bileaflet prolapse of >2 mm beyond the long-­
axis annular plane of the valve with or without leaflet thickening.
Prolapse with valve thickening >5 mm is “classic”; a lesser degree is
“nonclassic.” Two-­dimensional echocardiography shows that both
the free edge and the body of the mitral leaflets move posteriorly
in systole toward the left atrium. Doppler is then used to assess the
presence and severity of mitral regurgitation.
This lesion is not progressive in childhood, and specific therapy is
not indicated. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended during surgery and dental procedures (see Chapter 486). This recommendation is
controversial because certain features (regurgitation, thickened redundant leaflets) may increase the risk of endocarditis.
Adults (males more often than females) with MVP are at increased
risk for cardiovascular complications (sudden death, arrhythmia,
cerebrovascular accident, progressive valve dilation, heart failure, and
endocarditis) if they have thickened (>5 mm) and redundant mitral
valve leaflets. Risk factors for morbidity also include poor LV function,
moderate to severe mitral regurgitation, and left atrial enlargement.
MVP with severe valve regurgitation, or heart failure, or significant
arrhythmias may require initial valve repair or replacement. Betablocking agents have been used for patients with palpitations and some
arrhythmias. Most patients are asymptomatic and require no treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

477.4 Tricuspid Regurgitation
Daniel Bernstein
Isolated congenital tricuspid regurgitation is most often associated
with Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve (see Chapter 479.7).
Ebstein anomaly may occur either without cyanosis or with varying degrees of cyanosis, depending on the severity of the tricuspid
regurgitation and the presence of an atrial-­level communication
(patent foramen ovale or atrial septal defect). Older children tend
to have the acyanotic form or only develop cyanosis with exercise,
whereas if detected in the newborn period, Ebstein anomaly is usually associated with severe cyanosis.
In pediatric patients, tricuspid regurgitation is most often associated with congenital heart disease and/or RV dysfunction. When
the right ventricle becomes dilated because of volume overload
(e.g., pulmonary insufficiency) or intrinsic myocardial disease
(dilated cardiomyopathy), the tricuspid annulus also enlarges, with
separation of the leaflets and resultant valve insufficiency. This
form of regurgitation may improve if the cause of the RV dilation
is corrected, or it may require surgical plication of the valve annulus. Tricuspid regurgitation can also be encountered in patients
with congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries (see
Chapter 479) and in patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome
after surgical palliation; in both of these situations the RV is pumping at systemic pressure. Isolated tricuspid regurgitation is also
encountered in newborns with perinatal asphyxia. The cause may
be related to an increased susceptibility of the papillary muscles to
ischemic damage and subsequent transient papillary muscle dysfunction. Lastly, tricuspid regurgitation is seen in up to 30% of children after heart transplantation, which can be a risk factor for graft
dysfunction, but is also seen as a result of valve injury caused by
endomyocardial biopsy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 478

Cyanotic Congenital Heart
Disease: Evaluation of the
Critically Ill Neonate with
Cyanosis and Respiratory
Distress
Daniel Bernstein
See also Chapter 124.
A severely ill neonate with cardiorespiratory distress and cyanosis is a diagnostic challenge. The clinician must perform a rapid
evaluation to determine whether congenital heart disease (CHD)
is a cause so that potentially lifesaving measures can be instituted.
The differential diagnosis of neonatal cyanosis is presented in
Table 121.2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 478 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease
CARDIAC DISEASE LEADING TO CYANOSIS

CHD produces cyanosis when obstruction to right ventricular inflow
or outflow causes intracardiac right-­to-­left shunting or when complex
anatomic defects cause an admixture of pulmonary (deoxygenated) and
systemic (oxygenated) venous return somewhere in the heart. Cyanosis
from pulmonary edema may also develop in patients with heart failure
caused by left-­to-­right shunts, although the degree of desaturation is usually less severe. In general, right ventricular outflow obstruction without
an intracardiac shunt (e.g., isolated valvar pulmonary stenosis) does not
cause cyanosis; however, in the newborn period, cyanosis may be caused
by right-­to-­left shunting across the foramen ovale in the presence of elevated right-­sided filling pressures. Persistent pulmonary hypertension
of the newborn (PPHN) is another cause of right-­to-­left shunting at the
atrial level in the newborn period (see Chapter 130).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The hyperoxia test is one method of distinguishing cyanotic CHD
from pulmonary disease. This test is based on the premise that neonates with cyanotic CHD usually are unable to significantly raise
their arterial blood partial pressure of oxygen (Pao2) during administration of 100% oxygen, whereas in infants with pulmonary disease, high levels of intraalveolar Po2 will overcome at least some
of the ventilation-­perfusion abnormalities and reverse the hypoxia.
This test is performed using a hood rather than nasal cannula or
face mask to guarantee delivery of almost 100% oxygen to the
patient. False-­positive tests can occur if this is not done correctly.
In a healthy newborn, the Pao2 should rise above 300 mm Hg; if
between 150 and 300 mm Hg, noncardiac etiologies (pulmonary
disease, central nervous system disorders, methemoglobinemia) are
most likely. This is not 100% confirmative, however, because some
patients with cyanotic CHD may be able to increase their Pao2 to
>150 mm Hg because of favorable intracardiac streaming patterns.
In infants with cyanosis from a central nervous system disorder, the
Pao2 usually normalizes completely during artificial ventilation. If

A

B

2799

the Pao2 is between 100 and 150 mmHg, then cyanotic congenital heart lesions, increased pulmonary blood flow (mixing lesions,
see Chapter 480), or PPHN are more likely. If the Pao2 is less than
100 mm Hg, then CHD with decreased pulmonary blood flow (see
Chapter 479) is more likely. Another clue to etiology is that hypoxia
in many heart lesions is relatively constant, whereas in respiratory
disorders and in PPHN, Pao2 often varies with time or changes
in ventilator management. For example, hyperventilation may
improve the hypoxia in neonates with PPHN but only occasionally
in those with cyanotic CHD.
Although a significant heart murmur usually suggests a cardiac
basis for the cyanosis, several of the more severe cardiac defects
(e.g., transposition of the great vessels) may not initially be associated with a murmur. The chest radiograph may be helpful in the
differentiation of pulmonary and cardiac disease; in the latter, it
also indicates whether pulmonary blood flow is increased,
normal, or decreased (Fig. 478.1) as well as shows alterations in cardiac size.
Two-­dimensional echocardiography with Doppler is the definitive noninvasive test to determine the presence of CHD. With
today’s high-­quality echocardiography, cardiac catheterization is
less often used for diagnostic purposes and is usually performed to
examine structures that are less well visualized by echocardiography, such as distal branch pulmonary arteries and aortopulmonary
collateral arteries in patients with tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia (see Chapter 479.2) or coronary arteries and right
ventricular sinusoids in patients with pulmonary atresia and intact
ventricular septum (see Chapter 479.3). If echocardiography is not
immediately available to confirm a diagnosis of cyanotic CHD, the
clinician caring for a newborn with possible cyanotic CHD should
not hesitate to start a prostaglandin infusion (for a possible ductal-­
dependent lesion). Because of the risk of hypoventilation associated
with prostaglandins, a practitioner skilled in neonatal endotracheal
intubation must be available.

C

Fig. 478.1 Physiology of congenital heart disease delineated by chest radiography. A, Mild cardiomegaly with an upturned cardiac apex, a

concave main pulmonary artery segment, and symmetric, severely diminished pulmonary blood flow in a 4-­yr-­old child with tetralogy of Fallot/
pulmonary atresia. B, Moderate cardiomegaly and symmetric, increased pulmonary blood flow in a 3-­mo-­old infant with a large atrial septal defect
and ventricular septal defect. C, Moderate cardiomegaly with interstitial edema in an 8-­day-­old newborn with critical aortic stenosis. (From Frost JL,
Krishnamurthy R, Sena L. Cardiac imaging. In: Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology—The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2017: Fig. 3.9, p. 68.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2800 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Chapter 479

Cyanotic Congenital
Heart Disease: Lesions
Associated with
Decreased Pulmonary
Blood Flow
479.1 Tetralogy of Fallot
Daniel Bernstein
Tetralogy of Fallot is one of the conotruncal family of heart lesions in
which the primary defect is an anterior deviation of the infundibular
septum (the muscular septum that separates the aortic and pulmonary
outflows during division of the truncus arteriosus). The consequences
of this deviation are the four components that Fallot initially described:
(1) obstruction to right ventricular (RV) outflow (pulmonary stenosis);
(2) a malalignment type of ventricular septal defect (VSD); (3) dextroposition of the aorta so that it overrides the ventricular septum; and
(4) right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH; Fig. 479.1). Obstruction to

80

60
2

3

100

2

60
3

2

1
95
60

Fig. 479.1 Physiology of tetralogy of Fallot. Circled numbers repre-

sent oxygen saturation values. The numbers next to the arrows represent volumes of blood flow (in L/min/m2). Atrial (mixed venous) oxygen
saturation is decreased because of the systemic hypoxemia. A volume
of 3 L/min/m2 of desaturated blood enters the right atrium and traverses the tricuspid valve. Two liters flow through the right ventricular
outflow tract into the lungs, whereas 1 L shunts right to left through
the ventricular septal defect (VSD) into the ascending aorta. Thus pulmonary blood flow is two-­thirds normal (Qp:Qs [pulmonary-­to-­systemic
blood flow ratio] of 0.7:1). Blood returning to the left atrium is fully saturated. Only 2 L of blood flow across the mitral valve. Oxygen saturation
in the left ventricle may be slightly decreased because of right-­to-­left
shunting across the VSD. Two liters of saturated left ventricular blood
mixing with 1 L of desaturated right ventricular blood are ejected into
the ascending aorta. Aortic saturation is decreased, and cardiac output
is normal.

pulmonary artery blood flow is usually at both the RV infundibulum
(subpulmonic area) and the pulmonary valve. The main pulmonary
artery (MPA) may also be small, and various degrees of branch pulmonary artery stenosis may be present. Complete obstruction of RV
outflow (tetralogy with pulmonary atresia) is classified as an extreme
form of tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.2) and may be associated
with various degrees of hypoplasia of the branch pulmonary arteries.
The degree of pulmonary outflow obstruction and whether the ductus
arteriosus is open or closed determine the degree of the patient’s cyanosis and the age at first presentation.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The pulmonary valve annulus may range from being nearly normal in
size to being severely hypoplastic. The valve itself is often bicuspid or
unicuspid and, occasionally, is the only site of stenosis. More often, the
subpulmonic or infundibular muscle, known as the crista supraventricularis, is hypertrophic, which contributes to the subvalvar stenosis and
results in an infundibular chamber of variable size and contour. When
the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) is completely obstructed
(pulmonary atresia), the anatomy of the branch pulmonary arteries
is extremely variable. An MPA segment may be in continuity with RV
outflow, separated by a fibrous but imperforate pulmonary valve; the
MPA may be moderately or severely hypoplastic but still supply part
or all of the pulmonary bed; or the entire main pulmonary artery segment may be absent. Occasionally, the branch pulmonary arteries may
be discontinuous. In these extreme cases, pulmonary blood flow may
be supplied by a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) or by multiple major
aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs) arising from the
ascending and/or descending aorta or aortic branches and supplying
various lung segments.
The VSD is usually nonrestrictive and large, is located just below
the aortic valve, and is related to the posterior and right aortic cusps.
Rarely, the VSD may be in the inlet portion of the ventricular septum
(tetralogy with atrioventricular septal defect). The normal fibrous continuity of the mitral and aortic valves is usually maintained, and if not
(because of the presence of a subaortic muscular conus), the defect is
classified as a double-­outlet right ventricle (DORV) instead of tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.5). The aortic arch is right sided in 20%
of cases, and the aortic root is usually large and overrides the VSD to
varying degrees. When the aorta overrides the VSD by >50% (in which
case it may also be a subaortic conus), this defect is also classified as a
form of DORV; however, the circulatory dynamics and the method of
repair for these types of DORV are the same as for tetralogy of Fallot.
Systemic venous return to the right atrium and right ventricle is
normal. When the right ventricle contracts in the presence of marked
pulmonary stenosis, blood is shunted into the overriding aorta or
across the VSD into the aorta. Persistent arterial desaturation and cyanosis result, with the degree of desaturation dependent on the severity
of the pulmonary obstruction. Pulmonary blood flow, when severely
restricted by the obstruction to RV outflow, is often supplemented by a
PDA during the immediate newborn period. Peak systolic and diastolic
pressures in each ventricle are similar and at the systemic level. A large
pressure gradient occurs across the obstructed RVOT, and pulmonary
artery pressure is either normal or lower than normal. The degree of
RV outflow obstruction determines the timing of the onset of symptoms and the severity of cyanosis. When obstruction to RV outflow is
mild to moderate and a balanced shunt is present across the VSD, the
patient may not be visibly cyanotic (acyanotic or “pink” tetralogy of
Fallot). When obstruction is severe, cyanosis will be present from birth
and worsen dramatically when the ductus arteriosus begins to close.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infants with mild degrees of RV outflow obstruction may initially even
have symptoms of heart failure caused by a ventricular-­level left-­to-­
right shunt. In these patients, cyanosis is not present at birth, but with
increasing hypertrophy of the RV infundibulum as the patient grows,
cyanosis occurs later in the first few months of life. In contrast, in
infants with more severe degrees of RV outflow obstruction, neonatal
cyanosis is noted immediately. In these infants, pulmonary blood flow

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2801
may be partially or almost totally dependent on flow through the ductus arteriosus. When the ductus begins to close in the first few hours
or days of life, severe cyanosis and circulatory collapse may occur. All
degrees of variation exist between these two clinical extremes. Older
children with long-­standing cyanosis who have not undergone surgery
may have dusky blue skin, mucous membranes, and nailbeds (the latter
two are key to diagnosing cyanosis in children with darker skin color).
Patients may have gray sclerae with engorged blood vessels and (usually after 2 years of age) clubbing of the fingers and toes. Chapter 483
describes the extracardiac manifestations of long-­standing cyanotic
congenital heart disease.
In older children with unrepaired tetralogy, dyspnea occurs on
minimal exertion. They may play actively for a short time and then sit
or lie down or walk a block or so before stopping to rest. Characteristically, children assume a squatting position for the relief of dyspnea
caused by physical effort; squatting increases venous return to the
right side of the heart and also increases systemic vascular resistance,
both serving to increase flow through the obstructed RV outflow. The
child is usually able to resume physical activity after a few minutes of
squatting.
Paroxysmal hypercyanotic attacks (hypoxic, “blue,” or “tet” spells)
may develop during the first year of life. The infant becomes hyperpneic and restless, cyanosis increases, gasping respirations ensue, and
syncope may follow. The spells occur most frequently in the morning
on initially awakening or after episodes of vigorous crying. Temporary
disappearance or a decrease in intensity of the typical systolic ejection
murmur occurs as flow across the RVOT diminishes during the spell.
Tet spells may last from a few minutes to a few hours. Short episodes are
followed by generalized weakness and sleep. Severe spells may progress
to unconsciousness and occasionally to convulsions, stroke, and death.
The onset of these spells is usually spontaneous and unpredictable.
They are associated with reduction of an already compromised pulmonary blood flow, which, when prolonged, results in severe systemic
hypoxia and metabolic acidosis. Infants who are only mildly cyanotic
at rest may be more prone to the development of hypoxic spells because
they have not acquired the homeostatic mechanisms that would allow
them to better tolerate rapid lowering of arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation (Sao2), such as polycythemia.
Depending on the frequency and severity of hypercyanotic attacks,
one or more of the following procedures should be instituted in
sequence: (1) placement of the infant on the abdomen in the knee-­
chest position while making certain that the infant’s clothing is not
constrictive; (2) administration of oxygen (although increasing
inspired oxygen will not reverse cyanosis caused by intracardiac shunting); (3) injection of morphine subcutaneously or intranasal fentanyl
or intranasal midazolam; (4) administer propranolol or esmolol; and
(5) begin a phenylephrine intravenous infusion. Calming and holding
the infant in a knee-­chest position may abort progression of an early
spell. Premature attempts to obtain blood samples may cause further
agitation and may be counterproductive; transcutaneous oxygen saturation monitoring is helpful in these cases but is limited in not measuring the degree of acidosis if the spell is prolonged.
Because metabolic acidosis develops when arterial oxygen tension
(Pao2) is <40 mm Hg, rapid correction (within several minutes) with
intravenous (IV) administration of sodium bicarbonate is necessary if
the spell is unusually severe and the child shows a lack of response to
the foregoing therapy. Recovery from the spell is usually rapid once the
pH has returned to normal. Repeated blood pH measurements may be
necessary because rapid recurrence of acidosis may ensue. For spells
that are resistant to this therapy, intubation and anesthetic sedation are
often sufficient to break the spell. Drugs that increase systemic vascular resistance, such as IV phenylephrine, can improve RV outflow,
decrease the right-­to-­left shunt, and improve symptoms. β-­Adrenergic
blockade by the IV administration of propranolol (0.15-­0.25 mg/kg/
dose given slowly; can be repeated once in 15 minutes) has also been
used. Spells are quite rare because most infants with tetralogy of Fallot
undergo reparative surgery in early infancy.
Growth and development may be delayed in patients with severe
untreated tetralogy of Fallot, particularly when their Sao2 is chronically

<70%. Puberty may also be delayed in patients who have not undergone surgery.
The peripheral pulses are usually normal, as are central venous and
arterial pressures. In older infants and children, the left anterior hemithorax may bulge anteriorly because of long-­standing RVH. A substernal RV impulse can usually be detected. A systolic thrill may be felt
along the left sternal border in the third and fourth parasternal spaces.
The systolic murmur is usually loud and harsh; it may be transmitted widely, especially to the lungs, but is most intense at the mid-­and
upper-­left sternal border. The murmur is generally ejection in quality
at the upper-­left sternal border, but it may sound more holosystolic
toward the lower-­left sternal border. It may be preceded by a click at
the upper sternal border or over the sternum. The murmur is caused by
turbulence through the RVOT. It tends to become louder, longer, and
harsher as the severity of pulmonary stenosis increases from mild to
moderate; however, it can become less prominent with severe obstruction, especially during a hypercyanotic spell, because of shunting of
blood away from the RV outflow through the overriding aortic valve.
Either the second heart sound (S2) is single or the pulmonic component is soft because of the decreased excursion of the stenotic valve.
Infrequently, a continuous murmur may be audible, especially if prominent MAPCAs are present.

DIAGNOSIS

The typical radiologic configuration as seen in the anteroposterior
(AP) view consists of a narrow base, concavity of the left heart border in the area usually occupied by the pulmonary artery, and normal
overall heart size. The hypertrophied right ventricle causes the rounded
apical shadow to be uptilted so that it is situated higher above the diaphragm than normal and pointing horizontally to the left chest wall.
The cardiac silhouette has been likened to that of a boot (“coeur en
sabot”) (Fig. 479.2). The hilar areas and lung fields are relatively clear
because of diminished pulmonary blood flow or the small size of the
pulmonary arteries, or both. The aorta is usually large, and in approximately 20% of patients it arches to the right, which results in an indentation of the leftward-­positioned air-­filled tracheobronchial shadow in
the AP view.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrates right-­axis deviation and
evidence of RVH; because prominent right-­sided forces are normal in
the newborn period, the ECG may be technically normal at this time.
A dominant R wave appears in the right precordial chest leads (V1, V2)
or an RSR′ pattern. In some cases, the only sign of RVH may initially

Fig. 479.2 Chest radiograph of 8-­yr-­old child with tetralogy of Fallot.

Note the normal heart size, some elevation of the cardiac apex, concavity in the region of the main pulmonary artery, right-­sided aortic arch,
and diminished pulmonary vascularity.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2802 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

RV
Ao
LV
LA
C

Fig. 479.3 Echocardiogram of patient with tetralogy of Fallot. This
parasternal long-­axis 2D view demonstrates anterior displacement of
the outflow ventricular septum that resulted in stenosis of the subpulmonic right ventricular outflow tract, overriding of the aorta, and an associated ventricular septal defect. Ao, Overriding aorta; LA, left atrium;
LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle.

be a positive T wave in leads V3R and V1. The P wave may be tall and
peaked, suggesting right atrial enlargement (see Fig. 472.6).
Two-­dimensional (2D) echocardiography with Doppler establishes
the diagnosis (Fig. 479.3) and provides information about the extent
of aortic override of the septum, the location and degree of the RVOT
obstruction, the size of the pulmonary valve annulus and main and
proximal branch pulmonary arteries, and the side of the aortic arch.
The echocardiogram is also useful in determining whether a PDA is
supplying a portion of the pulmonary blood flow. In a patient with
tetralogy of Fallot without pulmonary atresia, echocardiography
usually obviates the need for catheterization before surgical repair.
However, in patients with pulmonary atresia, catheterization and CT
angiography are usually necessary to image the size and source of
blood supply (native pulmonary arteries or MAPCAs) to each lung
vascular segment.
Cardiac catheterization demonstrates a systolic pressure in the right
ventricle equal to the systemic pressure because the right ventricle is
connected directly to the overriding aorta. If the pulmonary artery is
entered, the pressure is greatly decreased, although crossing the RVOT,
especially in severe cases, may precipitate a tet spell. Pulmonary artery
pressure is usually lower than normal, in the range of 5-­10 mm Hg.
The Sao2 level depends on the magnitude of the right-­to-­left shunt; in
“pink tets,” the systemic So2 may be normal, whereas in a moderately
cyanotic patient at rest, it is usually 75–85%.
Selective right ventriculography will demonstrate all the anatomic
features. Contrast medium outlines the heavily trabeculated right
ventricle. The infundibular stenosis varies in length, width, contour,
and distensibility (Fig. 479.4). The pulmonary valve is usually thickened, and the annulus may be small. In patients with tetralogy and
pulmonary atresia, echocardiography alone is not adequate to assess
the anatomy of the true pulmonary arteries and collateral MAPCAs.
Cardiac CT is extremely helpful, and cardiac catheterization with
injection into each arterial collateral is usually indicated. Complete
and accurate information regarding the size and peripheral distribution of the main pulmonary arteries and any collateral vessels
(MAPCAs) is important when evaluating these children for complex
reparative surgery.
Aortography or coronary arteriography outlines the course of the
coronary arteries. In 5–10% of patients with the tetralogy of Fallot,
coronary artery abnormalities may be present, most often an aberrant
coronary artery crossing over the RVOT; care must be taken not to
cut this artery during surgical repair. Verification of normal coronary
arteries is important when considering surgery in young infants, who
may need a patch across the pulmonary valve annulus. Echocardiography can usually delineate the coronary artery anatomy; angiography is
reserved for cases in which questions remain.

Fig. 479.4 Lateral view of selective right ventriculogram in patient

with tetralogy of Fallot. The left arrow points to an infundibular stenosis
that is below the infundibular chamber (C). The narrowed pulmonary
valve orifice is seen at the distal end of the infundibular chamber.

COMPLICATIONS

Before the advent of corrective surgery, patients with tetralogy of Fallot were susceptible to several serious complications. For this reason,
most children undergo complete repair (or in rare situations palliation) in the first few months of life; consequently, these complications
are now rare. Cerebral thromboses, usually occurring in the cerebral veins or dural sinuses and occasionally in the cerebral arteries,
are sequelae of extreme polycythemia and dehydration. Thromboses
occur most often in patients younger than 2 years. These patients
may have iron-­deficiency anemia, frequently with hemoglobin and
hematocrit levels in the normal range (but too low for cyanotic
heart disease). Therapy consists of adequate hydration and supportive measures. Phlebotomy and volume replacement with albumin
or saline are indicated in extremely polycythemic patients who are
symptomatic.
Brain abscess is less common than cerebrovascular events and
extremely rare today. Patients with a brain abscess are usually older
than 2 years. The onset of the illness is often insidious and consists
of low-­grade fever or a gradual change in behavior, or both. Some
patients have an acute onset of symptoms that may develop after a
recent history of headache, nausea, and vomiting. Seizures may occur;
localized neurologic signs depend on the site and size of the abscess
and the presence of increased intracranial pressure. Head CT or MRI
confirms the diagnosis. Antibiotic therapy may help keep the infection
localized, but surgical drainage of the abscess is usually necessary (see
Chapter 644).
Bacterial endocarditis may occur in the RV infundibulum or on
the pulmonic, aortic, or rarely, tricuspid valve. Endocarditis may complicate palliative shunts or, in patients with corrective surgery, any
residual pulmonic stenosis or VSD. Heart failure is not a usual feature
in patients with tetralogy of Fallot, with the exception of some young
infants with “pink” or acyanotic tetralogy of Fallot. When the degree
of pulmonary obstruction worsens with age, the symptoms of heart
failure resolve, and eventually the patient experiences cyanosis, usually
by 4-­6 months of age. These patients are at increased risk for hypercyanotic spells at this time.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2803
ASSOCIATED ANOMALIES

A PDA may be present, and defects in the atrial septum are occasionally seen. A right aortic arch occurs in approximately 20% of patients,
and other anomalies of the pulmonary arteries and aortic arch may
also be seen. Persistence of a left superior vena cava draining into the
coronary sinus is common but not a concern. Multiple VSDs are occasionally present and should be diagnosed before corrective surgery.
Coronary artery anomalies are present in 5–10% and can complicate
surgical repair. Tetralogy of Fallot may also occur with an atrioventricular septal defect, often associated with Down syndrome.
Congenital absence of the pulmonary valve produces a distinct
syndrome that is usually marked by signs of upper airway obstruction (see Chapter 477.1). Cyanosis may be absent, mild, or moderate;
the heart is large and hyperdynamic; and a loud to-­and-­fro murmur is
present. Marked aneurysmal dilation of the main and branch pulmonary arteries results in compression of the bronchi and then produces
stridulous or wheezing respirations and recurrent pneumonia. If the
airway obstruction is severe, reconstruction of the trachea at the time of
corrective cardiac surgery may be required to alleviate the symptoms.
Absence of a branch pulmonary artery, most often the left, should
be suspected if the radiographic appearance of the pulmonary vasculature differs between the right and left sides; absence of a pulmonary artery is often associated with hypoplasia of the affected lung. It
is important to recognize the absence of a pulmonary artery because
occlusion of the remaining pulmonary artery during surgery seriously
compromises the already reduced pulmonary blood flow.
As one of the conotruncal malformations, tetralogy of Fallot can be
associated with DiGeorge syndrome or velocardiofacial syndrome,
also known by the acronym CATCH 22 (cardiac defects, abnormal
facies, thymic hypoplasia, cleft palate, hypocalcemia). Cytogenetic
analysis using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) demonstrates deletions of a large segment of chromosome 22q11.2 known
as the DiGeorge critical region. Deletion or pathogenic variants in
Tbx1 have been implicated as a possible cause of DiGeorge syndrome,
although several other genes have been identified as possible candidates or as modifier genes (see Chapter 473).

TREATMENT

Treatment of tetralogy of Fallot depends on the severity of the RVOT
obstruction. Infants with severe tetralogy require urgent medical treatment and surgical intervention in the neonatal period. Therapy is
aimed at providing an immediate increase in pulmonary blood flow
to prevent the sequelae of severe hypoxia. Prolonged, severe hypoxia
may lead to shock, respiratory failure, and intractable acidosis and will
significantly reduce the chance of survival, even when surgically amenable lesions are present. It is critical that normal body temperature
be maintained during the transfer because cold increases oxygen consumption, which places additional stress on a cyanotic infant, whose
oxygen delivery is already limited. Blood glucose levels should be monitored because hypoglycemia is more likely to develop in infants with
cyanotic heart disease.
Neonates with marked RVOT obstruction may deteriorate rapidly
because as the ductus arteriosus begins to close, pulmonary blood flow
is further compromised. The IV administration of prostaglandin E1
(PGE1; 0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min), a potent and specific relaxant of ductal
smooth muscle, causes dilation of the ductus arteriosus and usually
provides adequate pulmonary blood flow until a surgical procedure
can be performed. This agent should be administered intravenously as
soon as cyanotic CHD is clinically suspected and continued through
the preoperative period and during cardiac catheterization. Because
prostaglandin can cause apnea, an individual skilled in neonatal intubation should be readily available.
Infants with less severe RVOT obstruction who are stable and
awaiting surgical intervention require careful observation. Acyanotic
patients can progress fairly quickly to having cyanotic episodes. Prevention or prompt treatment of dehydration is important to avoid
hemoconcentration and possible thrombotic episodes. In the past,
oral propranolol (0.5-­2 mg/kg every 6 hours) was used to decrease the
frequency and severity of hypercyanotic spells, but with the excellent

surgical results available today, surgical treatment is indicated, usually
before spells begin.
Infants with symptoms and severe cyanosis in the first month of life
usually have marked obstruction of the RVOT. Two options are available in these infants. The first option is corrective open heart surgery
performed in early infancy (or even in the newborn period in critically
ill infants). This approach has widespread acceptance with excellent
short-­and long-­term results and has supplanted palliative shunts (see
later) for most cases. Early total repair carries the theoretical advantage that early physiologic correction allows for improved growth of
the branch pulmonary arteries. In infants with less severe cyanosis who
can be maintained with good growth and absence of hypercyanotic
spells, primary repair is performed electively in the first few months.
Corrective surgical therapy consists of relief of the RVOT obstruction by resecting obstructive muscle bundles and by patch closure
of the VSD. If the pulmonary valve is stenotic, as it usually is, a valvotomy is performed. If the pulmonary valve annulus is too small or
the valve is extremely thickened, a valvectomy may be performed, the
pulmonary valve annulus split open, and a transannular patch placed
across the pulmonary valve ring. The advantage of a patch that is not
circumferential is that it preserves part of the normal valve annulus and
leaflets, allowing for future growth. A right ventriculotomy was once
the standard approach; a transatrial-­transpulmonary approach is routinely performed to reduce the long-­term risks of a large right ventriculotomy. In the past, surgeons placed large transannular patches with
the goal of eliminating any possibility of residual pulmonary stenosis,
even if these resulted in wide-­open pulmonary insufficiency. Currently, surgeons use smaller patches and are more accepting of small
RVOT gradients if the degree of valve insufficiency can be minimized.
In tetralogy patients, pulmonary valve insufficiency is one of the main
reasons for reoperation long-­term.
The second option, rarely used today, is a palliative systemic-­to-­
pulmonary artery shunt (Blalock-­Taussig or B-­T shunt) performed
to augment pulmonary artery blood flow. The B-­T shunt augmented
pulmonary blood flow, decreasing hypoxia, improving linear growth,
and augmenting growth of the branch pulmonary arteries. Initially
performed via direct anastomosis of the subclavian artery to the pulmonary artery, today, the modified B-­T shunt consists of a Gore-­Tex
conduit anastomosed side to side from the subclavian artery to the
homolateral branch of the pulmonary artery (Fig. 479.5). Sometimes
the shunt is brought directly from the ascending aorta to the MPA; in
this case it is called a central shunt. Postoperative complications after a
B-­T shunt include chylothorax, diaphragmatic paralysis, and Horner
syndrome. Rarely, postoperative pulmonary overcirculation leading to
symptoms of cardiac failure may be caused by too large a shunt. Long-­
term problems associated with the original B-­T shunt (absent radial
pulse and arm length discrepancy) are rarely seen with the current
procedure.
B-­T shunts are usually reserved for patients with comorbidities, such
as other major congenital anomalies or prematurity, that would make
full repair a higher-­risk option. Many surgeons still recommend full
repair in these situations, being preferable to the combined risks of a
staged procedure, and successful complete repairs have been done even
in small premature infants.

PROGNOSIS

After successful total correction, patients are generally asymptomatic
and are able to lead unrestricted lives. Uncommon immediate postoperative problems include RV failure, transient heart block, residual
VSD with left-­to-­right shunting, and (rarely) myocardial infarction
from interruption of an aberrant coronary artery. The long-­term effects
of isolated, surgically induced pulmonary valvular insufficiency or of
insufficiency and mild stenosis (as is more typical with modern-­era
smaller transannular patches) are still being defined as more patients
with repaired tetralogy of Fallot reach adulthood, but pulmonary
insufficiency is generally well tolerated through childhood and early
adolescence. Many patients after tetralogy repair, and all those with
transannular patch repairs, have a to-­and-­fro murmur at the left sternal border, usually indicative of mild outflow obstruction and mild

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2804 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

85

75

100

60

95
60

Fig. 479.5 Physiology of Blalock-­Taussig shunt in patient with tetral-

ogy of Fallot. Circled numbers represent oxygen saturation values. The
intracardiac shunting pattern is as described for Figure 479.1. Blood
shunting left to right across the shunt from the right subclavian artery
to the right pulmonary artery increases total pulmonary blood flow and
results in a higher oxygen saturation than would exist without the shunt.

to moderate pulmonary insufficiency. Patients with more marked or
long-­standing pulmonary valve insufficiency may also have moderate
to more severe degrees of RV enlargement and may develop tricuspid regurgitation as the tricuspid valve annulus dilates. These patients
will develop a holosystolic murmur at the lower-­left and -­right sternal
borders. Patients with a moderate to severe residual gradient (stenosis)
across the RVOT usually require balloon angioplasty or catheter placement of a stent or reoperation, but milder degrees of residual obstruction usually do not require reintervention.
Follow-­up of patients 5-­20 years after surgery indicates generally
excellent outcomes, with minimal symptoms and good exercise tolerance. Despite being asymptomatic, many patients may have lower-­
than-­
normal exercise capacity and maximal heart rate on formal
cardiopulmonary exercise testing. These abnormal findings are more
common in patients who underwent placement of a transannular outflow tract patch and may be less frequent when surgery is performed
at an early age. When these children move into adolescence and adulthood, some (more often those with transannular patches) will develop
RV dilation as a result of long-­term pulmonary regurgitation. Careful surveillance for excessive RV dilation and early signs of RV dysfunction is critical. After reaching adulthood, lifelong follow-­up by a
specialist in adult congenital heart disease (CHD) is important. Serial
echocardiography and the more quantitative magnetic resonance angiography (MRI/MRA) are valuable tools for assessing the degree of RV
dilation, identifying the presence of early stages of RV dysfunction, and
quantifying the regurgitant fraction. A significant portion of patients
with tetralogy of Fallot have been found to have some degree of fibrosis
within the right ventricle by MRI. Valve repair or replacement is indicated for those patients with increasing RV dilation and if tricuspid
regurgitation is more than mild. For patients requiring valve replacement, nonsurgical (transcatheter) options are available. Several stent-­
valves can be delivered in the cardiac catheterization laboratory, and
these have been used successfully in patients with repaired tetralogy
of Fallot. The initial versions of these devices (the Melody valve) were
designed to be used predominantly in patients who have previously
had a homograft or other artificial conduit placed between the RV and
pulmonary arteries; often stent-­valves (the Harmony valve) have been
designed to be inserted into the native RVOT.

Conduction disturbances can occur after surgery. The atrioventricular node and the bundle of His and its divisions are close to the VSD and
may be injured during surgery; however, permanent complete heart
block after tetralogy repair is rare. When present, it should be treated
by placement of a permanently implanted pacemaker. Even transient
complete heart block in the immediate postoperative period is rare; it
may be associated with an increased incidence of late-­onset complete
heart block and sudden death. In contrast, right bundle branch block
is extremely common on the postoperative ECG. The duration of the
QRS interval has been shown to predict both the presence of residual
hemodynamic derangement and the long-­term risk of arrhythmia
(mainly ventricular tachycardia) and sudden death. Biventricular pacing (in which a pacemaker is used to resynchronize the activation of
the right and left ventricles) has been shown to improve hemodynamics in patients with RV dysfunction and long ventricular conduction
delays on ECG.
Many children have premature ventricular beats after repair of the
tetralogy of Fallot. These beats, if isolated and infrequent, may be benign
but are of particular concern in patients with residual hemodynamic
abnormalities. Approximately 10% of patients with repaired tetralogy
are at risk of life-­threatening ventricular arrhythmias, and 30% are
at risk of atrial arrhythmias as they reach adulthood. Long-­duration
electrocardiographic monitoring studies, such as Holter (24-­48 hours)
or ZioPatch (1-­2 weeks), should be performed on a regular basis to
ensure that occult episodes of ventricular tachycardia are not occurring. Exercise studies may be useful in provoking cardiac arrhythmias
that are not apparent at rest. In the presence of complex ventricular
arrhythmias or severe residual hemodynamic abnormalities, prophylactic antiarrhythmic drug therapy or an implantable defibrillator is
warranted. Surgical or transcatheter intervention is indicated if significant residual RVOT obstruction or severe pulmonary insufficiency is
present because arrhythmia risk may improve after hemodynamics are
restored to a more normal level.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

479.2 Tetralogy of Fallot with Pulmonary
Atresia
Daniel Bernstein
Tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia is the most extreme form of
the tetralogy of Fallot. The pulmonary valve is atretic (absent), and the
pulmonary trunk may be hypoplastic or atretic as well. The entire RV
output is ejected into the aorta. Pulmonary blood flow is then dependent on multiple major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs) arising from the ascending and/or descending aorta or aortic
branches and supplying various lung segments or, rarely, on a PDA.
The ultimate prognosis depends on the presence or absence of true
branch pulmonary arteries and, if present, the degree of development.
This is best assessed by a combination of CT and cardiac catheterization. If repair is approached early in life and performed at a center with
expertise in this highly complex surgery, the mid-­term outcomes are
good. However, if the pulmonary arteries are severely hypoplastic and
surgical intervention fails to establish low pulmonary vascular pressures, lung or heart-­lung transplantation may be the only therapy (see
Chapter 492.2). Tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia is also associated with the 22q11.2 deletion and DiGeorge syndrome. The association of severe tracheomalacia or bronchomalacia with these severe
forms of tetralogy/pulmonary atresia may complicate postoperative
recovery.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients with tetralogy of Fallot/pulmonary atresia have findings similar to those in patients with severe tetralogy of Fallot. Cyanosis usually appears within the first few hours or days after birth; however, the
prominent systolic murmur associated with tetralogy is usually absent.
The first heart sound (S1) may be followed by an ejection click caused

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2805
by the enlarged aortic root, S2 is single and loud, and continuous murmurs of collateral flow may be heard over the entire precordium and
over the back. Most patients are moderately cyanotic and are initially
stabilized with a PGE1 infusion pending cardiac catheterization and/
or CT scan to further delineate the anatomy. Patients with several large
MAPCAs may be less cyanotic and, once the diagnosis is confirmed,
can be taken off prostaglandin while awaiting palliative surgical intervention. Some patients may even develop symptoms of heart failure
caused by increased pulmonary blood flow via these collateral vessels.

DIAGNOSIS

The chest radiograph demonstrates a varying heart size, depending on
the amount of pulmonary blood flow, a concavity at the position of the
pulmonary arterial segment, and often the reticular pattern of bronchial collateral flow. The ECG shows RVH. The echocardiogram identifies aortic override, a thick RV wall, and atresia of the pulmonary valve.
Pulsed and color Doppler echocardiographic studies show an absence
of forward flow across the pulmonary valve, with pulmonary blood
flow being supplied by MAPCAs, which can usually be seen using color
Doppler arising from the descending aorta. At cardiac catheterization,
right ventriculography reveals a large aorta, opacified immediately by
passage of contrast medium through the VSD but with no dye entering
the lungs through the RVOT. It is important in planning surgical repair
to delineate carefully the often diminutive native pulmonary arteries,
if present, to determine whether they are continuous or discontinuous and whether they arborize to all lung segments. The location and
arborization of all MAPCAs and the presence of any localized stenosis,
which become more common as the patient grows older, are determined by selective contrast injection into each vessel from its origin in
the aorta. CT angiography is extremely valuable in mapping the extent
of MAPCA arborization.

479.3 Pulmonary Atresia with Intact
Ventricular Septum
Daniel Bernstein
Pulmonary atresia with an intact ventricular septum presents in the
newborn period with severe cyanosis. The pulmonary valve leaflets are
completely fused to form a membrane, and the RVOT is atretic. Because
no VSD is present, no egress of blood from the right ventricle can occur.
Any blood that enters the right ventricle will regurgitate back across
the tricuspid valve into the right atrium. Right atrial pressure increases,
and blood shunts via the foramen ovale into the left atrium, where it
mixes with pulmonary venous blood and enters the left ventricle (Fig.
479.6). The combined left and right ventricular output is pumped solely
by the left ventricle into the aorta. In a newborn with pulmonary atresia, the only source of pulmonary blood flow occurs via a PDA. The
right ventricle and tricuspid valve are usually hypoplastic, although the
degree of hypoplasia varies considerably. Patients who have a small RV
cavity also tend to be those with the smallest tricuspid valve annulus,
which limits RV inflow. Patients with pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum may have coronary sinusoidal channels within the RV
wall that communicate directly with the coronary arterial circulation.
The high RV pressure results in desaturated blood flowing retrograde
through these channels into the coronary arteries. Sometimes there are
also stenoses of the coronary arteries proximal to where the sinusoids
enter, so that distal coronary artery flow is dependent on flow from
the right ventricle (known as right ventricle–dependent coronary circulation). The prognosis in patients with these sinusoids and proximal
stenosis of the coronary arteries is more guarded than in those patients
without sinusoids or with sinusoids but no coronary stenoses. Rarely,
the proximal coronary artery may be totally absent.

TREATMENT

The surgical procedure of choice depends on whether the MPA segment is present and, if so, on the size and branching pattern of the
branch pulmonary arteries. If these arteries are well developed, a
one-­stage surgical repair with a homograft conduit inserted between
the right ventricle and pulmonary arteries and closure of the VSD is
usually feasible. If the pulmonary arteries are hypoplastic, extensive
reconstruction may be required. This may involve several staged surgical procedures. If the native pulmonary artery is present but small, a
connection made between the aorta and the hypoplastic native pulmonary artery (aortopulmonary window) can be performed in the
newborn period to induce growth of the native pulmonary arteries. At
3-­4 months of age, the multiple MAPCAs are gathered together (unifocalization procedure) and eventually incorporated into the final repair
along with the native pulmonary arteries. This series of operations may
be accomplished through successive right and left lateral thoracotomies
or through a single midline sternotomy if the anatomy is favorable.
To be a candidate for full repair, the pulmonary arteries must be
of adequate size to accept the full volume of RV output. Complete
repair includes closure of the VSD and placement of a homograft conduit from the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery. At the time of
reparative surgery, previous shunts are taken down. Because of patient
growth and homograft narrowing caused by proliferation of intimal
tissue and calcification, replacement of the homograft conduit replacement is usually required in later life, and multiple replacements may be
needed. Some of these patients are candidates for placement of a transcatheter stent-­valve in the pulmonary position. Patients with obstruction of the very distal branches of the pulmonary arteries may undergo
repeat surgical procedures or transcatheter balloon dilation and stenting of the multibranch pulmonary arterial stenosis. Careful follow-­up
is warranted for these patients, with a combination of echocardiogram,
catheterization, and CT or MRI, to ensure maximal chance of growth
of all pulmonary artery segments. Serial radionuclide lung perfusion
scans can be used to assess pulmonary perfusion to each lung segment
and the percentage of flow to the right vs the left lung.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

85
85

85

60

85

Fig. 479.6 Physiology of pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular sep-

tum. Circled numbers represent oxygen saturation values. Right atrial
(mixed venous) oxygen saturation is decreased secondary to systemic
hypoxemia. A small amount of the blood entering the right atrium may
cross the tricuspid valve, which is often stenotic as well. The right ventricular cavity is hypertrophied and may be hypoplastic. No outlet from
the right ventricle exists because of the atretic pulmonary valve; thus
any blood entering the right ventricle returns to the right atrium via
tricuspid regurgitation. Most of the desaturated blood shunts right to
left via the foramen ovale into the left atrium, where it mixes with fully
saturated blood returning from the lungs. The only source of pulmonary
blood flow is via the patent ductus arteriosus. Aortic and pulmonary
arterial oxygen saturation will be identical (definition of a total mixing
lesion).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2806 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

When the ductus arteriosus closes in the first hours or days of life,
infants with pulmonary atresia and an intact ventricular septum
become markedly cyanotic because their only source of pulmonary
blood flow is removed. Untreated, most patients die within the first
week of life. Physical examination reveals severe cyanosis and respiratory distress. S2, representing only aortic closure, is single and loud.
Often, no murmurs are audible; sometimes a systolic or continuous
murmur can be heard secondary to ductal blood flow. A harsh holosystolic murmur may be heard at the lower left and right sternal borders if
there is significant tricuspid regurgitation.

DIAGNOSIS

The ECG shows a frontal QRS axis between 0 and +90 degrees, the
amount of leftward shift reflecting the degree of RV hypoplasia. Tall,
spiked P waves indicate right atrial enlargement. QRS voltages are consistent with left ventricular dominance or hypertrophy; RV forces are
usually decreased in proportion to the decreased size of the RV cavity.
Because the normal newborn ECG shows increased right-­sided forces,
if a normal “adult” ECG R-­wave progression is seen, it suggests RV
hypoplasia of some degree. Most patients with small right ventricles
have decreased RV forces, but occasionally, patients with larger, thickened RV cavities may have evidence of RVH. The chest radiograph
shows decreased pulmonary vascularity, the degree depending on the
size of the branch pulmonary arteries and the patency of the ductus.
Unlike in patients with pulmonary atresia and tetralogy of Fallot, the
presence of MAPCAs is rare.
The 2D echocardiogram is useful in estimating RV dimensions and
the size of the tricuspid valve annulus, which have been shown to be
of prognostic value. Echocardiography can often suggest the presence
of sinusoidal channels but cannot be used to evaluate coronary stenoses. Thus cardiac catheterization is necessary for complete evaluation.
Pressure measurements reveal right atrial and RV hypertension. Ventriculography demonstrates the size of the RV cavity, the atretic RVOT,
the degree of tricuspid regurgitation, and the presence or absence of
intramyocardial sinusoids filling the coronary vessels. Aortography
shows filling of the pulmonary arteries by the PDA and is helpful in
determining the size and branching patterns of the pulmonary arterial bed. An aortogram or, if necessary, selective coronary angiography
is performed to evaluate for the presence of proximal coronary artery
stenosis (RV-­dependent coronary circulation) or proximal coronary
artery atresia.

procedure (see Chapter 479.4), allowing blood to bypass the hypoplastic right ventricle by flowing to the pulmonary arteries directly from the
venae cavae. When coronary artery stenoses are present and retrograde
coronary perfusion occurs from the right ventricle through myocardial
sinusoids, the prognosis is more guarded because of a higher risk of
arrhythmias, coronary ischemia, and sudden death. It is important for
these patients not to try to open the RVOT, because dropping the RV
pressure rapidly will reduce coronary perfusion, leading to ischemia.
These patients are usually treated with an aortopulmonary shunt, followed by the Glenn and Fontan procedure. Although at higher risk
than those without coronary stenoses, recent reports show good success with this approach; however, long-­term complications are higher
than in other groups of single-­ventricle patients. A small number of
these infants (e.g., those with atresia of a proximal coronary artery) are
best referred for heart transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

479.4 Tricuspid Atresia
Daniel Bernstein
In tricuspid atresia, there is no outlet from the right atrium to the right
ventricle; the entire systemic venous return leaves the right atrium and
enters the left side of the heart through the foramen ovale or, most
often, an atrial septal defect (ASD) (Fig. 479.7). The physiology of the
circulation and the clinical presentation will depend on the presence
and type of other congenital heart defects, most notably on whether
the great arteries are normally related or are transposed (aorta arising from the right ventricle, pulmonary artery from the left ventricle).
In patients with normally related great arteries, left ventricular (LV)

80
80
100

TREATMENT

Infusion of PGE1 (0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min) is usually effective in keeping
the ductus arteriosus open before intervention, thus reducing hypoxemia and acidemia before surgery. The choice of surgical procedure
depends on whether there is an RV-­dependent coronary circulation
and on the size of the RV cavity. In patients with only mild to moderate RV hypoplasia without sinusoids, or in patients with sinusoids but
no evidence of coronary stenoses, a surgical pulmonary valvotomy is
carried out to relieve outflow obstruction. Often, the RVOT is widened
with a patch. To provide adequate pulmonary blood flow, an aortopulmonary (Blalock-­Taussig) shunt may also be performed during the
same procedure. An alternative approach uses interventional catheterization, in which the imperforate pulmonary valve is first punctured
either with a wire or a radiofrequency ablation catheter, followed by a
balloon valvuloplasty. If this course is taken, it may take days to weeks
before the RV muscle regresses enough for the patient to be weaned
from prostaglandin, and many of these patients will still require surgical intervention.
The aim of surgery or interventional catheterization is to encourage
growth of the RV chamber by allowing some forward flow through the
pulmonary valve while using the shunt to ensure adequate pulmonary
blood flow. Later, if the tricuspid valve annulus and RV chamber grow
to adequate size, the shunt is taken down and any remaining atrial-­level
shunt can be closed. If the RV chamber remains too small for use as a
pulmonary ventricle, the patient is treated as having a single-­ventricle
circulation, with a Glenn procedure followed by a modified Fontan

85

60

80

Fig. 479.7 Physiology of tricuspid atresia with normally related great

vessels. Circled numbers represent oxygen saturation values. Right
atrial (mixed venous) oxygen saturation is decreased secondary to systemic hypoxemia. The tricuspid valve is nonpatent, and the right ventricle may manifest varying degrees of hypoplasia. The only outlet from
the right atrium involves shunting right to left across an atrial septal
defect or patent foramen ovale to the left atrium. There, desaturated
blood mixes with saturated pulmonary venous return. Blood enters the
left ventricle and is ejected either through the aorta or via a ventricular
septal defect (VSD) into the right ventricle. In this example, some pulmonary blood flow is derived from the right ventricle and the rest from
a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). In patients with tricuspid atresia, the
PDA may close or the VSD may grow smaller and result in a marked
decrease in systemic oxygen saturation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2807
blood supplies the systemic circulation through the aorta. Blood also
flows into the right ventricle through a VSD (if the ventricular septum
is intact, the right ventricle will be completely hypoplastic and pulmonary atresia will also be present [see Chapter 479.3]). Pulmonary blood
flow (and thus the degree of cyanosis) depends on the size of the VSD
and the presence and severity of any associated pulmonic stenosis. Pulmonary blood flow may be augmented by or be totally dependent on
a PDA. The inflow portion of the right ventricle is always missing, but
the outflow portion can be of variable size. The clinical presentation of
patients with tricuspid atresia and normally related great arteries will
depend on the degree of obstruction to pulmonary blood flow. Patients
with a smaller VSD or moderate degrees of pulmonary stenosis are
recognized in the early days or weeks of life by decreased pulmonary
blood flow and cyanosis, especially after the PDA begins to close. Alternatively, in those with a large VSD and minimal or no RVOT obstruction, pulmonary blood flow may be normal or increased; these patients
have only mild cyanosis and can present with signs of pulmonary overcirculation and heart failure.
In patients with tricuspid atresia and transposition of the great
arteries (TGA), LV blood flows directly into the pulmonary artery,
whereas systemic blood must traverse the VSD and right ventricle to
reach the aorta. In these patients, pulmonary blood flow is usually massively increased, and heart failure develops early. If the VSD is restrictive, systemic blood flow may be compromised and the patient may
present with signs of decreased perfusion. Coarctation of the aorta is
often noted in this setting.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Some degree of cyanosis is usually evident at birth, with the extent
depending on the degree of limitation to pulmonary blood flow.
Unique to tricuspid atresia, an increased LV impulse may be noted,
in contrast to most other causes of cyanotic heart disease, in which an
increased RV impulse is usually present. Most patients have holosystolic murmurs audible along the left sternal border; S2 is usually single.
Pulses in the lower extremities may be weak or absent in the presence
of transposition and with coarctation of the aorta. Patients with tricuspid atresia are at risk for spontaneous narrowing or even closure of
the VSD, which can occasionally occur rapidly and lead to a marked
increase in cyanosis.

DIAGNOSIS

Radiologic studies show either pulmonary undercirculation (most
often in patients with normally related great arteries) or overcirculation (most often in patients with transposed great arteries). Left-­axis
deviation and LV hypertrophy are generally noted on the ECG (except
in patients with TGA), and these unique features are a hallmark of tricuspid atresia, distinguishing it from most other cyanotic heart lesions,
which are associated with right-­axis deviation and RV hypertrophy. In
the right precordial leads, the normally prominent R wave is replaced
by an rS complex. The left precordial leads show a qR complex, followed by a normal, flat, biphasic, or inverted T wave. RV6 is normal or
tall, and SV1 is generally deep. The P waves are usually biphasic, with
the initial component tall and spiked in lead II. 2D echocardiography
reveals the presence of a fibromuscular membrane in place of a tricuspid valve, a variably small right ventricle, variably sized VSD, and a
slightly to moderately enlarged left ventricle (Fig. 479.8). The relationship of the great vessels (normal or transposed) can be determined.
The degree of obstruction at the level of the VSD or at the RVOT can
be determined by Doppler examination. Blood flow through a patent
ductus can be evaluated by color flow and pulsed Doppler.
Cardiac catheterization, indicated usually only if questions remain
after echocardiography, shows normal or slightly elevated right atrial
pressure with a prominent a wave. If the right ventricle is entered
through the VSD, the pressure may be lower than on the left if the VSD
is restrictive in size. Right atrial angiography shows immediate opacification of the left atrium from the right atrium, followed by left ventricular filling and visualization of the aorta. Absence of direct flow to
the right ventricle results in an angiographic filling defect between the
right atrium and the left ventricle.

LA
RA

RV

LV

Fig. 479.8 Echocardiogram demonstrating tricuspid atresia. The floor

of the right atrium consists of a fibromuscular membrane (longer arrow)
instead of the normal tricuspid valve apparatus. The large secundum
atrial septal defect can be seen between the right and left atria. The
short arrow shows the ventricular septal defect. LA, Left atrium; LV, left
ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

TREATMENT

Management of patients with tricuspid atresia depends on the adequacy of pulmonary blood flow. Moderately or severely cyanotic neonates (most often those with normally related great arteries) should be
maintained on an IV infusion of PGE1 (0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min) until a surgical aortopulmonary shunt procedure can be performed to increase
pulmonary blood flow. The Blalock-­Taussig procedure (see Chapter
479.1) or a variation is the preferred anastomosis. Rare patients with
restrictive atrial-­level communications also benefit from a Rashkind
balloon atrial septostomy (see Chapter 480.2) or surgical septectomy.
Infants with increased pulmonary blood flow because of an unobstructed pulmonary outflow tract (more often patients with TGA)
may require early surgery or pulmonary arterial banding (especially
for patients in the first 1-­2 months of life) to decrease the symptoms
of heart failure and protect the pulmonary bed from the development
of pulmonary vascular disease. Infants with just adequate pulmonary
blood flow who are well balanced between cyanosis and pulmonary
overcirculation can be watched closely for the development of increasing cyanosis, which may occur as the VSD begins to get smaller or the
pulmonary outflow becomes narrower and is an indication for surgery.
The next stage of palliation for patients with tricuspid atresia
involves the creation of an anastomosis between the superior vena cava
and the pulmonary arteries (bidirectional Glenn shunt; Fig. 479.9A).
This procedure is performed at usually between 2 and 6 months of age.
The Glenn shunt provides a stable source of pulmonary blood flow as
well as reducing the volume load on the left ventricle.
The modified Fontan operation is the preferred approach for
longer-­term palliation. It is usually performed between 2 and 3 years
of age, after the patient is ambulatory. Initially, this procedure was performed by anastomosing the right atrium or atrial appendage directly
to the pulmonary artery. The procedure used most often now is a modification of the Fontan procedure, known as a cavopulmonary isolation procedure, which involves anastomosing the inferior vena cava
directly to the pulmonary arteries using a homograft or Gore-­Tex tube
running outside the heart (external-­conduit Fontan; Fig. 479.9C). An
older version of this procedure uses an internal baffle that runs along
the lateral wall of the right atrium (lateral-­tunnel Fontan; see Fig.
479.9B). In a completed Fontan repair, desaturated blood flows from
both venae cavae directly into the pulmonary arteries. Oxygenated
blood returns to the left atrium, enters the left ventricle, and is ejected
into the systemic circulation. The volume load is completely removed
from the left ventricle, and the right-­to-­left shunt is abolished. Because
of the reliance on passive filling of the pulmonary circulation, the Fontan procedure is contraindicated in patients with elevated pulmonary
vascular resistance, in those with pulmonary artery hypoplasia, and in
patients with LV dysfunction. The patient also must not have significant mitral insufficiency. Patients who are not in normal sinus rhythm

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2808 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

SVC

SVC

RPA

SVC

RPA
Right atrium
closed

RPA

RA

*

Baffle
inside
right
atrium

RA

Synthetic
conduit

RA
Fenestration

A

* In some patients the main pulmonary artery
remains connected to the pulmonary arteries

B

IVC

Right atrium
closed

C

IVC

Fig. 479.9 Staged surgical approach to palliation of the patient with a single-­ventricle circulation. A, Bidirectional Glenn shunt. The superior vena

cava (SVC) is divided and detached from the right atrium (RA) and anastomosed end-­to-­side to the pulmonary artery, which has also been divided
and detached from the right ventricle. B, Lateral tunnel Fontan. Inferior vena caval flow is directed upward through a synthetic or pericardial baffle sutured to the RA wall. The lower portion of the SVC (previously divided during the Glenn shunt) is now sutured directly to the right pulmonary
artery. Thus blood flows from the upper body via the SVC directly into the lungs via the previous Glenn shunt and from the lower body via the baffle, through the RA but not emptying into the RA, directly into the lungs. The only remaining blood flow entering into the RA is from the coronary
sinus, which represents the small amount of venous return coming directly from the left ventricle. The RA is thus excluded from the Fontan circuit. C,
Extracardiac Fontan. The inferior vena cava (IVC) is detached from the RA, and an extracardiac synthetic conduit or homograft is used to direct that
flow, outside the heart, to the inferior aspect of the right pulmonary artery (RPA). Both Fontan approaches achieve the same endpoint in isolating
the venous circulation (blue blood) from the arterial circulation (red blood). The external conduit Fontan procedure is more common today because
of concerns about atrial arrhythmias and/or blood clots related to the baffle in the RA. Many surgeons orient the connection from the IVC more
centrally on the pulmonary arteries than shown in (C) to avoid a ”collision” of flow from the upper and lower bodies, which in flow dynamic modeling
studies has been shown to reduce the efficiency of the Fontan circulation, especially during exercise. (Adapted from Burchill LJ, Wald RM, Mertens
L. Single ventricles: echocardiographic assessment after the Fontan operation. In Otto CM, ed. The Practice of Clinical Echocardiography, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017, Figs. 49-­6, 8, and 9.)

are at increased risk, and if a pacemaker is required in these patients,
dual-­chamber pacing is the preferred approach.
Postoperative problems after the Fontan procedure are most often
related to the increase in central venous pressure that occurs when the
vena cavae are connected directly to the pulmonary arteries. Normal
central venous pressure is 0-­5 mm Hg, whereas after the Fontan operation, central venous pressure can rise to 10-­15 mm Hg, and occasionally even more. In the immediate postoperative period, this elevation
of systemic venous pressure can lead to fluid retention and pleural or
pericardial effusions. The occurrence of these effusions has been markedly reduced with the cavopulmonary isolation procedure now in use,
although prolonged chest tube drainage can still occur, but eventually
resolves. Some centers use a fenestration at the time of the Fontan,
consisting of a small communication between the inferior vena cava
and the pulmonary artery conduit and the left atrium. This serves as a
“pop-­off ” during early postoperative recovery and may hasten hospital
discharge. The fenestration will result in some amount of right-­to-­left
shunting and is therefore usually closed with a catheter closure device
after the immediate postoperative period.
Late complications of the Fontan procedure include stenosis of the
superior or inferior vena cava anastomosis, vena cava or pulmonary
artery thromboembolism, protein-­losing enteropathy, plastic bronchitis, renal dysfunction, immune deficiency, supraventricular arrhythmias (atrial flutter, paroxysmal atrial tachycardia), and hepatic injury,
referred to as Fontan-­associated liver disease (FALD), as a result of
persistently elevated central venous pressures. Rarely liver disease may
predispose to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. As more
patients survive into young and middle adult years, the occurrence of
these complications increases, and these patients require careful follow-­up in a center skilled at caring for adults with congenital heart
disease (ACHDs). Oral budesonide or sildenafil has been used with
varying success to treat protein-­losing enteropathy associated with
the Fontan procedure. MRI lymphangiography followed by thoracic
duct ligation, decompression, or embolization is used to treat plastic

bronchitis and other complications of a Fontan procedure. LV dysfunction may be a late occurrence, usually not until adolescence or young
adulthood. Heart transplantation is a successful treatment option for
pediatric patients with “failed” Fontan circuits but is a somewhat riskier procedure when performed in older adults. Patients with combined
heart failure and liver dysfunction have been treated with combined
heart-­liver transplantation with good result.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

479.5 Double-­Outlet Right Ventricle
Daniel Bernstein
Double-­outlet right ventricle (DORV) is characterized when both the
aorta and pulmonary artery arise from the right ventricle. The only
outlet from the left ventricle occurs through a VSD emptying into the
right ventricle, although some degree of override of the septum may
place either the aorta or pulmonary artery partially over the left ventricle. Normally, the aortic and mitral valves are in fibrous continuity; in
DORV the aortic and mitral valves are separated by a smooth muscular
conus, like that seen under the normal pulmonary valve. In DORV
the great arteries may be normally related, with the aorta closer to (or
slightly overriding) the VSD, or the great arteries may be malposed,
with the pulmonary artery closer to (or slightly overriding) the VSD.
The degree to which the great artery closest to the VSD may override
the defect is variable but must be at least 50% committed to the right
ventricle to be termed DORV. When the VSD is subaortic, the defect
may be viewed as part of a continuum with the tetralogy of Fallot,
and the physiology, history, physical examination, ECG, and radiography depend on the degree of pulmonary stenosis, like the situation
in tetralogy of Fallot (see Chapter 479.1). If the VSD is subpulmonic,
there may be subvalvar, valvar, or supravalvar aortic stenosis, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2809
coarctation is a possibility as well. This is known as the Taussig-­Bing
malformation. The clinical presentation of these patients will depend
on the degree of aortic obstruction, but because the pulmonary artery
is usually wide open, the presentation will usually include some degree
of pulmonary overcirculation and heart failure. If the aortic obstruction is severe or there is a coarctation, poor pulses, hypoperfusion, and
cardiovascular collapse are possible presenting signs, especially when
the PDA begins to close.
The 2D echocardiogram demonstrates both great vessels arising
from the right ventricle and mitral-­aortic valve discontinuity. The relationships between the aorta and pulmonary artery to the VSD can be
delineated, and the presence of either pulmonary obstruction or aortic
obstruction can be evaluated. The aortic arch is imaged to evaluate for
coarctation. Cardiac catheterization is not necessarily required if the
echocardiogram is straightforward. Angiography will show that the
aortic and pulmonary valves lie in the same horizontal plane and that
both arise predominantly or exclusively from the right ventricle.
Surgical correction depends on the relationship of the great vessels
to the VSD. If the VSD is subaortic, the repair will be like that used
for tetralogy of Fallot with patch closure of the VSD so that the left
ventricle ejects blood into the aorta. In cases where the aorta is more
distant from the left ventricle, repair may consist of creating an intraventricular tunnel so that the left ventricle ejects blood through the
VSD, into the tunnel, and into the aorta. The pulmonary obstruction
is relieved either with an outflow patch or with a right ventricle–to–
pulmonary artery homograft conduit (Rastelli operation). If the VSD
is subpulmonic, the great vessels can be switched (see Chapter 479.6)
and the Rastelli operation performed. However, if there is substantial
aortic obstruction or if one of the ventricles is hypoplastic, a Norwood-­
style single-­ventricle repair may be necessary (see Chapter 480.10). In
selected small infants, palliation with an aortopulmonary shunt can
provide symptomatic improvement and allow for adequate growth
before corrective surgery is performed.

479.6 Transposition of the Great Arteries
with Ventricular Septal Defect and
Pulmonary Stenosis
Daniel Bernstein
The combination of TGA with VSD and pulmonary stenosis may
mimic tetralogy of Fallot in its clinical features (see Chapter 479.1).
However, because of the transposed great vessels, the site of obstruction is in the left as opposed to the right ventricle. The obstruction
can be either valvular or subvalvular; the latter type may be dynamic,
related to the interventricular septum or atrioventricular valve tissue,
or acquired, as in patients with transposition and VSD after pulmonary
arterial banding.
The age at which clinical manifestations initially appear varies from
soon after birth to later infancy, depending on the degree of pulmonic
stenosis. Clinical findings include cyanosis, decreased exercise tolerance, and poor physical development, like those described for tetralogy
of Fallot; the heart is usually more enlarged. The pulmonary vasculature as seen on radiograph depends on the degree of pulmonary
obstruction. The ECG usually shows right-­axis deviation, right and left
ventricular hypertrophy, and sometimes tall, spiked P waves. Echocardiography confirms the diagnosis and is useful in sequential evaluation
of the degree and progression of the LV outflow tract obstruction. Cardiac catheterization, if necessary, shows that pulmonary arterial pressure is low and that oxygen saturation in the pulmonary artery exceeds
that in the aorta, since pulmonary blood flow is coming directly from
the left ventricle. Selective right and left ventriculography demonstrates the origin of the aorta from the right ventricle, the origin of
the pulmonary artery from the left ventricle, the VSD, and the site and
severity of the pulmonary stenosis.
An infusion of PGE1 (0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min) should be started
in neonates who present with cyanosis. When necessary, balloon

atrial septostomy is performed to improve atrial-­level mixing and
to decompress the left atrium (see Chapter 480.2). Cyanotic infants
may be palliated with an aortopulmonary shunt (see Chapter
479.1), followed by a Rastelli operation when older, as the preferred
corrective procedure. The Rastelli procedure achieves physiologic
and anatomic correction by (1) closure of the VSD using an interventricular tunnel so that LV blood flow is directed to the aorta and
(2) connection of the right ventricle to the distal pulmonary artery
by an extracardiac homograft conduit (Fig. 479.10). These conduits
will eventually become stenotic with patient growth and require
replacement. Patients with milder degrees of pulmonary stenosis
amenable to simple valvotomy may be able to undergo complete
correction with an arterial switch procedure (see Chapter 480.2)
and closure of the VSD. Surgical correction by the Mustard or Senning operation (see Chapter 480.2) with simultaneous closure of
the VSD and relief of LV outflow obstruction may be an alternative
when the position of the VSD is not suitable for a Rastelli operation;
however, this procedure leaves the right ventricle as the systemic
pumping chamber and has fallen out of favor.

479.7 Ebstein Anomaly of the Tricuspid
Valve
Daniel Bernstein
Ebstein anomaly consists of downward displacement of an abnormal
tricuspid valve into the right ventricle. The defect arises from failure
of the normal process by which the tricuspid valve is separated from
the RV myocardium (see Chapter 469). The anterior cusp of the valve
retains some attachment to the valve ring, but the other leaflets are
adherent to the wall of the right ventricle. The right ventricle is thus
divided into two parts by the abnormal tricuspid valve: the first, a
thin-­walled “atrialized” portion, is continuous with the cavity of the
right atrium; the second, often smaller, portion consists of normal
ventricular myocardium. The right atrium is enlarged as a result of
tricuspid valve regurgitation, although the degree is extremely variable. In more severe forms of Ebstein anomaly, the effective output
from the right side of the heart is decreased because of a combination of the poorly functioning small right ventricle, tricuspid valve
regurgitation, and RVOT obstruction produced by the large, sail-­like,
anterior tricuspid valve leaflet. The severity of tricuspid valve displacement has been grouped into four degrees (A through D), known
as the Carpentier classification. In newborns, RV function may be so
compromised that it is unable to generate enough force to open the
pulmonary valve in systole, thus producing “functional” pulmonary
atresia. Some infants have true anatomic pulmonary atresia. The
increased volume of right atrial blood shunts through the foramen
ovale (or through an associated ASD) to the left atrium and produces
cyanosis (Fig. 479.11).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The severity of symptoms and the degree of cyanosis are highly variable and depend on the extent of displacement of the tricuspid valve
and the severity of RVOT obstruction. In many patients with milder
forms of tricuspid valve displacement, symptoms are mild and may
be delayed until the teenage years or young adult life; the patient
may initially have fatigue, exercise intolerance, or palpitations as
a result of cardiac dysrhythmias. The atrial right-­to-­left shunt is
responsible for cyanosis, which may only be evident during exercise
and, if long-­standing, polycythemia. Jugular venous pulsations, an
index of central venous pressure, may be normal or increased in
those with tricuspid insufficiency. On palpation, the precordium is
quiet. A holosystolic murmur caused by tricuspid regurgitation is
audible over most of the anterior left side of the chest. A gallop
rhythm is common and often associated with multiple clicks at the
lower-­left sternal border. A scratchy diastolic murmur may also be
heard at the left sternal border. This murmur may mimic a pericardial friction rub.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2810 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
A

Pulmonary a.

Aorta

Pulmonary a.

C
Superior
vena cava
Aorta
Mitral valve
Ventricular
septal defect

Main pulmonary a.
divided
Homograft
conduit
Pericardial roof

Inferior
vena cava
Tricuspid
valve

B

Fig. 479.10 A, Taussig-­Bing type of double-­outlet right ventricle with subpulmonary stenosis necessitating repair by the Rastelli technique. B, The
main pulmonary artery is divided and oversewn proximally. The pulmonary valve lies within the baffle pathway. C, Completion of the Rastelli repair
with a right ventricle–pulmonary artery allograft conduit. (From Castañeda AR, Jonas RA, Mayer JE Jr, et al. Single-­ventricle tricuspid atresia. In:
Castañeda AR, Jonas RA. Mayer JE Jr, Hanley FL, eds. Cardiac Surgery of the Neonate and Infant. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1994.)

Newborns with severe forms of Ebstein anomaly have marked
cyanosis, massive cardiomegaly, and long holosystolic murmurs.
Death may result from cardiac failure, hypoxemia, and pulmonary
hypoplasia, the result of severe long-­standing intrauterine right
atrial enlargement. Spontaneous improvement may occur in some
neonates as pulmonary vascular resistance falls and improves the
ability of the right ventricle to provide pulmonary blood flow. The
majority are dependent on a PDA, and thus on a prostaglandin
infusion, for pulmonary blood flow. Fetuses diagnosed with Ebstein
anomaly on fetal ultrasound can be particularly challenging. Severe
leakage of the tricuspid valve is one of the few congenital heart
lesions that cannot be bypassed by the parallel fetal circulation (see
Chapter 470), and thus cardiac enlargement and fetal heart failure
may supervene. When the heart enlarges, particularly the right
atrium, compression of the lungs can result and the fetus is at risk
for development of pulmonary hypoplasia.

DIAGNOSIS

The ECG usually shows a right bundle branch block without
increased right precordial voltage, normal or tall and broad P
waves, and a normal or prolonged P-­R interval. Wolff-­Parkinson-­
White syndrome may be present, and these patients may have
episodes of supraventricular tachycardia (see Chapter 484). On
radiographic examination, heart size varies from slightly enlarged
to massive, box-­shaped cardiomegaly caused by enlargement of
the right atrium. In newborns with severe Ebstein anomaly, the
heart may be so enlarged as to totally obscure the pulmonary fields

(Fig. 479.12). Echocardiography is diagnostic and shows the degree
of displacement of the tricuspid valve leaflets, a dilated right atrium,
and any RVOT obstruction (Fig. 479.13). Pulsed and color Doppler
examination demonstrates the degree of tricuspid regurgitation. In
severe cases the pulmonary valve may appear immobile, and pulmonary blood flow may come solely from the ductus arteriosus.
It may be difficult to distinguish true from functional pulmonary
valve atresia. Cardiac catheterization, which is not usually necessary, confirms the presence of a large right atrium, an abnormal
tricuspid valve, and any right-­to-­left shunt at the atrial level. The
risk of arrhythmia is significant during catheterization and angiographic studies.

TREATMENT

Neonates with milder degrees of cyanosis can sometimes be managed medically, waiting to see how they do once their pulmonary
vascular resistance decreases over the first few weeks of life. Those
with moderate to severe hypoxia are initially treated with prostaglandins, mechanical ventilation and inhaled nitric oxide in an
attempt to enhance pulmonary blood flow by reducing pulmonary
vascular resistance. Surgical options for these patients include an
aortopulmonary (Blalock-­Taussig) shunt, tricuspid valve replacement (most often with a bioprosthetic valve), or surgical repair of
the tricuspid valve (cone procedure). In the critically ill neonate,
closure of the valve (creating tricuspid atresia physiology) with an
aortopulmonary shunt (Starnes procedure), with eventual single-­
ventricle repair using the Fontan palliation (see Chapter 479.4) is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 479 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Decreased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2811

LA

RA
85
85
100

LV
85

RV

A
60

85

Fig. 479.11 Physiology of Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve. Cir-

cled numbers represent oxygen saturation values. Inferior displacement
of the tricuspid valve leaflets into the right ventricle has resulted in a
thin-­walled, low-­pressure “atrialized” segment of right ventricle. The
tricuspid valve is grossly insufficient. Right atrial blood flow is shunted
right to left across an atrial septal defect or patent foramen ovale into
the left atrium. Some blood may cross the right ventricular outflow tract
and enter the pulmonary artery; however, in severe cases, the right ventricle may generate insufficient force to open the pulmonary valve, and
“functional pulmonary atresia” results. In the left atrium, desaturated
blood mixes with saturated pulmonary venous return. Blood enters the
left ventricle and is ejected via the aorta. In this example, some pulmonary blood flow is derived from the right ventricle, the rest from a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Severe cyanosis will develop in neonates
with a severe Ebstein anomaly when the PDA closes.

B
Fig. 479.13 Echocardiographic demonstration of Ebstein anomaly of

the tricuspid valve. A, Subcostal, four-­chamber, 2D view showing severe
displacement of the tricuspid valve leaflets (arrow) inferiorly into the
right ventricle. The location of the tricuspid valve annulus is outlined by
the arrow. The portion of the right ventricle between the valve annulus
and the valve leaflets is the “atrialized” component. B, Color Doppler
examination showing severe regurgitation of the dysplastic tricuspid
valve. Note that the regurgitant turbulent flow (arrow) begins halfway
into the right ventricular chamber, at the location of the displaced valve
leaflets. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

is of primary importance; surgical treatment may not be necessary
until adolescence or young adulthood. Older patients with severe
tricuspid regurgitation can undergo repair or replacement of the
abnormal tricuspid valve along with closure of the ASD. In some
patients, a bidirectional Glenn shunt is also performed, with the
superior vena cava anastomosed to the pulmonary arteries. This
procedure reduces the volume of blood that the dysfunctional right
side of the heart has to pump, thus creating a “one-­and-­one-­half
ventricle repair.”

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS
Fig. 479.12 Massive cardiomegaly in a newborn infant with severe
Ebstein anomaly. The heart is so enlarged (in part because of a massive
right atrium) that lung hypoplasia is a major concern.

an option. Many infants with Ebstein anomaly who have undergone
valve repair will also have a bidirectional Glenn shunt performed
to reduce the volume load on the right ventricle and reduce the
amount of tricuspid regurgitation (see Chapter 479.4). In older
children with mild or moderate disease, control of supraventricular
dysrhythmias (medications or radiofrequency ablation), if present,

The prognosis in Ebstein anomaly is extremely variable and depends
on the severity of the defect. The prognosis is more guarded for
neonates or infants with cyanosis. Patients with milder degrees of
Ebstein anomaly usually survive well into adult life. An associated
form of left ventricular cardiomyopathy, isolated left ventricular
noncompaction (LVNC), is seen in up to 18% of patients with
Ebstein anomaly, and the severity of the LV dysfunction directly
affects the prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2812 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

480.2 d-­Transposition of the Great Arteries
with Intact Ventricular Septum

Chapter 480

Cyanotic Congenital
Heart Disease: Lesions
Associated with Increased
Pulmonary Blood Flow
480.1 d-­Transposition of the Great Arteries
Daniel Bernstein
d-­Transposition of the great arteries or vessels (d-­TGA or d-­TGV)
accounts for approximately 5% of all congenital heart disease. In this
anomaly, the systemic veins return, as normal, to the right atrium
and the pulmonary veins return to the left atrium. The connections
between the atria and ventricles are also normal (i.e., atrioventricular concordance). The aorta arises from the right ventricle and the
pulmonary artery from the left ventricle (Fig. 480.1). In normally
related great vessels (i.e., in the normal heart) the aorta is posterior and to the right of the pulmonary artery. Whereas in d-­TGA
the aorta is anterior and to the right of the pulmonary artery (the
d indicates a dextropositioned aorta, transposition indicates that
the aorta arises from the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery
from the left ventricle). Desaturated blood returning from the body
to the right side of the heart goes inappropriately out via the aorta
and back to the body again, whereas oxygenated pulmonary venous
blood returning to the left side of the heart is returned directly to
the lungs. Thus the systemic and pulmonary circulations exist as
two parallel circuits. Survival in the immediate newborn period is
provided by the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus, which permit some mixture of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood. Approximately 50% of patients with d-­TGA also have a ventricular septal
defect (VSD), which usually provides for better mixing. The clinical findings and hemodynamics vary in relation to the presence or
absence of associated defects (e.g., VSD or pulmonary stenosis).
d-­TGA is more common in infants of diabetic mothers and in males
(a ratio of 3:1). When accompanied by other cardiac defects such
as pulmonic stenosis or right aortic arch, d-­TGA can be associated
with deletion of chromosome 22q11.2 (DiGeorge syndrome; see
Chapter 473).

Daniel Bernstein
d-­TGA with an intact ventricular septum is also referred to as simple
TGA or isolated TGA. Before birth, oxygenation in the upper and
lower body fetal circulation is only slightly abnormal, given that oxygenated blood enters the heart from the placenta, umbilical vein, and
inferior vena cava. After birth, once the ductus arteriosus begins to
close, the minimal mixing of systemic and pulmonary blood by the
patent foramen ovale is usually insufficient and severe hypoxemia
ensues, generally within the first few days of life.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cyanosis and tachypnea are most often recognized within the first
hours or days of postnatal life. Untreated, most of these infants would
not survive the neonatal period. Hypoxemia is usually moderate to
severe, depending on the degree of atrial-­level shunting and whether
the ductus is partially open or totally closed. This condition is a medical emergency, and only early diagnosis and appropriate intervention
can avert the development of prolonged severe hypoxemia and acidosis, which lead to death. Physical findings, other than cyanosis, may be
remarkably nonspecific. The precordial impulse may be normal, or a
parasternal heave may be present. The second heart sound (S2) is usually single and loud, although it may be split. Murmurs may be absent,
or a soft systolic ejection murmur may be noted at the mid-­left sternal
border.

DIAGNOSIS

The electrocardiogram (ECG) is usually normal, showing the
expected neonatal right-­sided dominant pattern. Chest radiographs
may show mild cardiomegaly and a narrow mediastinum (the classic “egg-­shaped heart”). In the early newborn period, the pulmonary
blood flow is generally normal. As pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR) drops during the first several weeks of postnatal life, evidence
of increased pulmonary blood flow becomes apparent. Arterial blood
partial pressure of oxygen (Pao2) is low and does not rise appreciably
after the patient breathes 100% oxygen (hyperoxia test), although this
test may not be totally reliable. Echocardiography is diagnostic and
confirms the transposed ventricular-­arterial connections (Fig. 480.2).
The size of the interatrial communication and the ductus arteriosus
can be visualized and the degree of mixing assessed by pulsed and
color Doppler examination. The presence of any associated lesion,
such as left ventricular outflow tract obstruction or a VSD, can also
be assessed. The origins of the coronary arteries can be imaged,
although echocardiography is not as accurate as catheterization for

Ao
PA
LA

MPA

Ao

Ao
MPA

RA
LV

RV

RV

LV

RV

A

B

C

D

E

Fig. 480.1 d-­Looped transposition of the great arteries (TGA). A, Diagram of d-­TGA, with the main pulmonary artery (MPA) arising from the left

ventricle (LV) and the aorta (Ao) arising from the right ventricle (RV). The degree of cyanosis is variable and depends on the presence of intracardiac
shunts such as an atrial septal defect or a ventricular septal defect (VSD) to get oxygenated blood into the systemic circulation. LA, Left atrium; PA,
pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium. B and C, Oblique reformatted images from a 3D steady-­state free-­precession sequence show (B) the Ao arising
from the anterior RV with a subaortic conus (arrow), and (C) the MPA arising from the posterior LV. D, The Ao and MPA have a parallel “back-­to-­front”
arrangement. E, This parallel back-­to-­front arrangement contributes to the narrow mediastinum and “egg on a string” appearance seen on chest
radiography. This patient has a large VSD with increased pulmonary blood flow. (From Frost JL, Krishnamurthy R, Sena L. Cardiac imaging. In: Walters
MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017, Fig 3-­20, p. 75.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2813

LPA
RPA
PA
LV

RA
RV

A

B

C

D

Fig. 480.2 Subcostal four-­chamber 2D echocardiographic demon-

stration of d-­transposition of the great arteries. The pulmonary artery
(PA) can be seen arising directly from the left ventricle (LV). The immediate bifurcation of this great vessel into the branch pulmonary arteries
differentiates it from the aorta, which branches more distally from the
heart. LPA, Left pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle.

this purpose. Cardiac catheterization may be performed in patients
for whom noninvasive imaging is diagnostically inconclusive, where
an unusual coronary artery anomaly is suspected, or in patients who
require emergency balloon atrial septostomy (i.e., the Rashkind
procedure). Catheterization will show right ventricular pressure to
be at a systemic level because this ventricle is supporting the systemic
circulation. The blood in the left ventricle (LV) and pulmonary artery
has a higher oxygen saturation than that in the aorta. Depending on
the age at catheterization, LV and pulmonary artery pressure can vary
from a systemic level to <50% of systemic-­level pressure. Right ventriculography demonstrates the anterior and rightward aorta originating from the right ventricle (RV), as well as the intact ventricular
septum. Left ventriculography shows that the pulmonary artery arises
exclusively from the LV.
Anomalous coronary arteries are noted in 10–15% of patients and
can be defined by an aortic root injection or by selective coronary
arteriography.

TREATMENT

When transposition is suspected, an infusion of prostaglandin E1
(PGE1, 0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min) should be initiated immediately to
maintain patency of the ductus arteriosus and improve oxygenation.
Because of the risk of apnea associated with prostaglandin infusion, an
individual skilled in neonatal endotracheal intubation should be available. Hypothermia intensifies the metabolic acidosis resulting from
hypoxemia, and thus the patient should be kept warm. Prompt correction of acidosis and hypoglycemia is essential.
Infants who remain severely hypoxic or acidotic despite prostaglandin infusion should undergo Rashkind balloon atrial septostomy
(Fig. 480.3). A Rashkind atrial septostomy is also usually performed in
patients in whom any significant delay in surgery is expected. If surgery
is planned during the first 2 weeks of life and the patient is stable, catheterization and atrial septostomy may often be avoided.
A successful Rashkind atrial septostomy should result in a rise in
Pao2 to 35-­50 mm Hg and elimination of any pressure gradient across
the atrial septum. Some patients with TGA and VSD (see Chapter
480.3) may require balloon atrial septostomy because of poor mixing,
even though the VSD is large. Others may benefit from decompression
of the left atrium to alleviate the symptoms of increased pulmonary
blood flow and left-­sided heart failure.
The arterial switch (Jatene) procedure is the surgical treatment of
choice for neonates with d-­TGA and an intact ventricular septum and
is usually performed within the first 2 weeks of life. The reason for this
time frame is that as PVR declines after birth, pressure in the LV (connected to the pulmonary vascular bed) also declines. This pressure

Fig. 480.3 Rashkind balloon atrial septostomy. Four frames from a

continuous cineangiogram show the creation of an atrial septal defect
in a hypoxemic newborn infant with transposition of the great arteries
and an intact ventricular septum. A, Balloon inflated in the left atrium.
B, The catheter is jerked suddenly so that the balloon ruptures the foramen ovale. C, Balloon in the inferior vena cava. D, Catheter advanced to
the right atrium to deflate the balloon. The time from A to C is <1 sec.

drop results in a decrease in LV mass over the first few weeks of life.
If the arterial switch operation is attempted after LV pressure (and
mass) has declined too far, the LV will be unable to generate adequate
pressure to pump blood to the high-­pressure systemic circulation. The
arterial switch operation involves dividing the aorta and pulmonary
artery just above the sinuses and reanastomosing them in their correct
anatomic positions. The coronary arteries are removed from the old
aortic root along with a button of aortic wall and reimplanted in the
old pulmonary root (now called the neoaorta). By using a button of
great vessel tissue, the surgeon avoids having to suture directly onto
the coronary artery (Fig. 480.4); this is the major innovation that has
allowed the arterial switch to replace previous atrial switch operations
for d-­TGA. Rarely, a two-­stage arterial switch procedure, with initial
placement of a pulmonary artery band, may be used in patients presenting late who already have had a reduction in LV muscle mass and
pressure. The arterial switch procedure has a survival rate of >95%
for uncomplicated d-­TGA. It restores the normal physiologic relationships of systemic and pulmonary arterial blood flow and eliminates the long-­term complications of the previously used atrial switch
procedure.
Previous operations for d-­TGA consisted of some form of atrial
switch procedure (Mustard or Senning operation). These procedures
produced excellent early survival (85–90%) but had significant long-­
term morbidities. Atrial switch procedures reverse blood flow at the
atrial level by creating an interatrial baffle that directs systemic venous
blood returning from the venae cavae to the left atrium, where it will
enter the LV, the pulmonary artery, and the lungs. The same baffle also
permits oxygenated pulmonary venous blood to cross over to the right
atrium, RV, and aorta. Atrial switch procedures involve significant atrial
surgery and have been associated with the late development of atrial
conduction disturbances, sick sinus syndrome with bradyarrhythmia
and tachyarrhythmia, atrial flutter, sudden death, superior or inferior
vena cava syndrome, edema, ascites, and protein-­losing enteropathy.
The atrial switch procedure also leaves the RV as the systemic pumping
chamber, and this “systemic” RV often begins to fail in young adulthood. Atrial switch operations are currently reserved for patients whose
anatomy is such that they are not candidates for the arterial switch
procedure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2814 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Pulmonary a.

Aorta

L. coronary a.

R. coronary a.

B

Pulmonary a.

Pulmonary a.

R. coronary a.

A

R. coronary a. L. coronary a.

L. coronary a.

C

Aorta

Fig. 480.4 Method for translocating the coronary arteries in the arte-

rial switch (Jatene) procedure. A, The aorta (anterior) and the pulmonary artery (posterior) have been transected to allow visualization of the
left and right coronary arteries. The coronaries have been excised from
their respective sinuses, including a large flap (button) of arterial wall.
Equivalent segments of the wall of the pulmonary artery (which will become the neoaorta) are also removed. B, The aortocoronary buttons are
sutured into the proximal portion of the neoaorta. With this technique
all sutures are placed in the button of aortic wall rather than directly on
the coronary arteries. C, Completed anastomosis of the left and right
coronary arteries to the neoaorta. (Adapted from Castañeda AR, Jonas
RA, Mayer JE Jr, et al. Cardiac Surgery of the Neonate and Infant. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1994.)

480.3 Transposition of the Great Arteries
with Ventricular Septal Defect
Daniel Bernstein
If the VSD associated with d-­TGA is small, the clinical manifestations,
laboratory findings, and treatment are similar to those described previously for transposition with an intact ventricular septum. A harsh systolic murmur is audible at the lower left sternal border, resulting from
flow through the defect. Many of these small defects eventually close
spontaneously and may not need to be addressed at the time of surgery.
When the VSD is large and not restrictive to ventricular ejection, significant mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood usually occurs
and clinical manifestations of cardiac failure are seen. The degree of
cyanosis may be subtle and sometimes may not be recognized until an
oxygen saturation measurement is performed. The murmur is holosystolic and generally indistinguishable from that produced by a large
VSD in patients with normally related great arteries. The heart is usually significantly enlarged.
Cardiomegaly, a narrow mediastinal waist, and increased pulmonary
vascularity are demonstrated on the chest radiograph. The ECG findings can be variable. It can show prominent P waves and isolated RV
hypertrophy or biventricular hypertrophy. Occasionally, dominance of
the LV is present. Usually, the QRS axis is to the right, but it can be
normal or even to the left. The diagnosis is confirmed by echocardiography, and the extent of pulmonary blood flow can also be estimated by
the degree of enlargement of the left atrium and ventricle. In equivocal
cases, the diagnosis can be confirmed by cardiac catheterization. Right
and left ventriculography indicate the presence of arterial transposition and demonstrate the site and size of the VSD. Systolic pressure is
equal in the two ventricles, the aorta, and the pulmonary artery. Left
atrial pressure may be much higher than right atrial pressure, a finding
indicative of a restrictive communication at the atrial level. At the time
of cardiac catheterization, Rashkind balloon atrial septostomy may be
performed to decompress the left atrium, even when adequate mixing
is occurring at the ventricular level.
Surgical treatment is advised soon after diagnosis because heart failure and failure to thrive are difficult to manage and pulmonary vascular

disease can develop unusually rapidly in these patients. Preoperative
management with diuretics and other anticongestive therapies (including elective intubation and positive pressure ventilation) stabilize the
patient before surgery.
Patients with d-­TGA and a VSD without pulmonic stenosis can be
treated with an arterial switch procedure combined with VSD closure.
In these patients, the arterial switch operation can be safely performed
after the first 2 weeks of life because the VSD results in equal pressure
in both ventricles and prevents regression of LV muscle mass. At major
centers, however, there is no reason to delay repair, as results are excellent when the surgery is performed in the neonatal period.

480.4 l-­Transposition of the Great Arteries
(Corrected Transposition)
Daniel Bernstein
In l-­transposition of the great arteries (l-­TGA), both the atrioventricular and the ventriculoarterial relationships are discordant: the right
atrium is connected to an LV and the left atrium to an RV, which is also
known as ventricular inversion. The great arteries are also transposed,
with the aorta arising from the RV and the pulmonary artery from the
LV. In contrast to d-­TGA, the aorta arises to the left of the pulmonary
artery (thus the designation l for levo-­transposition). The aorta may be
anterior to the pulmonary artery, although often they are nearly side
by side.
The physiology of l-­TGA is quite different from that of d-­TGA.
Desaturated systemic venous blood returns via the vena cavae to a normal right atrium, from which it passes through a bicuspid atrioventricular (mitral) valve into a right-­sided ventricle that has the architecture
and smooth wall morphologic features of the normal LV (Fig. 480.5).
Because transposition is also present, however, the desaturated blood
ejected from this LV enters the transposed pulmonary artery and flows
into the lungs, as it would in the normal circulation. Oxygenated pulmonary venous blood returns to a normal left atrium, passes through
a tricuspid atrioventricular valve into a left-­sided ventricle, which has
the trabeculated morphologic features of a normal RV, and is then
ejected into the transposed aorta. The double inversion of the atrioventricular and ventriculoarterial relationships result in desaturated right
atrial blood appropriately flowing to the lungs and oxygenated pulmonary venous blood appropriately flowing to the aorta. The circulation
is thus physiologically “corrected.” Without other defects, the hemodynamics would be almost normal. In most patients, however, associated
anomalies coexist: VSD, Ebstein-­like abnormalities of the left-­sided
atrioventricular (tricuspid) valve, pulmonary valvular or subvalvular
stenosis (or both), and atrioventricular conduction disturbances (complete heart block, accessory pathways such as Wolff-­Parkinson-­White
syndrome).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms and signs are widely variable and are usually determined
by the associated lesions. If there is a VSD and pulmonary outflow is
unobstructed, the clinical signs are similar to those of an isolated VSD.
If l-­TGA is associated with pulmonary stenosis and a VSD, the clinical
signs are more similar to those of tetralogy of Fallot.

DIAGNOSIS

The chest radiograph may suggest the abnormal position of the great
arteries; the ascending aorta occupies the upper left border of the
cardiac silhouette and has a straight profile. The ECG, in addition to
any atrioventricular conduction disturbances, may show abnormal P
waves; absent Q waves in V6; abnormal Q waves in leads III, aVR, aVF,
and V1; and upright T waves across the precordium. The echocardiogram is diagnostic. The characteristic echocardiographic features of the
RV (moderator band, coarser trabeculations, tricuspid valve that sits
more inferiorly compared with the bicuspid mitral valve, and a smooth
muscular conus or infundibulum separating the atrioventricular valve

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2815

85

60

100

60

85
RV

to pulmonary blood flow, clinical manifestations are similar to those
of an uncomplicated VSD with a large left-­to-­right shunt, although
mild systemic desaturation may result from mixing of oxygenated and
deoxygenated blood in the RV. The ECG usually shows biventricular
hypertrophy. Echocardiography is diagnostic and shows the right ventricular origin of both great arteries, their anteroposterior relationship,
and the relationship of the VSD to each of the great arteries. Surgical
correction is dependent on these relationships. If the VSD is subaortic, it is accomplished by creation of an intracardiac tunnel. Blood is
then ejected from the LV via the VSD into the aorta. If the VSD is subpulmonic, an arterial switch may be performed in combination with
an intracardiac tunnel. If pulmonary blood flow is excessive enough
to cause congestive heart failure, pulmonary arterial banding may be
required in infancy, followed by surgical correction when the child
is bigger. When associated pulmonary stenosis is present, cyanosis is
more marked, pulmonary blood flow is decreased, and clinical presentation may be similar to that of tetralogy of Fallot.

60
LV

Fig. 480.5 Physiology of l-­transposition or corrected transposition of

the great arteries (l-­TGA) with a ventricular septal defect and pulmonic
stenosis (VSD + PS). Circled numbers represent oxygen saturation values. Right atrial (mixed venous) oxygen saturation is decreased secondary to systemic hypoxemia. Blood from the right atrium flows through
the mitral valve into the “inverted” left ventricle (LV). The left ventricle
is, however, attached to the transposed pulmonary artery. Therefore
despite the anomalies, desaturated blood still winds up in the pulmonary circulation. Saturated blood returns to the left atrium, traverses the
tricuspid valve into the “inverted” right ventricle (RV), and is pumped
into the transposed aorta. This circulation would be totally “corrected”
were it not for the frequent association of other congenital anomalies,
in this case, VSD + PS. Because of the stenotic pulmonary valve, some
left ventricular blood flow crosses the VSD and into the right ventricle
and the ascending aorta, and systemic desaturation results.

from the semilunar valve) allow the echocardiographer to determine
the presence of atrioventricular discordance (right atrium connected
to LV; left atrium to RV) and ventriculoarterial discordance (RV connected to aorta; LV to pulmonary artery).
Surgical treatment of the associated anomalies, most often the VSD,
is complicated by the position of the bundle of His, which can be
injured at surgery and result in heart block. Identification of the usual
course of the bundle in corrected transposition (running superior to
the defect) has been accomplished by mapping the conduction system
so that the surgeon can avoid the bundle of His during repair. Even
without surgical injury, patients with l-­TGA are at risk for developing
heart block as they grow older.
Because simple surgical correction leaves the RV as the systemic
pumping chamber, and thus vulnerable to late ventricular failure,
surgeons have become more aggressive about trying operations that
use the LV as the systemic pumping chamber. This is accomplished by
performing an atrial switch operation (see Chapter 480.3) to reroute
the systemic and pulmonary venous returns in combination with an
arterial switch operation to reroute the ventricular outflows (double
switch procedure). The long-­term benefit of this approach in preserving systemic ventricular function is still under investigation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

480.5 Double-­Outlet Right Ventricle
Without Pulmonary Stenosis
Daniel Bernstein
In double-­outlet RV without pulmonary stenosis, both the aorta and
the pulmonary artery arise from the RV (see Chapter 479.5). The only
outlet from the LV is through a VSD. In the absence of obstruction

480.6 Double-­Outlet Right Ventricle with
Malposition of the Great Arteries
(Taussig-­Bing Anomaly)
Daniel Bernstein
In double-­outlet RV with malposed great arteries, the VSD is usually
directly subpulmonic and the aorta distant from the LV. Sometimes
both the pulmonary and the aortic valve may be located close to the
VSD (doubly committed VSD) and sometimes neither is (doubly
uncommitted VSD). The term malposition is used instead of transposition because both great arteries arise from the RV. Aortic obstructive lesions are common, including valvular and subvalvular aortic
stenosis, coarctation of the aorta, and interruption of the aortic arch.
Because pulmonary blood flow is unobstructed, patients experience
cardiac failure early in infancy and are at risk for the development of
pulmonary vascular disease and cyanosis. If aortic obstructive lesions
are a component, patients can present with poor systemic output and
cardiovascular collapse, particularly after the ductus arteriosus begins
to close. Cardiomegaly is usual, and a parasternal systolic ejection murmur is audible, sometimes preceded by an ejection click and loud closure of the pulmonary valve. The ECG shows right axis deviation and
right, left, or biventricular hypertrophy. The chest radiograph shows
cardiomegaly and prominence of the pulmonary vasculature. The anatomic features of the anomaly and associated abnormalities are usually demonstrated by echocardiography, augmented if necessary by
either cardiac catheterization, MRI, or CT. Palliation may be achieved
by corrective surgery or pulmonary arterial banding in early infancy
and surgical correction at a later age, which may be accomplished by
an arterial switch procedure (see Chapter 480.2) combined with an
intracardiac baffle or some modification of the Rastelli procedure (see
Chapter 479.5).

480.7 Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous
Return
Daniel Bernstein
Abnormal development of the pulmonary veins may result in either
partial or complete anomalous drainage into the systemic venous circulation. Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR) is
usually an acyanotic lesion (see Chapter 475.4). Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR) is associated with total mixing of systemic venous and pulmonary venous blood flow within the heart and
thus produces cyanosis.
In TAPVR, there is no direct pulmonary venous connection into the
left atrium (Fig. 480.6). The pulmonary veins may drain above the diaphragm: into the right atrium directly, into the coronary sinus, or into
the superior vena cava by a “vertical vein”; or they may drain below the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2816 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 480.1  Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Return
SITE OF CONNECTION
(% OF CASES)

% WITH SIGNIFICANT
OBSTRUCTION

Supracardiac (50)
Left superior vena cava (40)

40

Right superior vena cava (10)

75

Cardiac (25)
Coronary sinus (20)

10

Right atrium (5)

5

Infracardiac (20)

95–100

Mixed (5)

A
closes soon after birth, although supracardiac anomalous veins may
also become obstructed. Occasionally, the drainage may be mixed,
with some veins draining above and others below the diaphragm.
All forms of TAPVR involve mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood before or at the level of the right atrium (total mixing
lesion). This mixed right atrial blood either passes into the RV and
pulmonary artery or passes through an atrial septal defect (ASD) or
patent foramen ovale into the left atrium, which will be the only source
of oxygenated systemic blood flow. The right atrium and ventricle and
the pulmonary artery are generally enlarged, whereas the left atrium
and ventricle may be normal or small. The clinical manifestations of
TAPVR depend on the presence or absence of obstruction of the venous
channels (Table 480.1). If pulmonary venous return is obstructed,
severe pulmonary congestion and pulmonary hypertension develop;
rapid deterioration occurs without surgical intervention. Obstructed
TAPVR is a pediatric cardiac surgical emergency because prostaglandin
therapy is usually not effective.

B

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

C
Fig. 480.6 A, Subcostal view demonstrating total anomalous pulmo-

nary drainage to the coronary sinus. Note the dilated coronary sinus
in both images. The echocardiogram also demonstrates an associated
confluence that connects to the coronary sinus. B, Suprasternal view
demonstrating total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage to a left
vertical vein. Note the direction of flow in the vertical vein that differentiates it from a left superior vena cava. C, Total anomalous pulmonary
venous drainage below the diaphragm. The specimen shows the pulmonary veins as they enter the confluence, whereas the echocardiogram demonstrates the descending veins as they enter the liver. Note
that the direction of flow is away from the heart. AO, Aorta; CS, coronary sinus; DA, descending aorta; DV, descending vein; LVV, left vertical
vein; PA, pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary vein; PVC, pulmonary venous
confluence; RA, right atrium. (From Webb GD, Smallhorn, JF, Therrien
J, et al. Congenital heart disease in the adult and pediatric patient. In:
Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease,
11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 75-­32, p. 1553.)

diaphragm and join into a “descending vein” that enters the inferior
vena cava or one of its major tributaries, often through the ductus venosus. This latter form of anomalous venous drainage is most often associated with obstruction to venous flow, usually as the ductus venosus

Two major clinical patterns of TAPVR are seen, depending on the presence or absence of obstruction. Those neonates with severe obstruction
to pulmonary venous return, most prevalent in the infracardiac group
(see Table 480.1), present with severe cyanosis and respiratory distress.
Murmurs may not be present. These infants are severely ill and fail to
respond to mechanical ventilation. Rapid diagnosis and surgical correction are necessary for survival. In contrast, those with mild or no
obstruction to pulmonary venous return are usually characterized by
the development of heart failure as the PVR falls, with mild to moderate degrees of desaturation. Systolic murmurs may be audible along the
left sternal border, and a gallop rhythm may be present. Some infants
may have mild obstruction in the neonatal period and develop worsening obstruction as time passes.

DIAGNOSIS

The ECG demonstrates RV hypertrophy (usually a qR pattern in V3R
and V1, and P waves are frequently tall and spiked). In neonates with
marked pulmonary venous obstruction, the chest radiograph demonstrates a very dramatic perihilar pattern of pulmonary edema and
a small heart (Fig. 480.7A). This appearance can sometimes be confused with primary pulmonary disease, and the differential diagnosis
includes persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn, respiratory distress syndrome, pneumonia, pulmonary lymphangiectasia, and
other heart defects (hypoplastic left heart syndrome). In older children,
if the anomalous pulmonary veins enter the innominate vein and persistent left superior vena cava (see Fig. 480.7B), a large supracardiac
shadow can be seen, which together with the normal cardiac shadow
forms a snowman appearance. In most cases without obstruction, the
heart is enlarged, the pulmonary artery and RV are prominent, and
pulmonary vascularity is increased.
The echocardiogram demonstrates a large RV and usually identifies the pattern of abnormal pulmonary venous connections

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2817
moderately elevated, but in infants with pulmonary venous obstruction, pulmonary hypertension is usual. Selective pulmonary arteriography shows the anatomy of the pulmonary veins and their point of
entry into the systemic venous circulation.
Fetal diagnosis of TAPVR is feasible in many, but not all, cases,
with the main ultrasonographic signs being ventricular disproportion,
increased area behind the left atrium, and the finding of a vertical vein.
Color Doppler is key to making this diagnosis. Prenatal diagnosis can
be helpful in planning for urgent surgical treatment after birth.

A

TREATMENT

B

Fig. 480.7 Chest radiographs of total anomalous pulmonary venous
return (TAPVR). A, A newborn with TAPVR to a descending vein (below
the diaphragm) with obstruction, showing marked pulmonary venous
congestion and normal heart size. B, TAPVR to the left superior vena
cava (preoperative image). Arrows point to the supracardiac shadow,
which produces the “snowman” or figure 8 configuration. Cardiomegaly and increased pulmonary vascularity are evident.

85
85

Surgical correction of TAPVR is performed during early infancy,
with emergent repair performed for those patients with venous
obstruction. If surgery cannot be performed urgently, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be required to maintain
oxygenation. Surgically, the pulmonary venous confluence is anastomosed directly to the left atrium, the ASD is closed, and any connection to the systemic venous circuit is interrupted. Early results
are generally good, even for critically ill neonates. The postoperative
period may be complicated by pulmonary artery hypertensive crises.
In some patients, especially those in whom the diagnosis is delayed
or the obstruction is severe, recurrent stenosis and development of
pulmonary venoocclusive disease may occur. Attempts have been
made to treat recurrent stenosis with surgery, balloon angioplasty,
stents, and antiproliferative chemotherapy. The long-­term prognosis
in patients with recurrent obstruction is poor. In those with aggressive venoocclusive disease, heart-­lung transplantation may be the
only option (see Chapter 492.2).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

100

480.8 Truncus Arteriosus
Daniel Bernstein

60
95
70

Fig. 480.8 Physiology of truncus arteriosus. Circled numbers rep-

resent oxygen saturation values. Right atrial (mixed venous) oxygen
saturation is decreased secondary to systemic hypoxemia. Desaturated
blood enters the right atrium, flows through the tricuspid valve into
the right ventricle, and is ejected into the truncus. Saturated blood returning from the left atrium enters the left ventricle and is also ejected
into the truncus. The common aortopulmonary trunk gives rise to the
ascending aorta and to the main or branch pulmonary arteries. Oxygen saturation in the aorta and pulmonary arteries is usually the same
(definition of a total mixing lesion). As pulmonary vascular resistance
decreases in the first few weeks of life, pulmonary blood flow increases
dramatically, and mild cyanosis and congestive heart failure result.

(see Fig. 480.6). The demonstration of any vein with Doppler flow
away from the heart is pathognomonic of TAPVR because normal venous flow is usually toward the heart. Shunting occurs from
right to left at the atrial level. The size of the left atrium and LV
can be measured and the presence of any associated cardiac defects
determined.
Echocardiography should be adequate to demonstrate TAPVR in
most cases; however, if there is question about the drainage of one or
more pulmonary veins, cardiac catheterization, MRI, or CTA is performed. Catheterization shows that the oxygen saturation of blood in
both atria, both ventricles, and the aorta is similar, indicative of a total
mixing lesion. An increase in systemic venous saturation occurs at
the site of entry of the abnormal pulmonary venous channel, either
above or below the diaphragm. In older patients without pulmonary
venous obstruction, pulmonary arterial and RV pressure may be only

In truncus arteriosus, a single arterial trunk (truncus arteriosus) arises
from the heart and supplies the systemic, pulmonary, and coronary
circulations. A VSD is always present, with the truncus overriding the
defect and receiving blood from both the RV and the LV (Fig. 480.8).
The number of truncal valve cusps varies from two to as many as six,
and the valve may be stenotic, regurgitant, or both. The pulmonary
arteries can arise together from the posterior left side of the persistent
truncus arteriosus and then divide into left and right pulmonary arteries (type I). In types II and III truncus arteriosus, no main pulmonary
artery is present, and the right and left pulmonary arteries arise from
separate orifices on the posterior (type II) or lateral (type III) aspects
of the truncus arteriosus. Type IV truncus is a term no longer used
because, in this case, there is no identifiable connection between the
heart and pulmonary arteries, and pulmonary blood flow is derived
from major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs) arising
from the transverse or descending aorta; this is essentially a form of
pulmonary atresia (see Chapter 479.2).
Both ventricles are at systemic pressure, and both eject blood into
the truncus. When PVR is relatively high immediately after birth,
pulmonary blood flow may be normal; as PVR drops in the first few
weeks of life, blood flow to the lungs is greatly increased and heart failure ensues. Truncus arteriosus is a total mixing lesion with complete
admixture of pulmonary and systemic venous return. Because of the
large volume of pulmonary blood flow, clinical cyanosis is usually mild.
If the lesion is left untreated, PVR eventually increases, pulmonary
blood flow decreases, and cyanosis becomes more prominent (Eisenmenger physiology; see Chapter 482.2).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical signs of truncus arteriosus vary with age and depend on
the level of PVR. In the immediate newborn period, signs of heart failure are usually absent; a murmur and minimal cyanosis may be the
only initial findings. If unrepaired, during the next 1-­2 months of life,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2818 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
pulmonary blood flow begins to become torrential and the clinical
picture is dominated by heart failure, with still mild cyanosis. Runoff
of blood from the truncus to the pulmonary circulation may result
in a wide pulse pressure and bounding pulses. These findings will be
further exaggerated if truncal valve insufficiency is present. The heart
is usually enlarged, and the precordium is hyperdynamic. S2 is loud
and single. A systolic ejection murmur, sometimes accompanied by a
thrill, is generally audible along the left sternal border. The murmur
is frequently preceded by an early systolic ejection click caused by the
abnormal truncal valve. In the presence of truncal valve insufficiency, a
medium-­to high-­pitched early diastolic decrescendo murmur is heard
at the mid-­left sternal border. An apical mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur caused by increased flow through the mitral valve is often audible
with the bell of the stethoscope, especially as heart failure develops.
Truncus arteriosus is a conotruncal malformation and may be associated with DiGeorge syndrome, linked to a deletion of a large region of
chromosome 22q11 (see Chapter 473).

DIAGNOSIS

The ECG shows right, left, or combined ventricular hypertrophy. The
chest radiograph also shows considerable variation. Cardiac enlargement will develop over the first several weeks of life and is a result of the
prominence of both ventricles. The truncus may produce a prominent
shadow that follows the normal course of the ascending aorta and aortic knob; the aortic arch is right sided in 50% of patients. Sometimes a
high bulge left of the aortic knob is produced by the main or left pulmonary artery. Pulmonary vascularity is increased after the first few weeks
of life. Echocardiography is diagnostic and demonstrates the large truncal artery overriding the VSD and the pattern of origin of the branch
pulmonary arteries (Fig. 480.9). Associated anomalies such as an interrupted aortic arch may be noted. Pulsed and color Doppler studies
are used to evaluate truncal valve regurgitation. If required, cardiac
catheterization shows a left-­to-­right shunt at the ventricular level, with
right-­to-­left shunting into the truncus. Systolic pressure in both ventricles and the truncus is similar. Angiography reveals the large truncus
arteriosus and better defines the origin of the pulmonary arteries.

TREATMENT

Most centers perform routine neonatal repair shortly after diagnosis.
If surgery is delayed and PVR falls over the first several weeks of life,
heart failure symptoms will worsen. Anticongestive medications can
be used to better prepare these patients for surgery; however, delay of
surgery much beyond this time period may increase the likelihood of
developing pulmonary vascular disease. At surgery, the VSD is closed,
the pulmonary arteries are separated from the truncus, and continuity is established between the RV and the pulmonary arteries with a

LPA

Ao
TR

LV
RV

homograft conduit. Immediate surgical results are excellent, but these
conduits will develop either regurgitation or stenosis over time and
must be replaced, often several times, as the child grows. If regurgitation is the primary problem, patients can now be treated with a transcatheter stent-­valve (see Chapter 479.1)

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Surgical results have been excellent, and many patients with repaired
truncus are now entering mid-­adulthood, with several centers reporting 30-­and 40-­year-­old survivors. The need to replace the RV-­to-­
pulmonary artery conduit as the child grows means that these patients
will need to undergo multiple operations by the time they reach adulthood. The development of transcatheter stent-­valves may reduce this
in the future (see Chapter 472). When truncus arteriosus is associated
with DiGeorge syndrome, the associated endocrine, immunologic, craniofacial, and airway abnormalities may complicate recovery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

480.9 Single Ventricle (Double-­Inlet
Ventricle, Univentricular Heart)
Daniel Bernstein
With a single ventricle, both atria empty through a common atrioventricular valve or through two separate valves into a single ventricular
chamber, with total mixing of systemic and pulmonary venous return.
This chamber may have left, right, or indeterminate (both right and
left) ventricular morphologic characteristics. The aorta and pulmonary
artery both arise from this single chamber, although one of the great
vessels may originate from a rudimentary outflow chamber. The aorta
may be posterior, anterior (malposition), or side-­by-­side with the pulmonary artery and either to the right or to the left. Pulmonary stenosis
or atresia is common.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical picture is variable and depends on the associated intracardiac anomalies. If pulmonary outflow is obstructed, the findings are
usually similar to those of tetralogy of Fallot: marked cyanosis without heart failure. If pulmonary outflow is unobstructed, the findings
are similar to those of transposition with VSD: minimal cyanosis with
increasing heart failure.
In patients with pulmonary stenosis, cyanosis is present in early
infancy. Cardiomegaly is mild or moderate, a left parasternal lift is palpable, and a systolic thrill is common. The systolic ejection murmur
is usually loud; an ejection click may be audible, and S2 is single and
loud. In patients with unobstructed pulmonary flow, as PVR drops,
torrential pulmonary blood flow develops, and these patients present
with tachypnea, dyspnea, failure to thrive, and recurrent pulmonary
infections. Cyanosis is only mild or moderate. Cardiomegaly is generally marked, and a left parasternal lift is palpable. A systolic ejection
murmur is present but is not usually loud or harsh, and S2 is loud
and closely split. A third heart sound (S3) is common and may be followed by a short mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur caused by increased
flow through the atrioventricular valves. The eventual development
of pulmonary vascular disease reduces pulmonary blood flow so that
the cyanosis increases and signs of cardiac failure appear to improve
(Eisenmenger physiology; see Chapter 482.2).

DIAGNOSIS
Fig. 480.9 Subcostal 2D echocardiographic demonstration of trun-

cus arteriosus. The large truncal valve can be seen overriding the ventricular septal defect. In this case, only the left pulmonary artery (LPA)
arises from the truncus (TR). The pulmonary arteries are discontinuous,
and the right pulmonary artery arises from the descending aorta via
the ductus arteriosus (not shown). Ao, Aorta; LV, left ventricle; RV, right
ventricle.

ECG findings are nonspecific. P waves are normal, spiked, or bifid.
The precordial lead pattern suggests right ventricular hypertrophy,
combined ventricular hypertrophy, or sometimes left ventricular
dominance. The initial QRS forces are usually to the left and anterior.
Radiographic examination confirms the degree of cardiomegaly. If
present, a rudimentary outflow chamber may produce a bulge on the
upper left border of the cardiac silhouette in the posteroanterior projection. In the absence of pulmonary stenosis, pulmonary vasculature is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2819
increased, whereas in the presence of pulmonary stenosis, pulmonary
vasculature is diminished. Echocardiography will confirm the absence
or near-­absence of the ventricular septum and can usually determine
whether the single ventricle has right, left, or mixed morphologic features. The presence of a rudimentary outflow chamber under one of
the great vessels can be identified, and pulsed Doppler can be used to
determine whether flow through this communication (known as a bulboventricular foramen) is obstructed.
If cardiac catheterization is performed, the pressure in the single
ventricular chamber is at systemic level; however, a gradient may be
demonstrated across the entrance to the rudimentary outflow chamber. Pressure measurements and angiography demonstrate whether
pulmonary stenosis is present.

Aorta
Ascending aorta

PA
PV

TREATMENT

If pulmonary stenosis is severe, a Blalock-­Taussig aortopulmonary
shunt is performed to provide a reliable source of pulmonary blood
flow (see Chapter 479.1). If pulmonary blood flow is unrestricted,
pulmonary arterial banding is used to control heart failure and prevent progressive pulmonary vascular disease. The bidirectional
Glenn shunt is usually performed at 2-­4 months of age, followed by a
modified Fontan operation (cavopulmonary isolation procedure; see
Chapter 479.4) at 2-­3 years. If subaortic stenosis is present because of
a restrictive connection to a rudimentary outflow chamber (restrictive
bulboventricular foramen), surgical relief can be provided by anastomosing the proximal pulmonary artery to the side of the ascending
aorta (Damus-­Stansel-­Kaye operation).

RA

LC
RC

LV

AD

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Unoperated, some patients succumb during infancy from heart failure. Others may survive to adolescence and early adult life but finally
succumb to the effects of chronic hypoxemia or, in the absence of pulmonary stenosis, to the effects of pulmonary vascular disease. Patients
with moderate pulmonary stenosis have the best prognosis because
pulmonary blood flow, though restricted, is still adequate. Surgical palliation, eventually leading to Fontan-­type circulatory physiology (see
Chapter 479.4), has very good short-­and intermediate-­term results.

480.10 Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome
Daniel Bernstein
The term hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) is used to describe a
related group of anomalies that include various degrees of underdevelopment of the left side of the heart: stenosis or atresia of the aortic and
mitral valves and hypoplasia of the left ventricular cavity and ascending aorta. HLHS categories are based on anatomic characteristics:
(1) mitral and aortic atresia (MA-­AA), (2) mitral stenosis with aortic
atresia (MS-­AA), and (3) mitral and aortic stenosis (MS-­AS). The LV
may be only moderately hypoplastic, very small and nonfunctional,
or totally atretic. The LV cavity may be slitlike, miniaturized, or small
and thick walled with endocardial fibroelastosis. In patients with MS-­
AA, there may be anomalous connections between the ventricle and
the coronary arteries, which some reports associate with an increased
postoperative risk.
The etiology of HLHS may be the result of poor left-­sided fetal blood
flow (no flow–no grow hypothesis). Alternatively, there may be intrinsic defects of myogenic and endocardial programming affecting differentiation, proliferation, maturation, and apoptosis. Although no single
gene is associated with all patients, multiple genes (GJA1, NKX2-­5,
SAP130, PCDHA, Notch 1, MY46) and pathways (transforming growth
factor beta [TGF-­β], Wnt) have been implicated.
In the immediate neonatal period, the RV maintains both the pulmonary circulation and the systemic circulation via the ductus arteriosus (Fig. 480.10). Pulmonary venous blood passes through an ASD
(which may or may not be restrictive) or dilated foramen ovale from
the left to the right side of the heart, where it mixes with systemic
venous blood (total mixing lesion). Minimal (mitral stenosis subtypes)

RV

Fig. 458.10 Hypoplastic left heart with aortic hypoplasia, aortic valve

atresia, and a hypoplastic mitral valve and left ventricle. AD, Anterior
descending; LC, left circumflex; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery;
PV, pulmonary vein; RA, right atrium; RC, right coronary artery; RV, right
ventricle. (From Webb GD, Smallhorn, JF, Therrien J, et al. Congenital
heart disease in the adult and pediatric patient. In: Zipes DP, Libby P,
Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 75-­28, p. 1548. Adapted from historical illustrations in Neufeld HN, Adams P Jr, Edwards JE, et al. Diagnosis of
aortic atresia by retrograde aortography. Circulation. 1962;25:278; and
Edwards JE, Dry TJ, Parker RL, et al. An Atlas of Congenital Anomalies
of the Heart and Great Vessels. Springfield: Charles C. Thomas; 1954.)

or no (mitral atresia subtype) blood enters the hypoplastic LV. All the
RV blood is ejected into the main pulmonary artery, where it then supplies both the descending and the ascending aorta (retrograde flow)
via the ductus arteriosus. The major hemodynamic abnormalities are
inadequate maintenance of the systemic circulation and, depending on
the size of the atrial-­level communication, either pulmonary venous
hypertension (restrictive foramen ovale) or pulmonary overcirculation
(moderate or large ASD).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although cyanosis may not always be obvious in the first 48 hours of
life, a grayish-­blue skin color is soon apparent and denotes a mix of cyanosis and poor perfusion. The condition is diagnosed in most infants in
the first few hours or days of life. Once the ductus arteriosus begins to
close, signs of poor systemic perfusion and shock predominate. All the
peripheral pulses may be weak or absent. A palpable RV parasternal lift
may be present along with a nondescript systolic murmur.
This lesion may be isolated or associated in 5–15% of patients with
known genetic syndromes, such as Turner syndrome; trisomy 13,
18, or 21; Jacobsen syndrome (11q deletion); Holt-­Oram syndrome;
and Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome. In these circumstances, noncardiac

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2820 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
manifestations of the syndrome may be evident and influence the
clinical outcomes. Occasionally, HLHS is familial and inherited as an
autosomal recessive or dominant trait; there are also families with constellations of different severities of left-­sided obstructive lesions, ranging from bicuspid aortic valve, to coarctation of the aorta, to Shone
complex, to HLHS.

DIAGNOSIS

On chest radiograph, the heart is variable in size in the first days of life,
but cardiomegaly develops rapidly and is associated with increased pulmonary vascularity. The initial ECG may show only the normal neonatal pattern of RV dominance, but later, P waves become prominent and
RV hypertrophy is usual with reduced LV forces. The echocardiogram
is diagnostic and demonstrates hypoplasia or atresia of the mitral valve
and aortic root, a variably small left atrium and LV, and a large right
atrium and RV (Fig. 480.11). The size of the atrial communication, by
which pulmonary venous blood leaves the left atrium, is assessed by
pulsed and color flow Doppler studies. The small ascending aorta and
transverse aortic arch are identified; a discrete coarctation of the aorta
in the juxtaductal area may be present, although in the presence of a
large ductus, it may be difficult to identify. Doppler echocardiography
demonstrates whether the mitral and aortic valves are severely stenotic
or totally atretic. The presence of left ventricular–to–coronary sinusoidal connections can be identified. The diagnosis of HLHS can usually
be made without the need for cardiac catheterization. If catheterization is necessary, the hypoplastic ascending aorta is demonstrated by
angiography.

TREATMENT

Surgical therapy for HLHS is associated with improved survival rates,
reported as high as 90–95% for the first-­stage palliation in experienced
centers. The first-­stage repair is designed to construct a reliable source
of systemic blood flow arising from the single RV using a combination
of aortic and pulmonary arterial tissue and to limit pulmonary blood
flow to avoid heart failure and prevent the development of pulmonary
vascular disease. The surgical procedure typically used is the Norwood
procedure (Fig. 480.12) or the Sano procedure. Primary heart transplantation, previously advocated by a few centers, is much less common because of the substantially improved survival rates with standard
surgery and the limited supply of donor organs in this age-­group.
Preoperative medical management includes maintaining ductus
arteriosus patency with PGE1 (0.05-0.1 μg/kg/min) to support systemic blood flow, avoiding excess pulmonary blood flow, and maintaining adequate flow from the left to the right atrium. Correction of
acidosis and hypoglycemia and prevention of hypothermia are also key
components. Excessive pulmonary blood flow, which worsens as the
PVR begins to fall, can lead to both respiratory distress and systemic

LA
LV
RA
RV

Fig. 480.11 Subcostal 2D echocardiographic diagnosis of hypoplas-

tic left heart syndrome. The small left ventricular chamber can be seen,
the apex of which (arrowhead) does not form the apex of the heart. The
atrial septum can be seen bowing from the left to the right, indicating
that the communication between the two atria is pressure restrictive.
LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

hypoperfusion. This can be prevented through managing ventilator settings to keep the Pco2 in the 45-­50 mm Hg range and avoiding supplemental oxygen (which acts as a pulmonary vasodilator) if the system
arterial O2 saturation is in the 70-­80 mm Hg range. If the atrial septum
is restrictive, a Rashkind balloon atrial septostomy, septal balloon dilation, or rarely, a blade septostomy of the atrial septum may be indicated.
The Norwood or Sano procedure is usually performed in three
stages. Stage I (see Fig. 480.12), usually performed in the first week of
life, includes an atrial septectomy and transection and ligation of the
distal main pulmonary artery; the proximal pulmonary artery is then
connected to the transversely opened hypoplastic aortic arch to form a
“neoaorta,” extending through the coarcted segment of the juxtaductal
aortic arch. In the Norwood operation, a synthetic aortopulmonary
(Blalock-­Taussig) shunt connects the aorta to the main pulmonary
artery to provide controlled pulmonary blood flow. In the Sano modification, an RV–to–pulmonary artery conduit is used instead of an
aortopulmonary shunt to provide pulmonary blood flow, temporarily
creating a double-­outlet RV. The operative risk for these first-­stage procedures has improved dramatically in the past 2 decades, and the best
reported results demonstrate a 90–95% survival rate. After the first stage,
the patient’s oxygen saturation usually ranges from 75% to 85% because
of the continued admixture of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in
the right atrium. In the past, there was a high interstage mortality rate
in infants discharged from the hospital between stages I and II. This has
largely been prevented by performing careful interstage surveillance in
home monitoring programs run by pediatric cardiac centers.
Stage II consists of a Glenn shunt anastomosis to connect the superior vena cava to the pulmonary arteries (see Chapter 480.4) at 2-­6
months of age. Stage III, usually performed at 2-­3 years, consists of a
modified Fontan procedure (cavopulmonary isolation) to connect the
inferior vena cava to the pulmonary arteries via either an intraatrial
or external baffle. After stage III, all systemic venous return enters the
pulmonary circulation directly. Pulmonary venous flow enters the left
atrium and is directed across the atrial septum to the tricuspid valve
and subsequently to the right (now the systemic) ventricle. Blood
leaves the RV via the neoaorta, which supplies the systemic circulation.
The old aortic root now attached to the neoaorta provides coronary
blood flow. The risks associated with stages II and III are less than those
of stage I; interstage mortality (usually between stages I and II) has
been dramatically reduced with the use of home monitoring programs
and interstage close follow-­up. The short-­and long-­term benefits of
using the Norwood vs the Sano procedure remain to be demonstrated.
An alternative therapeutic approach, initially developed for high-­
risk standard surgical candidates, is to perform a hybrid procedure
for the first stage. This involves performing a Rashkind balloon atrial
septostomy, cardiac catheter laboratory placement of a stent in the ductus arteriosus, and open chest surgical placement of bilateral pulmonary artery bands. After the hybrid procedure, patients can be weaned
off prostaglandin and discharged from the hospital. However, after a
hybrid procedure, patients need to undergo a more extensive second-­
stage procedure involving construction of a neoaorta and removal of
the pulmonary artery bands.
Another alternative therapy is cardiac transplantation, either in
the immediate neonatal period, thereby obviating stage I of the Norwood procedure, or after a successful stage I Norwood procedure
is performed as a bridge to transplantation. After transplantation,
patients usually have normal cardiac function and no symptoms of
heart failure; however, these patients have the chronic risk of organ
rejection and lifelong immunosuppressive therapy (see Chapter 492.1).
The combination of donor shortage and improved results with standard surgical and hybrid procedures has caused most centers to stop
recommending transplantation except when associated lesions make
the Norwood operation an exceptionally high-­risk procedure (e.g., significant coronary artery anomalies) or for patients who develop poor
ventricular function at some time after the standard surgical approach.

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Untreated patients most often succumb during the first few months of life,
usually during the first or second week. Up to 30% of infants with HLHS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2821

B

Inferior
vena cava

A
Homograft
Aorta
Main
pulmonary a.

C

E
F

D

Fig. 480.12 Norwood procedure, one of the two current techniques for first-­stage palliation of hypoplastic left heart syndrome. A, Incisions used

for the procedure incorporate a cuff of arterial wall allograft. The distal divided main pulmonary artery may be closed by direct suture or with a patch.
B, Dimensions of the cuff of the arterial wall allograft. C, The arterial wall allograft is used to supplement the anastomosis between the proximal divided main pulmonary artery and the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and proximal descending aorta. D and E, The procedure is completed by an atrial
septectomy and a 3.5-­mm modified right Blalock shunt. F, When the ascending aorta is particularly small, an alternative procedure involves placement of a complete tube of arterial allograft. The tiny ascending aorta may be left in situ, as indicated, or implanted into the side of the neoaorta.
(From Castañeda AR, Jonas RA, Mayer JE Jr, et al. Single-­ventricle tricuspid atresia. In: Cardiac Surgery of the Neonate and Infant. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 1994.)

have evidence of either a major or a minor central nervous system abnormality. Other dysmorphic features may be found in up to 40% of patients.
Thus careful preoperative evaluation (genetic, neurologic, ophthalmologic)
should be performed in patients being considered for surgical therapy.
Intermediate-­term follow-­up after completion of all three stages of
the Norwood procedure demonstrates generally good exercise capacity and long-­term complications equivalent to other patients who have
had the Fontan palliation (see Chapter 479.4). Some studies show
that patients with HLHS have a higher risk of neurodevelopmental

problems than those with other complex congenital heart lesions.
Whether the poor neurodevelopmental outcome is the result of genetically associated central nervous system malformations, alteration
of prenatal circulation dynamics or prenatal central nervous system
injury, complications of bypass surgery, or poor preoperative and/or
postoperative perfusion is unknown. Whether a specific HLHS subtype, specifically MS-­AA with ventricular-­coronary connections, is
associated with increased postoperative mortality is still unclear, as
studies have shown contradictory results.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2822 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
PREVENTION

Serial fetal echocardiographic studies demonstrate that in some
fetuses, HLHS may be a progressive in utero lesion, beginning with
simple valvar aortic stenosis in mid-­gestation. The decreased flow
through the stenotic aortic valve reduces flow through the LV during
development, resulting in gradual ventricular chamber hypoplasia.
The potential for preventing this hypoplasia has been demonstrated
by performing in utero aortic balloon valvuloplasty in mid-­gestation
fetuses (Fig. 480.13). Early results are encouraging, although even if
the aortic valve is successfully opened, adequate ventricular growth
occurs in only ∼50% of patients. At present, this procedure is regarded
as experimental.
Because of the high mortality of HLHS with an intact or restrictive
atrial septum, in utero attempts to improve atrial mixing with either
fetal atrial septoplasty or atrial stent placement are undergoing clinical
investigation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

480.11 Abnormal Positions of the Heart
and the Heterotaxy Syndromes
(Asplenia, Polysplenia)
Daniel Bernstein

organs and lung lobation are reversed, an arrangement known as
situs inversus occurs: the left atrium is on the right and the right
atrium on the left. If the visceroatrial situs cannot be readily determined, a condition known as situs indeterminus or heterotaxia
exists. The two major heterotaxy syndromes are asplenia syndrome
(right isomerism or bilateral right-­sidedness), which is associated
with a centrally located liver, absent spleen, and two morphologic
right lungs (Figs. 480.15 and 480.16), and polysplenia syndrome
(left isomerism or bilateral left-­sidedness), which is associated with
multiple small spleens, absence of the intrahepatic portion of the
inferior vena cava, and two morphologic left lungs (Figs. 480.17
and 480.18). The heterotaxia syndromes are usually associated with
severe congenital heart lesions: ASD, VSD, atrioventricular septal defect, hypoplasia of one of the ventricles, pulmonary stenosis
or atresia, and anomalous systemic venous or pulmonary venous
return (Table 480.2).
Human heterotaxia syndromes may be related to disorders in both
motile and primary cilia function and in utero left-­right axis development. Genes involved in heterotaxy syndromes, including NODAL
(known asymmetric gene), and those influenced by NODAL such as the
TGF-­β superfamily (LEFTY2) and Pitx2, have been implicated in the

A Situs solitus

Classification and diagnosis of abnormal cardiac position are best
performed through a segmental approach, with the position of the
viscera and atria defined first, then the ventricles, followed by the
great vessels (Fig. 480.14). Determination of visceroatrial situs
can be made by radiographic demonstration of the position of the
abdominal organs and the tracheal bifurcation for recognition of
the right and left bronchi and by echocardiography. The atrial situs
is usually similar to the situs of the viscera and lungs. In situs solitus the viscera are in their normal positions (stomach and spleen
on the left, liver on the right), the three-­lobed right lung is on the
right, and the two-­lobed left lung on the left; the right atrium is on
the right, and the left atrium is on the left. When the abdominal

B Situs inversus totalis

Lung
Heart
RA

LA

LA

RA

Liver
Stomach

Spleen

C Left isomerism

D Right isomerism

(polysplenia)

(asplenia)

Uterine wall
LA

LA

RA

RA

Fig. 480.14 Variations in thoracoabdominal situs in congenital heart
Fetal chest
wall
Fetal LV

Fig. 480.13 Fetal treatment of critical aortic stenosis to prevent

development of hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Fetal ultrasound
showing insertion of a needle (arrowheads) via the maternal abdominal wall, through the uterus and the fetal chest wall, and into the
fetal left ventricle (LV). A balloon catheter is next inserted via the needle into the left ventricular chamber and across the stenotic aortic
valve. The balloon is inflated to dilate the valve, and the catheter and
needle are removed. (Courtesy Dr. Stanton Perry, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA.)

disease. A, Situs solitus: On the right side there is a three-­lobed lung,
a right atrium (with superior and inferior vena cava entering), and the
liver; on the left side there is a two-­lobed lung, a left atrium (with pulmonary veins entering), the stomach, and the spleen. B, Situs inversus
totalis: All the structures are mirror-­image reversed: On the right side
there is a two-­lobed lung, a left atrium, the stomach, and the spleen;
on the left side there is a three-­lobed lung, a right atrium, and the liver.
C, Left isomerism (polysplenia): There are two left sides: On the right
side there is a two-­lobed lung and a structure that resembles the left
atrium; on the left side there is also a two-­lobed lung and a structure
that resembles the left atrium; there is usually a midline liver and stomach and multiple small spleens. D, Right isomerism (asplenia): There
are two right sides: On the right side there is a three-­lobed lung and a
structure that resembles the right atrium; on the left side there is also a
three-­lobed lung and a structure that resembles the right atrium; there
is usually a midline liver and stomach and an absent spleen. (Adapted
from Fliegauf M, Benzing T, Omran H. When cilia go bad: cilia defects
and ciliopathies. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2007;8:880–893, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2823

Apex

DAo
Liver

Liver

A

B

Fig. 480.17 A, Coronal T1-­weighted MRI of a patient with heterotaxy
syndrome (polysplenia) demonstrates a bilateral hyparterial bronchial
branching pattern (arrows) and left upper quadrant spleens. B, More
posterior coronal T1-­weighted MRI shows left azygos-­hemiazygos continuation to the left superior vena cava and right thoracic aorta. (From
Applegate KE, Goske MJ, Pierce G, Murphy D. Situs revisited: imaging
of the heterotaxy syndrome. Radiographics. 1999;19:837–852, Fig. 4.)

S

Fig. 480.15 X-ray from asplenic male neonate with right isomerism.
The liver is transverse, the stomach (S) is on the right, and the heart is
midline, but the base to apex axis points to the left. DAo, Descending
aorta. (Modified from Perloff JK, Marelli AJ. Perloff’s Clinical Recognition of Congenital Heart Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012:
Fig. 3-­31, p. 32.)

a

A
R

L

A

A

L

S

L
S

S
R

C

S

L
C

C

S

S
S

B
Fig. 480.18 Left isomerism with polysplenia. Contrast-­
enhanced

B
Fig. 480.16 Right isomerism with asplenia. Noncontrast-­enhanced

CT scan of a female with primary ciliary dyskinesia demonstrates features of right isomerism with asplenia. A, Large azygous vein arch is
noted, which compensates for the inferior vena cava interruption. B, CT
scan through the upper abdomen demonstrates midline liver (L), dextrogastria (s), and absent spleen. Bilateral renal cysts (C) are also noted.
(From Chmura K, Chan ED, Noone PG, Zariwala M, Winn RA, Knowles
MR, Iseman MD, Gardner EM. A middle-aged woman with recurrent
respiratory infections. Respiration. 2005;72(4):427–430.)

computed tomography scan of a male with primary ciliary dyskinesia
demonstrates features of left isomerism with polysplenia. A, Note bilateral superior vena cavae at the level of the aortic arch (a). The right
superior vena cava is enhanced after intravenous contrast material administration through a right antecubital vein. Left-­sided superior vena
cava indicated by arrow. B, Upper abdomen image demonstrates left
upper quadrant splenules (S). (From Kennedy MP, Omran H, Leigh
MW, et al. Congenital heart disease and other heterotaxic defects in
a large cohort of patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia. Circulation.
2007;11:2814–2821, Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2824 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 480.2  Comparison of Cardiosplenic Heterotaxy Syndromes
FEATURE

ASPLENIA (RIGHT ISOMERISM)

POLYSPLENIA (LEFT ISOMERISM)

Spleen

Absent

Multiple

Sidedness (isomerism)

Bilateral right

Bilateral left

Lungs

Bilateral trilobar with eparterial bronchi

Bilateral bilobar with hyparterial bronchi

Sex

Male (65%)

Female ≥ male

Right-­sided stomach

Yes

Less common

Symmetric liver

Yes

Yes

Partial intestinal rotation or malrotation

Yes

Yes

Risk for midgut volvulus

Yes

Yes

Dextrocardia (%)

30–40

30–40

Pulmonary blood flow

Decreased (usually)

Increased (usually)

Severe cyanosis

Yes

No

Transposition of great arteries (%)

60–75

15

Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (%)

70–80

Rare

Common atrioventricular valve (%)

80–90

20–40

Single ventricle (%)

40–50

10–15

Absent inferior vena cava with azygos
continuation

No

Characteristic

Bilateral superior venae cavae

Yes

Yes

Other common defects

PA, PS, right-­sided aortic arch

Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return,
ventricular septal defect, double-­outlet right
ventricle

Risk of pneumococcal sepsis

Yes

Yes

Howell-­Jolly and Heinz bodies, pitted
erythrocytes

Yes

No

Risk of nosocomial infection

Yes

Yes

Absent gallbladder; biliary atresia

No

Yes

PA, Pulmonary atresia; PS, pulmonary stenosis.

development of heterotaxia syndromes (Fig. 480.19 and Table 480.3).
Diagnostic gene panels are available to identify a possible genetic basis.
The next segment is localization of the ventricles, which depends
on the direction of development of the embryonic cardiac loop. Initial protrusion of the loop to the right (d-­loop) carries the future RV
anteriorly and to the right, whereas the LV remains posterior and on
the left (the normal relationship). With situs solitus, a d-­loop yields
normal atrioventricular connections (right atrium connecting to
RV, left atrium to LV). Protrusion of the loop to the left (l-­loop)
carries the future RV to the left and the LV to the right. In this case,
in the presence of situs solitus, the right atrium connects with the
LV and the left atrium with the RV (ventricular inversion).
The final segment is that of the great vessels. With each type of
cardiac loop, the ventricular-­arterial relationships may be regarded as
either normal (RV to pulmonary artery, LV to aorta); transposed (RV
to aorta, LV to pulmonary artery); or in the event of a double-­outlet
ventricle, either normally related or malposed. A further classification can be based on the position of the aorta (normally to the right
and posterior) relative to the pulmonary artery. In transposition, the

aorta is usually anterior and either to the right of the pulmonary artery
(d-­transposition) or to the left (l-­transposition).
These segmental relationships can usually be determined by echocardiographic studies demonstrating both atrioventricular and ventriculoarterial relationships. The clinical manifestations of these
syndromes of abnormal cardiac position are determined primarily by
their associated cardiovascular anomalies.
Dextrocardia occurs when the heart is in the right side of the chest.
Levocardia (the normal situation) is present when the heart is in the
left side of the chest. Dextrocardia without associated situs inversus
or levocardia in the presence of situs inversus is most often complicated by other severe cardiac malformations. Surveys of older children
and adults indicate that dextrocardia with situs inversus and normally
related great arteries (“mirror-­image” dextrocardia) is often associated
with a functionally normal heart, although congenital heart disease of
a less severe nature is common.
Anatomic or functional abnormalities of the lungs, diaphragm,
and thoracic cage may result in displacement of the heart to the right
(dextroposition). In this case, however, the cardiac apex is pointed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 480 u Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease: Lesions Associated with Increased Pulmonary Blood Flow 2825
Stages

Left
Nodal flow

First:
breaking of LR
symmetry at early
embryonic stages

RA
NVPs

Nodal
SHH

PKD2

LRD

crown cells

Notch

crown cells

pit cells
[Ca2+]

GDF1

Second:
transmission of
asymmetric signals
from the node
to LPM

ActRIIB

CFC1
AIK4

Smad2
Lefty1

Third:
asymmetric gene
expression in the left
LPM

FoxH1
nucleus
Nodal

right LPM

left LPM
Lefty2

Fourth:
LR asymmetric
morphogenesis of the
internal organs

Pitx2
(organ primordia)

Phenotypes

Genes with human variants

The embryonic LR development pathway
Right

DNAI1, DNAAF3, BNAH5, TXNDC3,
DNAH11, DNAI2, DNAAF2, DNAAF1,
CCDC39, CCDC40, DNAL1, CCDC103,
HEATR2, LRRC6, CCDC114, ZMYND10,
ARMC4, DYX1C1, D21ORF59, SPAG1
CCDC151
INVS, NPHP3, ANKS6
CEP290
PKD2
BBS2, BBS8, LZTFL1
ARL2BP
HES7
CCDC11
C1ORF88

PCD, SI or HTX

MEGF8
ZIC3
NEK8
NPHP4
EPB41L5
NEK2, ROCK2, TGFBR2
UVRAG, GALNT11
NODAL
GDF1
CFC1
ACVR2B
SMAD2

NPHP, SI or HTX
oculo-renal form of JSRD, SI
PKD2, SI or HTX
BBS, SI
RP, SI
SCDO4, SI
SI, HTX, CHD
SI, cystic kidneys and liver
fibrosis; DORV
CRPT2, SI, TGA, DEX
HTX, SI, TGA, CHD, VACTERL association
RHPD2, HTX
HTX, DEX, TGA, DORV, AVSD
HTX and holoprosencephaly
HTX
HTX
HTX, pulmonary valve atresia
RI
HTX, TGA, DORV
HTX
DEX, PS

NUP188

HTX

MED13L

TGA and mental retardation

FOXH1

TGA

SESN1

HTX

CITED2

DEX, CHD

NODAL

HTX, pulmonary valve atresia

LEFTY2

LI, CHD

NKX2-5

HTX, ASD
DEX
HTX, AVSD
DEX, TGA, PS, abdominal SI, bilateral
keratoconus and sensorineural hearing loss

GATA4
CRELD1
SHROOM3

Fig. 480.19 Pathway of left-­right (LR) development in the mouse embryo, list of genes associated with human LR asymmetry disorders, and correspond-

ing phenotypes in humans. LRD-­containing monocilia generate leftward nodal flow, and polycystin 2–containing cilia sense nodal flow and initiate an asymmetric calcium signal, which induces nodal expression around the node. Nodal signaling is involved in asymmetric morphogenesis by inducing expression
of the nodal-­responsive genes (NODAL, LEFTY2, and PITX2) in the left lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) and expression of LEFTY1 at the midline. Pathogenic
variants of genes associated with ciliopathies and nodal signal transduction pathway have been identified in human LR asymmetry disorders. Full arrows
indicate a direct positive effect on gene expression, dotted arrows indicate an indirect effect, and lines indicate inhibition. ASD, Atrial septal defect; AVSD,
atrioventricular septal defects; BBS, Bardet-­Biedl syndrome; CHD, congenital heart disease; CRPT2, Carpenter syndrome 2; DEX, dextrocardia; DORV,
double-­outlet right ventricle; HTX, heterotaxy; JSRD, Joubert syndrome–related disorders; LI, left isomerism; NPHP, nephronophthisis; NVPs, nodal vesicular parcels; PCD, primary ciliary dyskinesia; PKD2, polycystic kidney disease 2; PS, pulmonary stenosis; RA, retinoic acid; RHPD2, renal-­hepatic-­pancreatic
dysplasia 2; RI, right isomerism; RP, retinitis pigmentosa; SCDO4, spondylocostal dysostosis 4; SHH, sonic hedgehog; SI, situs inversus; TGA, transposition
of the great arteries. (From Deng H, Xia H, Deng S. Genetic basis of human left-­right asymmetry disorders. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2014;16:e19, Fig 1.)

Table 480.3  Ciliopathies with Heterotaxy Defects
CILIOPATHY

FEATURES

GENE(S)

Primary ciliary
dyskinesia

Bronchiectasis, sinusitis,
otitis media, infertility,
situs defects

AK7, ARMC4, C21orf59, CCDC103, CCDC114, CCDC151, Dextrocardia; heterotaxy
CCDC39, CCDC40, CCDC65, CCNO, DNAAF1,
spectrum heart defects in
DNAAF2, DNAAF3, DNAAF5, DNAH11, DNAH5,
∼12%; heterotaxy not thought
DNAH6, DNAI2, DNAL1, DNAJB13, DRC1, DYX1C1,
to occur with genes associated
GAS8, HEATR2, HYDIN, LRRC6, MCIDAS, NME8,
with central pair or radial spoke
PIH1D3, RPGR, TXNDC3, RSPH1, RSPH3, RSPH4A,
RSPH9, SPAG1, TTC25, ZMYND10

CARDIAC DEFECTS

Meckel-­Gruber
syndrome

Renal cysts, CNS anomalies
(encephalocele),
polydactyly, hepatic
fibrosis, congenital heart
defects

MKS1, TMEM216, TMEM67, CEP290, RPGRIP1L,
CC2D2A, NPHP3, TCTN2, B9D1, B9D2, TMEM231,
KIF14, TMEM107

Situs inversus; heterotaxy; HLHS

Joubert and related
syndromes

Hypoplasia of the
cerebellar vermis (molar
tooth sign), dysregulated
breathing pattern,
retinal dystrophy, renal
anomalies

AH1, C5ORF42, CC2D2A, CSPP1, TMEM216, NPHP1,
CEP290, TMEM67, RPGRIP1L, INPP5E, TCTN2, MKS1,
CEP104, CEP120, CEP41, KIAA0556, PDE6D, PIBF1,
TCTN1, TCTN3, ARL13B, CEP41, KIAA0586, TMEM237,
TMEM231, TMEM138, KIAA0753, TMEM107, KIF7,
OFD1, C2CD3, IFT172, ARL13B, ZNF423, TTC21B,
PDE60, POC18, B9D2, B9D1

Laterality defects; heart defects,
including septal defects, aortic
valve anomalies, coarctation;
in some cases, associated with
features of OFD

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2826 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 480.3  Ciliopathies with Heterotaxy Defects—cont’d
CILIOPATHY

FEATURES

GENE(S)

CARDIAC DEFECTS

Short rib thoracic
dysplasias,
including Jeune
chondrodysplasia,
Saldino-­Mainzer

Skeletal dysplasia; thoracic
deformities; polydactyly;
renal cysts; retinitis
pigmentosa

IFT80, DYNC2H1, TTC21B, WDR19, NEK1, WDR35,
WDR60, IFT140, IFT172, WDR34, CEP120, KIAA0586,
DYNC2LI1, IFT52, TCTEX1D2

Rare; septal defects, laterality
defects

Carpenter syndrome

Acrocephaly;
polysyndactyly,
hypogenitalism, obesity,
congenital heart defects

RAB23, MEGF8, RAB23

PDA, PS, VSD, situs inversus,
heterotaxy

HLHS, Hypoplastic left heart syndrome; OFD, oral-­facial-­digital; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PS, pulmonary stenosis; and VSD, ventricular septal defect.
Modified from Pierpont ME, Brueckner M, Chung WK, et al. Genetic basis for congenital heart disease: revisited: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2018;138(21):e653–e711, Table 6.

normally to the left, as opposed to dextrocardia, where the cardiac apex
is pointed to the right or anteriorly. This anatomic position is less often
associated with congenital heart lesions, although hypoplasia of a lung
may be accompanied by anomalous pulmonary venous return from
that lung (scimitar syndrome; see Chapter 475.4).
The ECG is difficult to interpret in the presence of lesions with
discordant atrial, ventricular, and great vessel anatomy. Diagnosis
usually requires detailed echocardiographic and sometimes MRI,
CT, or cardiac catheterization studies. The prognosis and treatment
of patients with one of the cardiac positional anomalies are determined by the underlying defects and are covered in their respective chapters. Asplenia increases the risk of serious infections, such
as bacterial (usually pneumococcal) sepsis, and thus requires daily
antibiotic prophylaxis. Patients with polysplenia frequently have
poor splenic function and also require prophylaxis against bacterial sepsis. Patients with heterotaxia are also at increased risk of
intestinal malrotation and volvulus and of ciliary dyskinesia and
associated pulmonary complications (see Chapters 101.3 and 455).

esophagogram, MRI, or CT scan, the esophagus is indented on its
right border at the level of the aortic arch.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Clinical Manifestations

Chapter 481

Other Congenital
Heart and Vascular
Malformations
481.1 Anomalies of the Aortic Arch
Daniel Bernstein

RIGHT AORTIC ARCH

In this abnormality, the aorta curves to the right and, if it descends
on the right side of the vertebral column, is usually associated with
other cardiac malformations. It is found in 20% of cases of tetralogy of Fallot and is also common in truncus arteriosus. A right
aortic arch without other cardiac anomalies is not associated with
symptoms. It can often be visualized on the chest radiograph. The
trachea is deviated slightly to the left of the midline rather than
to the right, as in the presence of a normal left arch. On a barium

VASCULAR RINGS

Congenital abnormalities of the aortic arch and its major branches result
in the formation of vascular rings around the trachea and esophagus with
varying degrees of compression (Table 481.1). The origin of these lesions
can best be appreciated by reviewing the embryology of the aortic arch (see
Fig. 469.1). The most common anomalies include (1) double aortic arch
(Fig. 481.1A), (2) right aortic arch with a left ligamentum arteriosum, (3)
anomalous innominate artery arising farther to the left on the arch than
usual, (4) anomalous left carotid artery arising farther to the right than
usual and passing anterior to the trachea, (5) anomalous right subclavian
artery, and (6) anomalous left pulmonary artery (vascular sling). In the latter anomaly, the abnormal vessel arises from an elongated main pulmonary
artery or from the right pulmonary artery. It courses between and compresses the trachea and the esophagus. Associated congenital heart disease
may be present in 5–50% of patients, depending on the vascular anomaly.
If the vascular ring produces compression of the trachea and/or esophagus, symptoms are frequently present during infancy. Chronic wheezing is exacerbated by crying, feeding, and flexion of the neck. Extension
of the neck tends to relieve the noisy respiration. Choking on solid
food and vomiting may also be symptoms. Affected infants may have
a brassy cough, pneumonia, or rarely, sudden death from aspiration.

Diagnosis

Standard radiographic examination is not usually helpful. In the past,
performing a barium esophagogram was the standard method of diagnosis (Fig. 481.2), which has been replaced by echocardiography in
combination with either MRI or CT (Fig. 481.3). Cardiac catheterization is reserved for cases with associated anomalies or in rare cases
where these other modalities are not diagnostic. Bronchoscopy is helpful in more severe cases to determine the extent of airway narrowing
and whether additional surgery is required on the airway.

Treatment

Surgery is advised for symptomatic patients who have evidence of tracheal compression. The anterior vessel is usually divided in patients with
a double aortic arch (see Fig. 481.1B). Compression produced by a right
aortic arch and left ligamentum arteriosum is relieved by division of
the latter. Anomalous innominate or carotid arteries cannot be divided;
attaching the adventitia of these vessels to the sternum usually relieves
the tracheal compression. An anomalous left pulmonary artery is corrected by division at its origin and reanastomosis to the main pulmonary
artery after it has been brought in front of the trachea. Severe tracheomalacia, if present, may require reconstruction of the trachea as well.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 481 u Other Congenital Heart and Vascular Malformations

2827

Table 481.1  Vascular Rings
LESION

SYMPTOMS

PLAIN FILM

Stridor
Respiratory
distress
Swallowing
dysfunction
Reflex apnea

AP—wider base of
heart
Lat.—narrowed
trachea
displaced
forward at C3-­C4

BARIUM
SWALLOW

BRONCHOSCOPY

MRI ECHO

TREATMENT

Bilateral indentation
of esophagus

Bilateral tracheal
compression—
both pulsatile

Diagnostic

Ligate and divide
smaller arch
(usually left)

RIGHT ARCH AND LIGAMENTUM/DUCTUS
Respiratory
AP—tracheal
distress
deviation to left
Swallowing
(right arch)
dysfunction

Bilateral indentation
of esophagus R > L

Bilateral tracheal
compression—
r. pulsatile

Diagnostic

Ligate ligamentum
or ductus

ANOMALOUS INNOMINATE
Cough
Stridor
Reflex apnea

AP—normal
Lat.—anterior
tracheal
compression

Normal

Pulsatile anterior
tracheal
compression

Unnecessary

Conservative
apnea, then
suspend

Normal

AP—oblique defect
upward to right
Lat.—small defect
on right posterior
wall

Usually normal

Diagnostic

Ligate artery

AP—low l. hilum,
r. emphysema/
atelectasis
Lat.—anterior
bowing of right
bronchus and
trachea

±Anterior
indentation above
carina between
esophagus and
trachea

Tracheal
displacement to
left
Compression
of right main
bronchus

Diagnostic

Detach and
reanastomose to
main pulmonary
artery in front of
trachea

DOUBLE ARCH

ABERRANT RIGHT SUBCLAVIAN
Occasional
swallowing
dysfunction

PULMONARY SLING
Expiratory stridor
Respiratory
distress

AP, Anteroposterior; L and l., left; Lat., lateral; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; R and r., right.
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004:88.

L. common
carotid artery
Innomin.
artery

L. subclavian a.
Ant. segment
of aortic arch

L. common
carotid artery
Innominate
artery

L. subclavian art.

Sutured
stumps

Aorta

Aorta
Pulm

art

Pulm.

a

Obliterated
duct. arterios.

Fig. 481.1 Double aortic arch. A, Small anterior

A

B

segment of the double aortic arch (most common
type). B, Operative procedure for release of the vascular ring. L., Left; a. and art., artery; ant., anterior;
innom., innominate; duct. arterios., ductus arteriosus; pulm., pulmonary.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2828 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 481.2  Congenital Anomalies of Coronary Arteries
Unassociated with Congenital Heart Disease

A

B

Fig. 481.2 Double aortic arch in an infant age 5 mo. A, Anteroposte-

rior view. The barium-­filled esophagus is constricted on both sides. B,
Lateral view. The esophagus is displaced forward. The anterior arch was
the smaller and was divided at surgery.

ANOMALOUS AORTIC ORIGIN
• Eccentric ostium within an aortic sinus
• Ectopic ostium above an aortic sinus
• Conus artery from the right aortic sinus
• Circumflex coronary artery from the right aortic sinus or from the
right coronary artery
• Origin of left anterior descending and circumflex coronary arteries
from separate ostia in the left aortic sinus (absence of left main
coronary artery)
• Atresia of the left main coronary artery
• Origin of the left anterior descending coronary artery from the
right aortic sinus or from the right coronary artery
• Origin of the right coronary artery from the left aortic sinus, from
posterior aortic sinus, or from left coronary artery
• Origin of a single coronary artery from the right or left aortic sinus
• Anomalous origin from a noncardiac systemic artery
ANOMALOUS AORTIC ORIGIN WITH ANOMALOUS PROXIMAL
COURSE
• Acute proximal angulation
• Ectopic right coronary artery passing between aorta and
pulmonary trunk
• Ectopic left main coronary artery
• Between aorta and pulmonary trunk
• Anterior to the pulmonary trunk
• Posterior to the aorta
• Within the ventricular septum (intramyocardial)
• Ectopic left anterior descending coronary artery that is anterior,
posterior, or between the aorta and pulmonary trunk
ANOMALOUS ORIGIN OF A CORONARY ARTERY FROM THE
PULMONARY TRUNK
• Left main coronary artery
• Left anterior descending coronary artery
• Right coronary artery
• Both right and left coronary arteries
• Circumflex coronary artery
• Accessory coronary artery

*

RMSB

From Perloff JK, Marelli J. Perloff’s Clinical Recognition of Congenital Heart Disease,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012: Table 32-3, p. 532.

LMSB

ANOMALOUS ORIGIN OF THE LEFT CORONARY
ARTERY FROM THE PULMONARY ARTERY
Fig. 481.3 Double aortic arch in a 12-year-old. Superior (bird’s eye

view) three-dimensional volume-rendered CT image shows the larger
dominant arch (arrowhead) on the right side, coursing over the right
mainstem bronchus (RMSB). There is mild indentation of the trachea.
The smaller left arch (asterisk) courses over the left mainstem bronchus
(LMSB). (From Madueme PC: Computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging of vascular rings and other things: a pictorial review.
Pediatr Radiol 2022;52:1839–1848.(Fig. 2, p. 1840.)

481.2 Anomalous Origin of the Coronary
Arteries
Daniel Bernstein
Table 481.2 provides a classification system for coronary artery anomalies. Although many of these are isolated, congenital anomalies of the
coronary arteries may also be seen in patients with congenital heart
disease (tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of the great arteries, congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries, single ventricle,
tricuspid atresia, truncus arteriosus, quadricuspid or bicuspid aortic
valves, double-­outlet ventricle). In addition, acquired lesions of the
coronary arteries associated with existing congenital heart disease may
develop because of alterations in blood flow or postoperative stenoses,
especially in patients whose surgery involves the aortic root.

In anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary
artery (ALCAPA), the blood supply to the left ventricular (LV) myocardium is severely compromised. Soon after birth, as pulmonary
artery pressure falls, perfusion pressure to the left coronary artery
(LCA) becomes inadequate; myocardial ischemia, infarction, and
fibrosis result. In some cases, interarterial collateral anastomoses
develop between the right coronary artery (RCA) and LCA. Blood flow
in the LCA is then reversed, and it empties into the pulmonary artery,
a condition known as myocardial steal syndrome. The LV becomes
dilated, and its performance is decreased. Mitral insufficiency is a frequent complication secondary to a dilated valve ring or infarction of
a papillary muscle. Localized aneurysms may also develop in the LV
free wall. Rare patients have adequate myocardial blood flow during
childhood and, later in life, a continuous murmur and a small left-­to-­
right shunt via the dilated coronary system (aorta to RCA to LCA to
pulmonary artery).

Clinical Manifestations

Evidence of heart failure becomes apparent within the first few months
of life and may be exacerbated by respiratory infection. Recurrent
attacks of discomfort, restlessness, irritability, sweating, dyspnea, and
pallor occur and represent an infantile version of angina pectoris.
Diagnosis is often made only after a chest x-­ray is obtained looking
for other sources of irritability and rapid breathing. Cardiac enlargement ranges from moderate to massive. A gallop rhythm is common.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 481 u Other Congenital Heart and Vascular Malformations

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

2829

Fig. 481.4 Electrocardiogram of a 2-­mo-­old with anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery. Myocardial infarction is
evidenced by abnormal Q waves in leads I and aVL and in the anterolateral precordial leads (V3, V4, V5, V6). There is also ST elevation in leads V4 and
V5, a sign of ongoing ischemia. Another sign of ALCAPA is the diminution or loss of R waves in the midprecordial leads (V2, V3).

Murmurs may be of the nonspecific ejection type or may be holosystolic because of mitral insufficiency. Older patients with abundant
intercoronary anastomoses may have continuous murmurs and less LV
dysfunction. However, during older childhood and adolescence, they
may experience angina during exercise. Rare patients with an anomalous RCA may also have such clinical findings, especially if the RCA
supplies the inferoposterior portion of the LV (right dominant system).

includes standard therapy for heart failure (diuretics, angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors, and β blockers).
Surgical treatment consists of detaching the anomalous coronary
artery from the pulmonary artery and anastomosing it to the aorta to
establish normal myocardial perfusion. In patients who have already
sustained a significant myocardial infarction, cardiac transplantation
may be the only option (see Chapter 492.1).

Diagnosis

ANOMALOUS ORIGIN OF THE RIGHT CORONARY
ARTERY FROM THE PULMONARY ARTERY

Radiographic examination confirms cardiomegaly. The electrocardiogram (ECG) can resemble the pattern described in anterolateral wall
myocardial infarction in adults, although this pattern can vary over the
first weeks of life. A QR pattern followed by flattened or inverted T
waves is typically seen in leads I and aVL (Fig. 481.4). The anterolateral precordial leads (V3-­V6) may show deep Q waves or elevated ST
segments and inverted T waves (the more typical adult findings of a
lateral myocardial infarction) or may be relatively normal. Decreased
or absent R waves may be seen over the mid-­precordial leads (V3, V4).
Given the subtlety of these ECG findings and that an infarct pattern
is not usually expected in infants, a high index of suspicion should be
maintained for patients with the symptoms described earlier. Two-­
dimensional (2D) echocardiography with color Doppler usually confirms the diagnosis; however, in rare cases, echocardiography may not
be definitive in diagnosing this condition. On 2D imaging alone, the
LCA may appear as though it is arising from the aorta. Color Doppler
ultrasound has improved the accuracy of diagnosis of this lesion, demonstrating the presence of retrograde flow in the LCA. If needed, CT or
MRI can confirm the origin of the coronary arteries. Cardiac catheterization is also diagnostic; aortography shows immediate opacification
of the RCA only. In patients who have developed collaterals, this vessel
is large and tortuous. After filling of the intercoronary anastomoses,
the LCA is opacified, and contrast can be seen to enter the pulmonary artery. Pulmonary arteriography should opacify the origin of the
anomalous LCA. Selective left ventriculography usually demonstrates a
dilated LV that empties poorly and mitral regurgitation.

Treatment and Prognosis

Untreated, death often occurs from heart failure within the first 6
months of life. Those who survive without surgery generally have
abundant intercoronary collateral anastomoses. Medical management

Anomalous origin of the RCA from the pulmonary artery is not usually manifested in infancy or early childhood. The LCA is enlarged,
whereas the RCA is thin walled and mildly enlarged. In early infancy,
perfusion of the RCA is from the pulmonary artery, whereas later, perfusion is from collaterals of the left coronary vessels. Angina and sudden death can occur in adolescence or adulthood. When recognized,
this anomaly should be repaired by reanastomosis of the RCA to the
aorta.

ANOMALOUS AORTIC ORIGIN OF A CORONARY
ARTERY

In anomalous aortic origin of a coronary artery (AAOCA), one or both
coronary arteries arise from their nonusual sinus (e.g., LCA from the
right sinus of Valsalva) or high on the aorta, above the sinotubular
junction. There are multiple anatomic variations, with different physiologic consequences, and therefore with different risks of coronary
ischemia, arrhythmia, and potentially sudden death. Fortunately, most
variants of AAOCA are benign, and the challenge for clinicians is to
recognize which variants place their patient at a greater risk of a life-­
threatening event.
The aberrant artery may be a left, right, or major branch coronary artery.
The site of origin may be the wrong sinus of Valsalva (anomalous origin of a
coronary artery from the opposite sinus, ACAOS) or a proximal coronary
artery. The ostium may be hypoplastic, slitlike, or of normal caliber. The
aberrant vessel may pass anteriorly, posteriorly, or between the aorta and
right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT); it may take an intramural course,
tunneling in the conal or interventricular septal tissue. Obstruction resulting from hypoplasia of the ostia, tunneling between the aorta and RVOT
or interventricular septum, and acute angulation produce myocardial ischemia and infarction. Although unobstructed vessels usually produce no

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2830 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 481.3  Classification of Coronary Anomalies Based
on Ischemia
ISCHEMIA

CLASSIFICATION

Absence of ischemia

Most anomalies (split RCA,
ectopic RCA from right cusp;
ectopic RCA from left cusp)

Episodic ischemia

Anomalous origin of a coronary
artery from the opposite sinus
(ACAOS); coronary artery
fistulas; myocardial bridge

Typical ischemia

Anomalous left coronary artery
from the pulmonary artery
(ALCAPA); coronary ostial
atresia or severe stenosis

RCA, Right coronary artery.
From Mehran R, Dangas GD. Coronary angiography and intravascular imaging.
In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 20.8, p. 385.

symptoms (Table 481.3), patients with coronary obstruction may initially
present with an acute coronary event, either acute myocardial infarction,
ventricular arrhythmias, angina pectoris, or syncope; sudden death may
occur, especially in young athletes.
Diagnostic modalities include ECG, 2D echocardiography, CT or MRI,
radionuclide perfusion scan, and cardiac catheterization with selective
coronary angiography. Exercise stress testing can play an important role
in assessing risk (e.g., in patients who present only with chest pain), but
is usually contraindicated in those who present with a sudden cardiac
arrest, documented ischemia, or ventricular arrhythmia.
Treatment is indicated for obstructed vessels, for patients with symptoms, and for those who present with a sudden cardiac event and consists of reanastomosis of the aberrant vessel to the correct aortic sinus.
The management of asymptomatic patients with ectopic coronary origin without obstruction remains controversial, as the ability to predict
risk is still incompletely understood. Management decisions should be
based on the specific anatomy, results of laboratory investigations, and
shared decision-­making with patients and their families after careful
explanation of risks and benefits. Surgery is not without complications
and should be performed at centers experienced in AAOCA surgery.
The risk appears to be highest with anomalous LCA from the right
sinus of Valsalva with interarterial course (see Table 481.3); however,
there are patients with anomalous RCA who are also at risk.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

481.3 Pulmonary Arteriovenous Fistula
Daniel Bernstein
Fistulous vascular communications in the lungs may be large and localized
or multiple, scattered, and small. The most common form of this unusual
condition is Osler-­Weber-­Rendu syndrome (hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia type I), which is also associated with angiomas of the nasal and
buccal mucous membranes, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, or liver. Pathogenic
variants in the endoglin gene, a cell surface component of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-­β receptor complex, cause this syndrome. The
usual communication is between the pulmonary artery and pulmonary
vein; direct communication between the pulmonary artery and left atrium
is extremely rare. Desaturated blood in the pulmonary artery is shunted
through the fistula into the pulmonary vein, thus bypassing the lungs, and
then enters the left side of the heart, resulting in systemic arterial desaturation and sometimes clinically detectable cyanosis. The shunt across the
fistula is at low pressure and resistance, so pulmonary artery pressure is
normal; cardiomegaly and heart failure are not present.
The clinical manifestations depend on the magnitude of the shunt.
Large fistulas are associated with dyspnea, cyanosis, clubbing, a continuous murmur, and polycythemia. Hemoptysis is rare, but when it
occurs, it may be massive. Features of Osler-­Weber-­Rendu syndrome

are seen in approximately 50% of patients (or other family members)
and include recurrent epistaxis and GI tract bleeding. Transitory dizziness, diplopia, aphasia, motor weakness, or convulsions may result
from cerebral thrombosis, abscess, or paradoxical emboli. Soft systolic
or continuous murmurs may be audible over the site of the fistula. The
ECG is normal. Chest radiographs may show opacities produced by
large fistulas; multiple small fistulas may be visualized by fluoroscopy
(as abnormal pulsations), MRI, or CT. Selective pulmonary arteriography demonstrates the site, extent, and distribution of the fistulas.
Treatment consisting of excision of solitary or localized lesions by
lobectomy or wedge resection results in complete disappearance of
symptoms. In most patients, fistulas are so widespread that surgery
is not possible. Any direct communication between the pulmonary
artery and the left atrium can be obliterated.
Patients who have undergone a Glenn cavopulmonary anastomosis for cyanotic congenital heart disease (see Chapter 479.4) are also
at risk for the development of pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). In these patients the AVMs are usually multiple, and the
risk increases over time after the Glenn procedure. Pulmonary AVMs
rarely occur after full palliation by completion of the Fontan operation. This finding suggests that the pulmonary circulation requires
an as-­yet-­undetermined hepatic factor to suppress the development
of AVMs. The hallmark of the development of pulmonary AVMs is a
gradual decrease in the patient’s oxygen saturation, which is usually
lower than normal to begin with. The diagnosis can often be made with
contrast echocardiography; cardiac catheterization is the definitive
test. Completion of the Fontan circuit, so that inferior vena cava blood
flow (containing hepatic venous drainage) is routed through the lungs,
usually results in improvement or resolution of the malformations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

481.4 Ectopia Cordis
Daniel Bernstein
In the most common thoracic form of ectopia cordis, the sternum is
split and the heart protrudes outside the chest. In other forms, the heart
protrudes through the diaphragm into the abdominal cavity or may be
situated in the neck. Associated intracardiac anomalies are seen in 40%
(tetralogy of Fallot, conotruncal lesions). Pentalogy of Cantrell consists
of ectopia cordis, midline supraumbilical abdominal defect, deficiency
of the anterior diaphragm, defect of the lower sternum, and an intracardiac defect (ventricular septal defect, tetralogy of Fallot, or diverticulum
of the left ventricle). Death may occur early in life, usually from infection, cardiac failure, or hypoxemia. Surgical therapy for neonates without
overwhelmingly severe cardiac anomalies consists of covering the heart
with skin without compromising venous return or ventricular ejection.
Repair or palliation of associated defects is also necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

481.5 Diverticulum of the Left Ventricle
Daniel Bernstein
Left ventricular diverticulum is a rare anomaly in which the diverticulum protrudes into the epigastrium. The lesion may be isolated or
associated with complex cardiovascular anomalies. A pulsating mass
is usually visible and palpable in the epigastrium. Systolic or systolic-­
diastolic murmurs produced by blood flow into and out of the diverticulum may be audible over the lower part of the sternum and the
mass. The ECG shows a pattern of complete or incomplete left bundle
branch block. The chest radiograph may or may not show the mass.
Associated abnormalities include defects of the sternum, abdominal
wall, diaphragm, and pericardium (see earlier). Surgical treatment
of the diverticulum and associated cardiac defects can be performed
in selected cases. Occasionally, a diverticulum may be small and not
associated with clinical signs or symptoms. These small diverticula are
diagnosed at echocardiographic examination for other indications.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 482 u Pulmonary Hypertension

Chapter 482

Pulmonary Hypertension
482.1 Primary Pulmonary Hypertension
Daniel Bernstein and Rachel K. Hopper
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) refers to an elevated pressure in the pulmonary arteries and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality in children. The etiologies of PH are varied, but all lead to similar
symptoms and can ultimately result in right-­sided heart failure (Tables
482.1 and 482.2). PH is often characterized by progressive vascular
disease of the pulmonary arteries (pulmonary arterial hypertension
[PAH], previously called primary PH). PH occurs at any age, although
in pediatric patients the mean age at diagnosis is 7-­10 years. In patients
with idiopathic or familial PAH, females outnumber males 1.7:1; in
other patients, both genders are represented equally. Pathogenic variants in the BMPR2 gene, a member of the transforming growth factor
(TGF)-­β receptor family, on chromosome 2q33 have been identified
in 70% of patients with familial pulmonary arterial hypertension
and in 10–20% with idiopathic sporadic PAH (see Table 482.2). Other
potential disease-­causing genes include ALK1 and ENG (both associated with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia) and SMAD9, CAV1,
KCNK3, and SOX17 (associated with congenital heart disease and
PAH). TBX4 is associated with developmental lung disease and PAH.
Viral infection, such as with the vasculotropic human herpesvirus 8,
has been suggested as a trigger factor in some patients.
PAH is associated with precapillary obstruction of the pulmonary
vascular bed as a result of hyperplasia of the muscular and elastic tissues and a thickened intima of the small pulmonary arteries and arterioles (Fig. 482.1). Secondary remodeling may be found in the larger
pulmonary arteries as well. Pulmonary venoocclusive disease, mixed
precapillary and postcapillary vascular disease, may account for some
cases of PAH. Before a diagnosis of PAH can be made, other causes of
elevated pulmonary artery pressure must be eliminated; these include
chronic pulmonary parenchymal disease, persistent obstruction of the
upper airway, congenital cardiac malformations, left-­sided heart disease, recurrent pulmonary emboli, developmental lung disease, liver
disease, autoimmune disease, and moyamoya disease (see Table 482.1).
PAH accounts for nearly half of all pediatric PH (45%), with PAH associated with congenital heart disease being the most common in pediatric patients, followed by idiopathic or familial disease. PH associated
with chronic lung disease is growing to encompass a larger portion of
new cases, nearly half of all pediatric PH (49%). Bronchopulmonary
dysplasia related to prematurity and other developmental lung diseases
are increasingly recognized as contributing to PH in children (see
Table 482.2).
PH places an afterload burden on the right ventricle, which results in
right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH). Dilation of the pulmonary artery
is present, and pulmonary valve insufficiency may occur. In the later
stages of the disease, the right ventricle dilates, tricuspid insufficiency
develops as the tricuspid valve leaflets are pulled apart, and cardiac output is decreased. Arrhythmias, syncope, and sudden death are known
complications.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The predominant symptoms include exercise intolerance (dyspnea) and
fatigability; occasionally, precordial chest pain, dizziness, or headaches
are noted. Syncope may be noted in approximately 30% of pediatric
patients. Patients often undergo an incorrect evaluation and are treated
for asthma or seizures before a proper diagnosis is made. Peripheral
cyanosis may be present, especially during exercise or in patients with
a patent foramen ovale or other intracardiac communication through
which blood can shunt from right to left. In the late stages of disease,
patients may have cold extremities and a gray appearance associated

2831

with low cardiac output. Arterial oxygen-­hemoglobin saturation is
usually normal unless there is an associated intracardiac shunt. If right-­
sided heart failure has supervened, jugular venous pressure is elevated,
and hepatomegaly and edema are present. Jugular venous a waves are
present, and in those with functional tricuspid insufficiency, a conspicuous jugular cv wave and systolic hepatic pulsations are manifested.
The heart is moderately enlarged, and a right ventricular heave can be
noted. The first heart sound is often followed by an ejection click emanating from the dilated pulmonary artery. The second heart sound (S2)
is narrowly split, with a loud pulmonic component that is sometimes
booming in quality; it is frequently palpable at the upper left sternal
border. A presystolic (S4) gallop rhythm may be audible at the lower
left sternal border. The systolic murmur is soft and short and is sometimes followed by a blowing decrescendo diastolic murmur caused by
pulmonary insufficiency. In later stages, a holosystolic murmur of tricuspid insufficiency is appreciated at the lower left sternal border.

DIAGNOSIS

Chest radiographs reveal a prominent pulmonary artery and right ventricle (Fig. 482.2). The pulmonary vascularity in the hilar areas may
be prominent, in contrast to the peripheral lung fields in which pulmonary markings are decreased. The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows
RVH, often with spiked P waves. Echocardiography is used to screen
for any congenital cardiac malformations and assess right ventricular
size and function. Doppler evaluation of the tricuspid valve, if insufficiency is present, will allow estimation of the right ventricular (and
thus pulmonary arterial) systolic pressure.
At cardiac catheterization, the presence of left-­sided obstructive
lesions (pulmonary venous stenosis, mitral stenosis, restrictive cardiomyopathy) that result in pulmonary venous hypertension can be evaluated (see Chapters 476.9, 480.7, and 488.3). Elevated pulmonary artery
pressures with a normal pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and high
vascular resistance is diagnostic of PAH. If the wedge pressure is elevated and left ventricular end-­diastolic pressure (LVEDP) is normal,
obstruction at the level of the pulmonary veins, left atrium, or mitral
valve should be suspected. If LVEDP is also elevated, the diagnosis of
restrictive cardiomyopathy should be entertained. The risks associated
with cardiac catheterization are increased in severely ill patients with
PAH and should occur at centers with expertise in pediatric PH.

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Many forms of PAH are progressive, and no cure is currently available.
Figure 482.3 provides a general treatment approach to PH. Current
medical therapies are pulmonary vasodilatory agents, which relieve
symptoms, improve quality of life, and delay clinical worsening; however, they do not stop the progression of the disease. Some success
has been reported with oral calcium channel blockers (CCBs) such
as nifedipine in children who demonstrate pulmonary vasoreactivity
when these agents are administered during catheterization. Continuous intravenous infusion of the arachidonic acid metabolite prostacyclin (epoprostenol) provides relief as long as the infusion is continued
and has been shown to improve survival in children with PAH. Treprostinil, a prostacyclin analog with a longer half-­life, has also been shown
to be effective. Nebulized and oral forms of prostacyclin, as well as
other oral pulmonary vasodilators, such as endothelin receptor antagonists and phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors, have been used with
success in adults and in a small number of clinical studies in children
(Table 482.3). In patients with PH secondary to left-­sided heart disease or lung disease, pulmonary vasodilators should only be considered after optimization of the underlying condition and in consultation
with a PH expert.
Anticoagulation may be of value in patients with previous pulmonary thromboemboli; some of these patients may respond to balloon
angioplasty of narrowed pulmonary artery segments. Riociguat, a soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator, with vasorelaxation, antiproliferation,
and antifibrotic properties, has proved effective in adults with chronic
thromboembolic or idiopathic PH. Diuretics are often used to manage
right heart failure. Despite many advances, definitive therapy is still
lung transplantation (see Chapter 492.2). Palliative interventions may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2832 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 482.1  Classification of Pulmonary Hypertension
(PH)*
1.	Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
1.1	Idiopathic PAH
1.2	Heritable PAH
1.3	Drug-­ and toxin-­induced PAH
1.4	PAH associated with:
1.4.1	Connective tissue disease
1.4.2	HIV infection
1.4.3	Portal hypertension
1.4.4	Congenital heart disease
1.4.5	Schistosomiasis
1.5	PAH long-­term responders to calcium channel blockers
1.6	PAH with overt features of venous/capillaries (PVOD/PCH)
involvement
1.7	Persistent PH of the newborn syndrome
2.	Pulmonary hypertension due to left heart disease
2.1	PH due to heart failure with preserved LVEF
2.2	PH due to heart failure with reduced LVEF
2.3	Valvular heart disease
2.4	Congenital/acquired cardiovascular conditions leading to
postcapillary PH
3.	Pulmonary hypertension due to lung diseases and/or hypoxia
3.1	Obstructive lung disease
3.2	Restrictive lung disease
3.3	Other lung disease with mixed restrictive/obstructive pattern
3.4	Hypoxia without lung disease
3.5	Developmental lung disorders
4.	PH due to pulmonary artery obstructions
4.1	Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
4.2	Other pulmonary artery obstructions
5.	Pulmonary hypertension with unclear and/or multifactorial
mechanisms
5.1	Hematologic disorders
5.2	Systemic and metabolic disorders
5.3	Others
5.4	Complex congenital heart disease.
*Modified as compared with the Nice 2013 classification.
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; PVOD, pulmonary venoocclusive disease; PCH,
pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis, LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction.
From Simonneau G, Montani D, Celermajer DS, et al. Haemodynamic definitions
and updated clinical classification of pulmonary hypertension. Eur Respir J.
2019;53(1):1801913.

include atrial septostomy or a surgical Potts shunt to create a right-­to-­
left shunt as a pop-­off to allow decompression of the right ventricle (see
Fig. 482.3). In patients with severe PH and low cardiac output, the terminal event is often sudden and related to a lethal arrhythmia. Patients
with PH diagnosed in infancy, especially those in premature infants
with chronic lung disease, have a high risk of early mortality, but PH
generally improves over time if lung growth and protection from infection and injury are achieved. Infants with PH caused by pulmonary
vein stenosis often have rapid progression and high mortality.

482.2 Pulmonary Vascular Disease
(Eisenmenger Syndrome)
Daniel Bernstein and Rachel K. Hopper
The term Eisenmenger syndrome refers to patients with an intracardiac
defect or aortopulmonary connection through which blood is shunted

New vascular intimal
formation

Table 482.2  Developmental and Genetic Lung Diseases
Associated with Pulmonary Hypertension
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Down syndrome
Noonan syndrome
Alveolar capillary dysplasia (ACD) with “misalignment of veins”
(FOXF1)
Cobalamin C deficiency
Lung hypoplasia, acinar dysplasia
Surfactant protein abnormalities
Surfactant protein B deficiency
Surfactant protein C deficiency
ATP-­binding cassette A3 variants
Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1)/Nkx2.1 homeobox pathogenic
variants
T-­box transcription factor 4 (TBX4)
Pulmonary interstitial glycogenosis
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Pulmonary lymphangiectasia
Other pathogenic variants (BMPR2, ACVRL1, EIF2AK4, CAV1, ENG,
KCNK3, SMAD9, SOX17)
Adapted with data from Rosenzweig EB, Abman SH, Adatia I, et al. Paediatric
pulmonary arterial hypertension: updates on definition, classification, diagnostics and
management. Eur Respir J. 2019;53(1):1801916; and Ivy DD, Abman SH, Barst RJ et al.
Pediatric pulmonary hypertension. J Amer Coll Cardiol. 2013;62(25):Suppl D, D118–
D126, 2013.

Fig. 482.1 Vascular abnormalities associated with pulmonary arterial

hypertension: abnormal muscularization of distal and medial precapillary arteries, loss of precapillary arteries, thickening of large pulmonary
arterioles, and new vascular intimal formation that is occlusive in vessels <500-­100 μM and in plexiform lesions therein. Adv. adventitial; EC,
endothelial cell; SMC, smooth muscle cell. (From Rabinovitch M. Molecular pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Clin Invest.
2012;122:4306–4313, Fig 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 482 u Pulmonary Hypertension
partially or totally from right to left as a result of the development of
pulmonary vascular disease. This physiologic abnormality can occur
with unrepaired ventricular or atrioventricular septal defects, patent
ductus arteriosus, aortopulmonary window, or any other communication between the aorta and pulmonary artery and in many forms of
complex congenital heart disease with unrestricted pulmonary blood
flow. Pulmonary vascular disease with an isolated atrial septal defect
can occur, but this is less common and usually does not occur until late
in adulthood.

2833

In Eisenmenger syndrome, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR)
after birth either remains high or, after having decreased during
early infancy, rises thereafter because of chronic increased shear
stress on pulmonary arterioles. Factors playing a role in the rapidity of development of pulmonary vascular disease include increased
pulmonary artery pressure, increased pulmonary blood flow, and
the presence of hypoxia or hypercapnia. Early in the course of disease, PH is the result of markedly increased pulmonary blood flow
(hyperkinetic PH). This form of PH decreases with the administration of pulmonary vasodilators such as nitric oxide, or oxygen,
or both. With the development of Eisenmenger syndrome, PH is
the result of pulmonary vascular disease (obstructive pathologic
changes in the pulmonary vessels). This form of PH is usually only
minimally responsive to pulmonary vasodilators or oxygen or may
be totally unresponsive.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
PT

RA
RV

A

B

Fig. 482.2 A, Radiograph from a 3-­yr-­old child with pulmonary ar-

terial hypertension. Pulmonary vascularity is reduced. The pulmonary
trunk (PT), right atrium (RA), and right ventricle (RV) are considerably
enlarged. B, Histology of an intrapulmonary artery at necropsy shows
medial hypertrophy (arrow). (From Perloff JK, Marelli AJ. Perloff’s Clinical Recognition of Congenital Heart Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2012: Fig. 14-­17, p. 207.)

The pathologic changes of Eisenmenger syndrome occur in the
small pulmonary arterioles and muscular arteries (<300 μm) and are
graded on the basis of histologic characteristics (Heath-­Edwards
classification):
• Grade I change involves medial hypertrophy alone.
• Grade II consists of medial hypertrophy and intimal hyperplasia.
• Grade III involves near-­obliteration of the vessel lumen.
• Grade IV includes arterial dilation.
• Grades V and VI include plexiform lesions, angiomatoid formation,
and fibrinoid necrosis.
Grades IV-­VI indicate irreversible pulmonary vascular obstructive disease. Eisenmenger physiology is usually defined by an absolute
elevation in pulmonary arterial resistance to >12 Wood units (resistance units indexed to body surface area) or by a ratio of pulmonary-­
to-­systemic vascular resistance of ≥1.0.
Pulmonary vascular disease occurs more rapidly in patients with
trisomy 21 who have left-­to-­right shunts. It also complicates the
natural history of patients with elevated pulmonary venous pressure secondary to mitral stenosis or left ventricular dysfunction,

Expert referral

General: Consider diuretics,
oxygen, anticoagulation, digoxin

Acute vasoreactivity testing
+

–

Positive
Negative
Oral CCB

Lower risk

Higher risk

Improved and
sustained
reactivity

ERA or PDE5i (oral)
Oral/inhaled prostacyclin/prostacyclin agonist
Consider combination therapy
(sequential or upfront)

Epoprostenol or
treprostinil (i.v./s.c.)
Consider early combination

No

Yes
Continue
CCB

Atrial
septostomy

Potts shunt

Serial reassessment#
Lung
transplant

Fig. 482.3 6th World Symposium on Pulmonary Hypertension Consensus pediatric idiopathic/familial PAH treatment algorithm. Use of all agents

is considered off-­label in children aside from sildenafil in Europe and bosentan in age >3 yr in the United States. CCB, Calcium channel blocker;
ERA, endothelin receptor antagonist; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; IV, intravenous; PDE-­5i, phosphodiesterase-­5 inhibitor; SC, subcutaneous; PO, by mouth; #, deterioration or not meeting treatment goals. (From Rosenzweig EB, Abman SH, Adatia I, et al. Paediatric pulmonary arterial
hypertension: updates on definition, classification, diagnostics and management. Eur Respir J. 2019;53[1]:1801916.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2834 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 482.3  Summary of Drugs Used to Treat Pulmonary Hypertension*
DRUG AND MECHANISM OF ACTION

DOSES USED IN PEDIATRIC STUDIES

COMMON SIDE EFFECTS

Epoprostenol (prostacyclin [PGI2], a
potent vasodilator; also inhibits platelet
aggregation)

1-­2 ng/kg/min initially
Increase based on clinical course and
tolerance to 5-­80 ng/kg/min
Some patients may require even higher doses
Must be given by continuous infusion that is
not interrupted

Flushing, headache, nausea, diarrhea,
hypotension, chest pain, jaw pain, foot and
bone pain

Iloprost (synthetic analog of PGI2)

2.5-­5.0 μg 6-­9 times daily (limited data in
children ) via inhalation

Flushing, headache, diarrhea, hypotension, jaw
pain, exacerbation of pulmonary symptoms
(cough, wheezing)

Treprostinil (synthetic analog of PGI2)

1-­2 ng/kg/min initially
Target dose ranges from 20-­80 ng/kg/min
Given either IV or SC via continuous infusion
Longer half-­life than epoprostenol
Inhaled: 6-­54 mcg (1-­9 patient activated
breaths) every 6 hr
Oral: initially 0.125 mg 3 times daily
Target dose ranges from 1 to 10 mg 3 times
daily

Flushing, headache, diarrhea, hypotension,
jaw pain
Pain at infusion site when given SC
Inhaled form can exacerbate reactive airway
symptoms
Increased gastrointestinal side effects with oral
formulation

Selexipag (prostacyclin IP receptor agonist)

50-­1600 mcg PO twice daily; limited data in
children

Headache, pain in jaw, joints or limbs,
myalgias, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
flushing

Ambrisentan (selective endothelin EtA
receptor antagonist)

Target dose ranges from 1.25 to 10 mg daily;
use ½ dose for first mo

Flushing, headache, hypotension, fluid
retention/edema, nasopharyngitis/
congestion, vomiting; teratogenicity risk

Bosentan (nonselective endothelin receptor
EtA and EtB antagonist)

Starting dose: 0.3-­1 mg/kg/dose twice daily
PO for first mo
For patients <10 kg: max. 2 mg/kg/dose twice
daily; 10-­20 kg: max. 2 mg/kg/dose twice
daily (32 mg tablets); 20-­40 kg: 62.5 mg/dose
twice daily; >40 kg: 125 mg/dose twice daily

Flushing, headache, hypotension,
nasopharyngitis/congestion, fluid retention,
edema, vomiting, anemia, elevated
transaminases (monthly LFTs required);
teratogenicity risk.
Caution in concomitant use of CYP3A4
inducers and inhibitors

Macitentan (nonselective endothelin receptor
EtA and EtB antagonist)

5-­10 mg daily PO; limited data in children

Flushing, headache, fluid retention/edema,
anemia, nasopharyngitis/congestion;
teratogenicity risk.

Sildenafil (phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor)

0.5-1 mg/kg/dose given 3-­4 times daily PO
For 10-­20 kg, use 10 mg 3 times daily; >20 kg,
20 mg 3 times daily
Initial dosing should be ½ final target dose to
evaluate for hypotension

Flushing, headache, dyspepsia, diarrhea,
hypotension, priapism, visual disturbance
(blue coloration), tinnitus

Tadalafil (phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor)

1 mg/kg/dose given daily PO
Maximum adult dose 40 mg daily
Initial dosing should be ½ final target dose to
evaluate for hypotension

Similar to sildenafil

Riociguat (soluble guanylate cyclase
stimulator)

Limited pediatric data
Starting adult dose 1 mg tid, can increase to
maximum 2.5 mg tid

Hypotension, headache, dizziness, dyspepsia
Use with PDE5 inhibitors contraindicated

Calcium channel blockers (amlodipine,
diltiazem, nifedipine)

Previously widely used, now indicated only
for patients who show a strong response to
nitric oxide during cardiac catheterization

Flushing, headache, edema, arrhythmia,
headache, hypotension, rash, nausea,
constipation, elevated LFTs

*Modified as compared with the Nice 2013 classification.
Note: These medications should only be administered under the direction of a specialist in pulmonary hypertension.
cGMP, Cyclic guanosine monophosphate; IV, Intravenously; LFT, liver function test; SC, subcutaneously.

especially in those with restrictive cardiomyopathy (see Chapter
488.3). Pulmonary vascular disease can also occur in any patient
with transmission of systemic pressure to the pulmonary circulation via a shunt at the interventricular or great vessel level and
in patients chronically exposed to low partial pressure of oxygen
(because of high altitude). Patients with cyanotic congenital heart
lesions associated with unrestricted pulmonary blood flow are at
particularly high risk.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms do not usually develop until the second or third decade
of life, although a more fulminant course may occur. Intracardiac
or extracardiac communications that would normally shunt from
left to right are converted to right-­to-­left shunting as PVR exceeds
systemic vascular resistance. Cyanosis becomes apparent, and dyspnea, fatigue, and a tendency toward dysrhythmias begin to occur.
In the late stages of the disease, heart failure, chest pain, headaches,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 483 u General Principles of Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease
syncope, and hemoptysis may be seen. Physical examination reveals
a right ventricular heave and a narrowly split S2 with a loud pulmonic component. Palpable pulmonary artery pulsation may be
present at the left upper sternal border. A holosystolic murmur of
tricuspid regurgitation may be audible along the left sternal border.
An early decrescendo diastolic murmur of pulmonary insufficiency
may also be heard along the left sternal border. The degree of cyanosis depends on the stage of the disease. Clubbing of the distal
digits may be seen in late disease as a result of chronic hypoxia.

DIAGNOSIS

On chest radiograph, the heart varies in size from normal to greatly
enlarged; the latter usually occurs late in the course of the disease. The
main pulmonary artery is generally prominent, similar to other causes
of PAH (see Fig. 482.2A). The pulmonary vessels are enlarged in the
hilar areas and taper rapidly in caliber in the peripheral branches. The
right ventricle and atrium are prominent. The ECG shows marked
RVH. The P wave may be tall and spiked. Cyanotic patients have various degrees of polycythemia that depend on the severity and duration
of hypoxemia.
The echocardiogram shows a thick-­walled right ventricle and
demonstrates the underlying congenital heart lesion. 2D echocardiography assists in eliminating from consideration lesions such
as obstructed pulmonary veins, supramitral membrane, mitral
stenosis, and restrictive cardiomyopathy. Doppler studies demonstrate the direction of the intracardiac shunt and the presence of a
typical hypertension waveform in the main pulmonary artery. Tricuspid and pulmonary regurgitation can be used in the Doppler
examination to estimate pulmonary artery systolic and diastolic
pressures.
Cardiac catheterization usually shows a bidirectional shunt at the
site of the defect. Systolic pressure is generally equal in the systemic
and pulmonary circulations. Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is
normal unless a left-­sided heart obstructive lesion or left ventricular
failure is the cause of the PAH. Arterial oxygen-­hemoglobin saturation is decreased depending on the magnitude of the right-­to-­left
shunt. The response to vasodilator therapy (oxygen, prostacyclin,
nitric oxide) may identify patients with less severe disease. Selective
pulmonary artery injections may be necessary if pulmonary venous
obstruction is suspected because of high wedge pressure and low
LVEDP.

TREATMENT

The best management for patients who are at risk for the development of late pulmonary vascular disease is prevention by early
surgical elimination of large intracardiac or great vessel communications during infancy. Some patients may be missed because they
have not shown early clinical manifestations. Rarely, PVR never
decreases at birth in these infants, and therefore they never acquire
enough left-­to-­right shunting to become clinically apparent. Such
delayed recognition is a particular risk in patients with congenital
heart disease who live at high altitude. It is also a risk in infants
with trisomy 21, who have a propensity for earlier development of
pulmonary vascular disease. Because of the high incidence of congenital heart disease associated with trisomy 21, routine echocardiography is recommended at the time of initial diagnosis, even in
the absence of other clinical findings.
Medical treatment of Eisenmenger syndrome is primarily symptomatic. Many patients benefit substantially from either oral (CCBs,
endothelin antagonist, phosphodiesterase inhibitors) or chronic
continuous intravenous (prostacyclin) therapy. Combined heart-­
lung or bilateral lung transplantation is the only surgical option for
many of these patients (see Chapter 492.2). Heart-­lung transplantation may be the option if there is associated complex congenital
heart disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2835

Chapter 483

General Principles of
Treatment of Congenital
Heart Disease
Daniel Bernstein
Most patients who have minor congenital heart lesions do not require
treatment. The parents and child should be made aware that a normal
life is expected and that no restriction of the child’s activities is necessary. Overprotective parents may use the presence of a minor congenital heart lesion or even a functional heart murmur as a means to
exert excessive control over their child’s activities. Although fears may
not be expressed overtly, the child may become anxious regarding early
death or debilitation, especially when an adult member of the family
acquires unrelated symptomatic heart disease. The family may have
an unexpressed fear of sudden death, and the rarity of this manifestation should be emphasized in discussions directed at improving their
understanding of the child’s congenital heart defect. General health
maintenance, including a well-­balanced “heart-­healthy” diet, aerobic
exercise, and avoidance of smoking, should be encouraged.
Even patients with moderate to severe congenital heart disease
(CHD) need not be restricted from all physical activity, although many
will tend to limit their own activities. Physical education should be
modified appropriately to the child’s capacity to participate; the extent
of such modification can be guided by formal exercise testing in an
appropriately equipped pediatric exercise laboratory. Although competitive sports for some patients may need to be discouraged, decisions are made on an individual basis. The influence of coach and peer
pressure should be considered when recommending competitive vs
noncompetitive athletics. Many cardiologists will also prohibit certain
high-­impact activities (“collision sports”) such as tackle football or
contact martial arts in patients who have had prior open heart surgery.
Routine immunizations should be given, with the inclusion of
influenza vaccine during the appropriate season. Vaccination against
the SARS-­CoV-­2 virus has been recommended for children with heart
disease who are eligible based on age. Prophylaxis against respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) is recommended during RSV season in young
infants with unrepaired CHD and significant hemodynamic abnormalities or in those with cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Careful
consideration of the timing of administration of live-­virus vaccination
is required in patients who are potential candidates for heart or heart-­
lung transplantation, and these patients cannot receive live-­virus vaccines after they have received their transplant.
Bacterial infections should be treated vigorously. Prophylaxis
against bacterial endocarditis should be carried out during dental
procedures for appropriate patients (see Chapter 486).
Cyanotic patients need to be monitored for noncardiac manifestations of oxygen deficiency (Table 483.1); however, it is rare today for a
patient to remain significantly cyanotic beyond the first few years of life,
although mild degrees of cyanosis may be seen in patients with a single
ventricle (e.g., hypoplastic left heart) who have a fenestration in their
Fontan conduits allowing right-­to-­left shunting. These patients should
be carefully observed for excessive polycythemia. Cyanotic patients
should avoid situations where dehydration may occur, which leads to
increased viscosity and increases the risk of stroke. Diuretics may need
to be decreased or temporarily discontinued during episodes of acute
gastroenteritis or during excessively hot weather. High altitudes and
sudden changes in the thermal environment should also be avoided.
Treatment of iron deficiency is important in cyanotic patients, who

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2836 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 483.1  Extracardiac Complications of Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease and Eisenmenger Physiology
PROBLEM

ETIOLOGY

THERAPY

Polycythemia

Persistent hypoxia

Phlebotomy if symptomatic

Relative anemia

Nutritional deficiency

Iron replacement

CNS abscess

Right-­to-­left shunting

Antibiotics, drainage

CNS thromboembolic stroke

Right-­to-­left shunting or polycythemia

Anticoagulation, phlebotomy

Low-­grade DIC, thrombocytopenia

Polycythemia

None for DIC unless bleeding, then
phlebotomy

Hemoptysis

Pulmonary infarct, thrombosis, or rupture of
pulmonary artery plexiform lesion

Embolization

Plastic bronchitis

Fontan procedure

Bronchoscopy, vascular coiling, lymphatic
ablation

Gum disease

Polycythemia, gingivitis, bleeding

Dental hygiene

Gout

Polycythemia, diuretic agent

Allopurinol

Arthritis, clubbing

Hypoxic osteoarthropathy

None

Pregnancy complications: miscarriage, fetal
growth retardation, prematurity increase,
maternal illness

Poor placental perfusion, poor ability to
increase cardiac output

Pregnancy prevention counseling, high-­risk
obstetric management

Infections

Associated asplenia, DiGeorge syndrome,
endocarditis

Antibiotics

Fatal RSV pneumonia with pulmonary
hypertension

RSV monoclonal antibodies* (prevention)

Failure to thrive

Increased oxygen consumption, decreased
nutrient intake

Treat heart failure; correct defect early;
increase caloric intake

Protein-­losing enteropathy

s/p Fontan; high right-­sided pressures

Oral budesonide or sildenafil

Chylothorax

Injury to thoracic duct

Medium-­chain triglyceride diet
Octreotide
Surgical ligation of thoracic duct

Neurodevelopmental disabilities

Chronic hypoxia, cardiac surgery, genetic

Early school-­based evaluation and intervention

Psychosocial adjustment

Limited activity, cyanotic appearance, chronic
disease, multiple hospitalizations

Counseling

*Palivizumab, nirsevimab.
CNS, Central nervous system; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; s/p, status post (after).

may have a low mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration despite
polycythemia. The risk of stroke for these patients can be reduced if the
red blood cells are not microcytic. Phlebotomy with partial exchange
transfusion is carried out only in symptomatic patients with severe
polycythemia (usually those with hematocrit >65%).
Patients with moderate to severe forms of CHD or a history of
rhythm disturbance should be carefully monitored during anesthesia
for even routine surgical or dental procedures. Consultation with an
anesthesiologist experienced in the care of children with CHD is recommended even if the surgical procedure is not cardiac related.
Females with unrepaired severe CHD should be counseled on the risks
associated with childbearing and on the use of contraceptives and other
methods to prevent pregnancy (see Chapter 483.1). Females with mild
to moderate CHD and many who have had corrective surgery can have
normal pregnancies, although those with residual hemodynamic derangements or with systemic right ventricles (RVs) should be followed by a high-­
risk perinatologist and a cardiologist with expertise in caring for adults
with CHD. Pregnancy may be highly dangerous to both mother and fetus
for patients with palliated (rather than repaired) complex CHD, chronic
cyanosis, or pulmonary arterial hypertension; for patients with a Fontan
circulation, the miscarriage rate has been reported as ranging from 27% to
50% and the rate of prematurity at 69%. Risks to the mother include heart
failure, thromboembolism, and arrhythmia. Several risk stratification
schemes have been developed for pregnant women with CHD, including
the Cardiac Disease in Pregnancy (CARPREG) score, the Zwangerschap bij Aangeboren HARtAfwijkingen (ZAHARA) score, and the World

Health Organization (WHO) classification. Based on the WHO system,
patients for whom pregnancy is associated with increased risk of mortality
or morbidity include those with a systemic RV (e.g., corrected transposition with good function), Fontan circulation, repaired coarctation of the
aorta bicuspid aortic valve with enlarged aortic root of 45-­50 mm, Marfan
syndrome with enlarged aortic root of 40-­45 mm, atrioventricular septal
defects, moderate mitral stenosis, severe aortic stenosis, and mechanical
valve replacement. Patients for whom pregnancy is considered contraindicated include those with pulmonary arterial hypertension, Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome, severe recoarctation of the aorta, Fontan circulation with any
complications, severe aortic or mitral stenosis, severe aortic dilation, and
systemic ventricular dysfunction with ejection fraction <30%.

POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT

After successful open heart surgery, the severity of the congenital heart
defect, the age and condition (nutritional status) of the patient before surgery, the events in the operating room (OR), and the quality of the postoperative care influence the patient’s course. Intraoperative factors that
influence survival and that should be noted when a patient returns from
the OR include the duration of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), duration
of aortic cross-­clamping (time the heart is not being perfused), and duration of profound hypothermia (used in some newborns; time the entire
body is not being perfused). Surgical techniques to provide ongoing perfusion to the upper body and brain even during surgery on the aortic arch
(e.g., in hypoplastic left heart syndrome [HLHS]) have eliminated the use
of profound hypothermia in many centers.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 483 u General Principles of Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease
Immediate postoperative care should be provided in an intensive
care unit (ICU) staffed by a team of physicians, nurses, and technicians
experienced with the unique problems encountered after open heart
surgery in childhood. In most major centers, this occurs in a dedicated
pediatric cardiovascular ICU. Preparation for postoperative monitoring begins in the OR, where the anesthesiologist or surgeon places an
arterial catheter to allow direct arterial pressure measurements and
arterial sampling for blood gas determination. A central venous catheter is also placed for measuring central venous pressure and for infusions of cardioactive medications. In more complex cases, right or left
atrial or pulmonary artery catheters may be inserted directly into these
cardiac structures and used for pressure monitoring purposes. Temporary pacing wires are placed on the atrium or ventricle, or both, in case
temporary postoperative heart block occurs. Transcutaneous oximetry provides for continuous monitoring of arterial oxygen saturation.
Near-­infrared spectroscopy is used to monitor cerebral and other end-­
organ perfusion in the perioperative period.
Functional failure of one organ system may cause profound physiologic
and biochemical changes in another. Respiratory insufficiency, for example, leads to hypoxia, hypercapnia, and acidosis, which in turn compromise cardiac, vascular, and renal function. The latter problems cannot be
managed successfully until adequate ventilation is reestablished. Thus it is
essential that the primary source of each postoperative problem be identified and treated.
Respiratory failure is a serious postoperative complication encountered after open heart surgery. CPB performed in the presence of
pulmonary congestion results in decreased lung compliance, copious
tracheal and bronchial secretions, atelectasis, and increased breathing
effort. Because fatigue and subsequently hypoventilation and acidosis
may rapidly ensue, mechanical positive pressure endotracheal ventilation is usually continued after open heart surgery for a minimum of
several hours in relatively stable patients and for up to 2-­3 days or longer in severely ill patients, especially infants. Protocols for early extubation have been successfully used in older children with uncomplicated
intraoperative courses. Patients with certain congenital heart lesions,
particularly those with DiGeorge syndrome, may also have airway
abnormalities (micrognathia, tracheomalacia, bronchomalacia) that
can make both ventilation and extubation more difficult.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) should be monitored continuously
during the postoperative period. A change in heart rate, even without
arrhythmia, may be the first indication of a serious complication such
as hemorrhage, hypothermia, hypoventilation, or heart failure. Cardiac rhythm disorders must be diagnosed quickly because a prolonged
untreated arrhythmia may add a severe hemodynamic burden to the
heart in the critical early postoperative period (see Chapter 484). Injury
to the heart’s conduction system during surgery can result in postoperative complete heart block. This complication is usually temporary and
is treated with surgically placed pacing wires that can later be removed.
Occasionally, complete heart block is permanent. If heart block persists
beyond 10-­14 days postoperatively, insertion of a permanent pacemaker
is required. Tachyarrhythmias are a common problem in postoperative
patients. Junctional ectopic tachycardia (JET) can be a particularly troublesome rhythm to manage, although it usually responds to antiarrhythmic medications such as intravenous amiodarone.
Heart failure with poor cardiac output after cardiac surgery may be
secondary to respiratory failure, serious arrhythmias, myocardial injury,
blood loss, hypovolemia, a significant residual hemodynamic abnormality,
or any combination of these factors. Treatment specific to the cause should
be instituted. Catecholamines, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, nitroprusside and other afterload-­reducing agents, and diuretics are the cardioactive
agents most often used in patients with myocardial dysfunction in the early
postoperative period (see Chapter 491). Postoperative pulmonary hypertension can be managed with hyperventilation and inhaled nitric oxide
(iNO). In the rare patients who are unresponsive to standard pharmacologic treatment, various ventricular assist devices are available, depending
on the patient’s size. If pulmonary function is adequate, a left ventricular
assist device (LVAD) may be used. If pulmonary function is inadequate,
biventricular assist devices (BVAD) or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be used. These extraordinary measures are helpful

2837

in maintaining the circulation until cardiac function improves, usually
within 2-­5 days. They have also been used as a bridge to transplantation in
patients with severe nonremitting postoperative cardiac failure.
Acidosis secondary to low cardiac output, renal failure, or hypovolemia
must be prevented or, if present, promptly corrected. Serial monitoring
of arterial blood gases (ABGs) and lactate concentrations is performed.
A low arterial pH may be a sign of decreased perfusion, and acidosis can
worsen cardiac function and may be the forerunner of arrhythmias or cardiac arrest.
Renal function may be compromised by congestive heart failure and
further impaired by prolonged CPB. Blood and fluid replacement, cardiac inotropic agents, and vasodilators will usually reestablish normal
urine flow in patients with hypovolemia or cardiac failure. Renal failure
secondary to tubular injury contributes to postoperative fluid overload
and may require temporary peritoneal or hemodialysis or hemofiltration. With attention paid to renal injury during the perioperative period,
the incidence and severity of chronic renal failure can be reduced.
Neurologic abnormalities can develop after CPB, especially in the
neonatal period. Seizures may occur when the patient awakens from sedation and can usually be controlled with anticonvulsant medications. In
the absence of other neurologic signs, self-­limited isolated seizures in the
immediate postoperative period usually carry a good long-­term prognosis.
Thromboembolism and stroke are rarer but serious complications of open
heart surgery. In the long term, both subtle and more substantial learning
disabilities may develop. Patients who have undergone surgery entailing
CPB, especially in the newborn period, should be watched carefully during
their early school years for signs of mild to moderate learning disabilities
or attention deficit disorders, which are often amenable to early remedial
intervention. The risk is higher in patients who have undergone repair
using hypothermic total circulatory arrest than in those where systemic
blood flow is maintained using CPB. With the increased recognition of the
genetic link between CHD and moderate or greater neurodevelopmental
delay, many of these cases may have multifactorial etiologies.
Postpericardiotomy syndrome may occur toward the end of the
first postoperative week or may sometimes be delayed until weeks or
months after surgery (Table 483.2). This febrile illness is characterized by fever, decreased appetite, listlessness, nausea, and vomiting.
Chest pain is not always present, so a high index of suspicion should
be maintained in any recently postoperative patient. Echocardiography is diagnostic. In most instances, postpericardiotomy syndrome is
self-­limited; when pericardial fluid accumulates rapidly, the potential
danger of cardiac tamponade should be recognized (see Chapter 489).
Table 483.2  Postpericardiotomy Syndrome (PPS)
Findings
FINDING

PERCENTAGE

SYMPTOMS
Pleuritic or pericarditic chest pain
Intermittent, low-­grade fever

>50
∼50

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Pericardial friction rub
Elevated C-­reactive protein (CRP)
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Leukocytosis
Electrocardiogram (ECG): low voltage of
the QRS, T-­wave inversion, ST elevation or
depression
IMAGING
Chest x-­ray: pleural effusion
Heart echocardiography: pericardial effusion
Mild (<10 mm)
Moderate (10-­20 mm)
Large (>20 mm)
Pleuropericardial involvement

20–30
80–90
80–90
80–90
∼50

>90
∼90
∼75*
∼10*
∼5
>80

*Of all PPS patients
From Lehto J, Kiviniemi T. Postpericardiotomy syndrome after cardiac surgery. Ann
Med. 2020;52(6):243–264, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2838 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Rarely, arrhythmias may also occur. Symptomatic patients usually
respond to salicylates, indomethacin, or colchicine and bed rest. Occasionally, corticosteroid therapy or pericardiocentesis is required. Late
recurrences are rare and can lead to chronic pericarditis.
Hemolysis of mechanical origin is seen, although rarely, after repair
of certain cardiac defects, for example, atrioventricular septal defects
(AVSDs), or after the insertion of a mechanical prosthetic valve. It is
caused by unusual turbulence of blood at increased pressure. Reoperation
may be necessary in rare patients with severe and progressive hemolysis
who require frequent blood transfusions, but in most cases the problem
slowly regresses.
Infection is another potentially serious postoperative problem.
Patients usually receive a broad-­spectrum antibiotic for the initial
postoperative period. Potential sites of infection include the lungs
(generally related to postoperative atelectasis), the subcutaneous tissues at the incision site, the sternum, and the urinary tract (especially
after an indwelling catheter has been in place). Sepsis with infective
endocarditis is an infrequent complication and can be difficult to manage, especially if prosthetic material was placed at surgery (see Chapter
486). Patients who undergo CPB during a viral infection, even if mild,
can develop severe complications; therefore many anesthesiologists
will postpone elective surgery if a child presents with a viral infection,
either upper respiratory or gastrointestinal.

INTERSTAGE MANAGEMENT

One group of infants at particularly high risk for both morbidity and
mortality are those who have completed their first-­stage Norwood
or Sano palliation for HLHS and are awaiting the next stage (Glenn
shunt) of their three-­stage palliation. Mortality in this group of infants
had been reported as high as 10–15%, motivating the National Pediatric Cardiology Quality Improvement Collaborative (NPC-­QIC) to
develop an interstage home monitoring program that has been successful in reducing interstage mortality by 44%.

Physical limitations in patients with CHD are variable, ranging from
minimal to none in patients with physiologic correction to mild to
moderate in patients with palliative procedures. The extent to which a
patient should be allowed to participate in athletics, both recreational
and competitive, can best be determined by the cardiologist, often with
formal cardiopulmonary exercise testing (see Chapter 472.5).
Long-­term morbidities affecting neurologic function and behavior
are influenced by many factors, including the effects of any genetic
alterations on the developing central nervous system (CNS). There may
be a greater role for prenatal CNS abnormalities (anatomic, genetic, or
secondary lesions caused by alterations in fetal cerebral blood flow or
oxygenation); these include microcephaly, cerebral atrophy, and altered
cerebral biochemistry. Chronic hypoxemia and failure to thrive may
also influence the developing brain, and there is evidence that the type
of intervention required (CPB, hypothermic total circulatory arrest,
catheter-­based therapy) plays a substantial role. Data from the Pediatric Cardiac Genomics Consortium have shown that there is also
a genetic component to these learning disabilities. Performing exome
sequencing on patients and their parents (trios), de novo gene variants were found in 2% of patients with CHD but in 20% of patients
with CHD and neurodevelopmental delay. The identity of these gene
variants and their mechanism of action is under study. In general, in
the absence of a significant genetic syndrome or major perioperative
complication, most children function at a fairly high level after repair
of congenital heart defects and are able to attend regular school. Group
mean scores on standard cognitive tests are no different from the general population; however, some areas appear to be more at risk than
others, including certain aspects of motor function, speech, visual-­
motor tracking, and phonologic awareness. Awareness of these potential issues is critical to obtaining prompt remedial assistance if a child
is found to be struggling in school.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

LONG-­TERM MANAGEMENT

Patients who have undergone surgery for CHD can be divided into
three major categories: lesions for which total repair has been achieved;
lesions for which both anatomic and physiologic corrections have been
achieved; and lesions for which only palliation, although potentially
long term, has been achieved. There is some disagreement among cardiologists as to exactly in which category a particular congenital heart
lesion might fall, and to some degree every case should be considered
individually. Many argue that only for isolated patent ductus arteriosus
(PDA) is total repair really achieved, with no requirement for long-­term
follow-­up. Patients who are able to undergo anatomic and physiologic
correction include many of the left-­to-­right shunt lesions (atrial and
ventricular septal defects) and milder forms of obstructive lesions (e.g.,
valvar pulmonic stenosis, some forms of valvar aortic stenosis, coarctation of aorta) and some forms of cyanotic heart disease (e.g., uncomplicated tetralogy of Fallot, simple transposition of great arteries). These
patients usually have achieved total or near-­total physiologic correction
of their lesion; however, they are still at some risk of long-­term sequelae,
including late heart failure or arrhythmia, or recurrence of a significant
physiologic abnormality (e.g., recoarctation of aorta, worsening mitral
regurgitation in patients with AVSDs, long-­standing pulmonary regurgitation in patients with tetralogy of Fallot repaired with transannular
patch). These patients require regular follow-­up with a pediatric cardiologist (and, when old enough, with an adult congenital heart disease specialist; see Chapter 483.1); however, their long-­term prognosis
is generally very good, although some will require repeat surgeries or
catheter-­based interventions. Patients with more complex lesions, such
as those with single-­ventricle physiology (e.g., hypoplastic left or right
heart syndrome), are at much higher risk of long-­term sequelae and
require even closer follow-­up. These patients, particularly those who
have undergone the Fontan procedure, are at risk long-­term for arrhythmia, thrombosis, protein-­losing enteropathy, plastic bronchitis, hepatic
dysfunction (Fontan-­associated liver disease or FALD), renal dysfunction, and heart failure. Some may eventually require heart, heart-­liver, or
heart-­kidney transplantation.

483.1 Congenital Heart Disease in Adults
Salil Ginde and Michael G. Earing
Approximately 90% of children with CHD survive to adulthood. More
adults than children are living with CHD in the United States, with a
5% increase every year. In the past decade, 35% of hospitalizations for
CHD were patients older than 18 years (mean age: 55 years).

LONG-­TERM MEDICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Approximately 25% of adults with CHD have a mild form that has
allowed them to survive into adulthood without surgical or interventional cardiac catheterization. The most common lesions in this
category include mild aortic valve stenosis (usually in the setting of
a bicuspid aortic valve), small restrictive ventricular septal defects
(VSDs), mild pulmonary valve stenosis, and mitral valve prolapse
(Table 483.3). These patients need less frequent follow-­up to assess
for progression of disease and to identify associated complications.
Many adults with CHD living in the United States are patients who
have had previous intervention (Table 483.4). Although most children
who undergo surgical intervention will survive to adulthood, with few
exceptions, total correction is not the rule. The few exceptions include
PDA, VSDs, and atrial septal defects (ASDs); this is true only if they are
closed early, before the development of irreversible pulmonary vascular changes, and if no residual lesions exist.
It has become apparent that even the simplest congenital heart lesions
can be associated with long-­term complications, including both cardiac
and noncardiac problems (Tables 483.5 and 483.6 and Fig. 483.1). Cardiac
complications include arrhythmias and conduction defects, ventricular
dysfunction, residual shunts, valvular lesions (regurgitation and stenosis), hypertension, and aneurysms. Noncardiac sequelae (comorbidities)
include pulmonary, renal, and hepatic dysfunction that is caused either
directly or indirectly by the underlying CHD. Abnormal pulmonary function most often presents as restrictive lung physiology and likely results

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 483 u General Principles of Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease

2839

Table 483.3  Congenital Heart Defects Associated with
Survival into Adulthood Without Surgery or
Interventional Cardiac Catheterization

Table 483.6  Adolescent Transition Issues Requiring
Coordination of Patient Care Between the
Cardiologist and Primary Care Physician

Mild pulmonary valve stenosis
Bicuspid aortic valve
Small to moderate-­sized atrial septal defect
Small ventricular septal defect
Small patent ductus arteriosus
Mitral valve prolapse
Partial atrioventricular canal (ostium primum atrial septal defect and
cleft mitral valve)
Marfan syndrome
Ebstein anomaly
Congenitally corrected transposition (atrioventricular and
ventriculoarterial discordance)

Antibiotic prophylaxis for endocarditis
Medications and drug interactions
Anticoagulation with prosthetic valves
Exercise and sports participation
Educational and vocational planning
Contraception and pregnancy
Drug, alcohol, and tobacco use
Noncardiac surgical planning
Anesthetic issues
New symptoms or acute illnesses
Comorbid conditions
Travel

Table 483.4  Most Common Congenital Heart Defects
in Patients Surviving to Adulthood After
Surgery or Interventional Catheterization
Aortic valve disease after balloon valvuloplasty or surgical valvotomy
Pulmonary valve stenosis after balloon valvuloplasty or surgical
valvotomy
Tetralogy of Fallot
Ventricular septal defect
Complete atrioventricular canal defect
Transposition of the great arteries
Coarctation of the aorta
Complex single ventricles after the modified Fontan procedure

Table 483.5  Risks in Adults Who Have Congenital Heart
Disease
RHYTHM DISORDERS
Supraventricular tachycardia (including atrial fibrillation)
Right bundle branch block
Heart block
Ventricular tachycardia
Sudden death
COARCTATION OF AORTA
Essential hypertension
Recoarctation
Aneurysm formation
RESIDUAL LESIONS (SHUNTS)
Ventral septal defect
Atrial septal defect
Patent ductus arteriosus
ACQUIRED LESIONS
Subacute bacterial endocarditis
Subvalvular stenosis
Supravalvular stenosis
Valvular insufficiency
Valvular restenosis
Eisenmenger complex
PREGNANCY RISK
See Figs. 483.2 and 483.3

from prior sternotomy or thoracotomy, scoliosis, diaphragmatic dysfunction, or parenchymal lung disease. Reduced pulmonary function contributes to reduced exercise tolerance and is a risk factor for mortality in adults
with CHD. Renal dysfunction may result from chronic cyanosis, multiple surgeries requiring CPB, or from other comorbid conditions, such
as hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Hepatic injury from chronic liver
congestion in patients with elevated central venous pressures, particularly
patients palliated with the Fontan procedure, can result in hepatic fibrosis,
cirrhosis, hepatic dysfunction, and rarely, hepatocellular carcinoma. Adults

Assess annually
Anemia history
Symptoms of hyperviscosity
Measure oxygen saturation
Laboratory measures:
hemoglobin, packed cell volume,
red-cell indices, serum ferritin,
transferrin saturation

Serum ferritin 15 µg/L
Transferrin saturation 15%

Serum ferritin 15 µg/L
Transferrin saturation 15%

Patient iron-deficient

Patient iron-replete

Patient iron-replete

Iron supplementation
Address other causes of iron
deficiency as identified from
history

No symptoms of
hyperviscosity

Symptoms of
hyperviscosity

Assess for other causes
of symptoms and treat
accordingly: e.g.,
Hypovolaemia
Gout
Brain abscess
Hypothyroidism
Depression

Reassess symptoms
Repeat laboratory tests
Consider cessation of iron
supplementation when iron
replete (serum ferritin 15 µg/L
and transferrin saturation 15%)
Some patients will require
chronic iron supplementation
for steady-state erythrocytosis
Regularly reassess symptoms
and laboratory tests

Resolution of
symptoms
Patient remains
iron-replete

Reassess every
6-12 months

Persistent moderatesevere hyperviscosity
symptoms
Packed cell volume
65%
Trial of phlebotomy
with fluid
replacement

Fig. 483.1 Algorithm detailing crucial issues to address at transition

to adulthood in patients with cyanotic congenital heart disease. (From
Spence MS, Balaratnam MS, Gatzoulis MA. Clinical update: cyanotic
adult congenital heart disease. Lancet. 2007;370:1531.)

with CHD are at risk for developmental abnormalities such as intellectual
impairment, somatic abnormalities such as facial dysmorphism (cleft
palate/lip), CNS abnormalities such as seizure disorders from previous
thromboembolic events or cerebrovascular accidents, and impairments of
hearing or vision loss. Psychosocial problems involving employment, life
and health insurance, participation in sports, sexual activity, and contraception are common. Mental health issues, such as anxiety and depression, are common in adults with CHD and are often underrecognized and
significantly affect quality of life. As a result of these long-­term complications, the majority of adults with CHD need lifelong follow-­up, ideally in
an integrated, collaborative, and multidisciplinary program. When adults
with CHD are hospitalized, it is usually for heart failure or an arrhythmia;
others may require catheterization or another cardiac surgical procedure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2840 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
SPECIFIC LESIONS
Left-­to-­Right Shunts

In general, the long-­term outcomes of adults with a history of shunt lesions
that underwent repair early in life are good with near-­normal life expectancy and relatively low risk for cardiac complications. However, if the initial lesion has a shunt that is large and nonrestrictive (allowing transmission
of near-­systemic pressure to the pulmonary arteries) and is unrepaired,
irreversible pulmonary vascular changes can occur, resulting in pulmonary
hypertension at systemic levels with reversed or bidirectional shunting at
the level of the defect (Eisenmenger syndrome; see Chapter 482.2).

Atrial Septal Defects

See Chapter 475.1.
Although most individuals with an ASD are diagnosed during childhood after a murmur is noted, a minority of patients present with symptoms for the first time as adults. Most patients are asymptomatic during
the first and second decades of life. In the third decade, an increasing number of patients then develop exercise intolerance, palpitations from atrial
arrhythmias, and cardiac enlargement. If untreated, survival into adulthood is the rule; life expectancy is reduced, however, and there is significant long-­term morbidity. After age 40 the mortality rate increases by 6%
per year, and >20% of patients will have developed atrial fibrillation (AF).
By age 60 the number of patients with AF increases to >60%.

Late Outcome After Closure of Atrial Septal Defect

Most patients who have undergone early ASD closure will have excellent
long-­term survival with low morbidity if repair is undertaken before age
25 years. Older age at repair is associated with decreased late survival
with an associated increased risk for the development of atrial arrhythmias, thromboembolic events, and pulmonary hypertension. Long-­term
late complications and survival after transcatheter device closure remain
unknown; early and intermediate results are excellent, with a high rate of
ASD closure and few major complications.

Ventricular Septal Defects

See Chapter 475.6.
Although isolated VSDs are among the most common forms of CHD,
the diagnosis of a VSD in an adult is rare. The primary reason is that most
patients with a hemodynamically significant VSD will have undergone
repair in childhood or will have died earlier in life. As result, the spectrum of isolated VSD in adults is limited to (1) those with small restrictive defects, (2) those with Eisenmenger syndrome, and (3) those who had
their defects closed in childhood.
For patients with small restrictive VSD, long-­term survival is excellent, with estimated 25-­year survival of 96%. In addition, the long-­term
morbidity for patients with a restrictive VSD also appears to be low. Their
clinical course is not completely benign. Reported long-­term complications include endocarditis, progressive aortic regurgitation secondary to
prolapse of the aortic valve into the defect (highest risk is with supracristal type but also can occur in setting of perimembranous defect), and
the development of both right and left outflow tract obstruction from a
double-­chamber RV or a subaortic membrane. For patients who develop
Eisenmenger syndrome, survival into the third decade is common.
With increasing age, the long-­term complications of right-­sided heart
failure, paradoxical emboli, and polycythemia usually result in progressive decline in survival, with death at an average age of 37 years.
Adults with previous VSD closure, without pulmonary hypertension
or residual defects, live a normal life expectancy. Because patients with
small VSDs are asymptomatic, these patients should be managed conservatively. Given the long-­term risks, they do need intermittent follow-­up for
life to monitor for the development of late complications. The exception to
this rule is patients with small supracristal or perimembranous VSD with
associated prolapse of the aortic cusp into the defect resulting in progressive aortic regurgitation. These patients should be considered for surgical
repair at diagnosis to prevent progressive aortic valve damage.

Complete Atrioventricular Canal

See Chapter 475.5.
The natural history for patients with complete AVSD is characterized by the early development of pulmonary vascular disease, leading

to irreversible damage often by age 1 year (especially in children with
Down syndrome). Thus patients who present in adulthood can be categorized into two groups: those with Eisenmenger syndrome and those
who had their defects closed in childhood.
Overall, for those patients who underwent early repair before the development of pulmonary vascular disease, the long-­term prognosis is good.
The most common long-­term complication is left atrioventricular valve
regurgitation, with approximately 5–10% of patients requiring surgical
revision for left atrioventricular valve repair or replacement during follow­up. The second most common long-­term complication for this patient
group is subaortic stenosis, occurring in up to 5% of patients after repair.
Other long-­term complications include residual atrial-­or ventricular-­
level shunts, complete heart block, atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, and
endocarditis.
For patients who have developed Eisenmenger syndrome, all are
symptomatic with exertional dyspnea, fatigue, palpitations, edema,
and syncope. Survival is similar to other forms of Eisenmenger syndrome, with a mean age at death of 37 years. Strong predictors for
death include syncope, age at presentation of symptoms, poor functional class, low oxygen saturation (<85%), elevated serum creatinine
and uric acid concentrations, and Down syndrome.
Patients who underwent previous repair and develop significant left
atrioventricular valve regurgitation causing symptoms, atrial arrhythmias, or deterioration in ventricular function should undergo elective
valve repair or replacement. Those previously repaired patients who
develop significant subaortic stenosis (defined as a peak cardiac catheterization or echo gradient of >50 mm Hg) should undergo surgical
repair.

Patent Ductus Arteriosus

See Chapter 475.8.
A PDA is usually an isolated lesion in the adult patient. The size of
the defect is the primary determinant of clinical course in the adult
patient. These clinical courses can be grouped into five main categories:
silent PDAs; small, hemodynamically insignificant PDAs; moderate-­
size PDAs; large PDAs; and previously repaired PDAs.
A silent PDA is a tiny defect that cannot be heard by auscultation
and is only detected by other means such as echocardiography. Life
expectancy is always normal in this population, and the risk for endocarditis is extremely low.
Patients with a small PDA have an audible long-­ejection or continuous murmur heard best at the left upper sternal border that radiates to
the back. In addition, they have normal peripheral pulses. Because there is
negligible left-­to-­right shunting these patients have normal left atrial and
left ventricle (LV) size and normal pulmonary artery pressure by echocardiography and chest x-­ray film. These patients, like those with silent PDAs,
are asymptomatic and live a normal life expectancy. They have a higher
risk for endocarditis.
Patients with moderate-­size PDAs may present during adulthood.
These patients often will have wide, bounding peripheral pulses and an
audible continuous murmur. These patients all have significant volume
overload and develop some degree of left atrial and LV enlargement
and some degree of pulmonary hypertension. These patients are symptomatic with dyspnea, palpitations, and heart failure.
Patients with large PDAs typically present with signs of severe pulmonary hypertension and Eisenmenger syndrome. By adulthood, the
continuous murmur is typically absent and there is differential cyanosis (lower-­extremity saturations lower than the right arm saturation).
These patients have a similar prognosis as other patients with Eisenmenger syndrome.
Patients who underwent repair of a PDA before the development
of pulmonary hypertension have a normal life expectancy without
restrictions.
All patients with clinical evidence of a PDA are at increased risk for
endocarditis. As result, all PDAs except for small silent PDAs and those
patients with severe irreversible pulmonary hypertension should be considered for closure. Catheter device closure is the preferred method in
most centers today. Surgical closure is reserved for patients with PDA too
large for device closure or when the anatomy is distorted, as in the setting
of a large ductal aneurysm.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 483 u General Principles of Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease
Cyanotic Heart Disease

See Chapters 478, 479, and 480.
Unlike the acyanotic forms of CHD, the majority of patients with
cyanotic CHD will have had at least one and often several previous
interventions before adulthood. The most frequent defects seen in the
outpatient adult CHD setting are tetralogy of Fallot, complete transposition of the great arteries (TGA, also known as d-­transposition),
pulmonary valve stenosis, and various forms of functional single
ventricles. Other defects include total anomalous pulmonary venous
return, truncus arteriosus, and double-­outlet RV.

Tetralogy of Fallot

See Chapter 479.1.
In the developed world, the unoperated adult patient with tetralogy
of Fallot is a rarity because the majority of patients will have undergone
palliation or, more often, repair in childhood. Only 11% of unoperated
patients are alive by age 20 and only 3% by age 40.
Late survival after repair of tetralogy of Fallot is excellent. Repair is typically performed at 3-­12 months of age and consists of patch closure of the
VSD and relief of the pulmonary outflow tract obstruction by patch augmentation of the right ventricular outflow tract, pulmonary valve annulus,
or both. Survival rates at age 32 and 35 years have been reported to be 86%
and 85%, respectively, compared with 95% in age-­and sex-­matched controls. Most patients live an unrestricted life. Many patients do develop late
symptoms that include exertional dyspnea, palpitations, syncope, and sudden cardiac death. Late complications include endocarditis, aortic regurgitation with or without aortic root dilation (typically caused by damage to
the aortic valve during VSD closure or secondary to an intrinsic aortic root
abnormality), left ventricular dysfunction (secondary to inadequate myocardial protection during previous repair or chronic LV volume overload
caused by long-­standing palliative arterial shunts), residual pulmonary
valve obstruction, residual pulmonary valve regurgitation, RV dysfunction (as a result of pulmonary regurgitation or pulmonary stenosis), atrial
arrhythmias (typically atrial flutter), ventricular arrhythmias, and heart
block.
Reintervention is necessary in approximately 10% of patients after
reparative surgery at 20-­year follow-­up. With longer follow-­up, the
incidence of reintervention continues to increase. The most common indication for reintervention is pulmonary valve replacement for
severe pulmonary valve regurgitation. Pulmonary valve replacement,
either surgical or transcatheter, is indicated when severe pulmonary
valve regurgitation is associated with RV or LV systolic dysfunction,
severe RV dilation, and/or progressive reduction in objective exercise
tolerance. Although pulmonary valve replacement is associated with
improved functional status, it has not been shown to improve mortality
or risk for ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death in adults
with tetralogy of Fallot. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators may be
considered in patients with a history of recurrent ventricular arrhythmias or other risk factors such as ventricular dysfunction.

Transposition of the Great Arteries

See Chapter 480.1.
The natural history of patients with unrepaired TGA is so poor that
very few patients survive past childhood without intervention. The first
definitive operations for TGA was the atrial switch procedure, where the
systemic and pulmonary venous returns are rerouted in the atrium by
constructing baffles. The systemic venous return from the superior and
inferior venae cavae is directed through the mitral valve and into the left
ventricle (connected to the pulmonary artery). The pulmonary venous
return is then directed through the tricuspid valve into the RV (connected
to the aorta). The procedure results in physiologic correction and can be
performed with low mortality but leave the left as the pulmonary ventricle
and the right as the systemic ventricle. Long-­term follow-­up studies after
the atrial switch procedure show a small but ongoing attrition rate with
numerous other intermediate-­and long-­term complications. Two specific
problems are most concerning: loss of sinus rhythm with development of
atrial arrhythmias, occurring in 50% of TGA patients by age 25, and development of systemic ventricular dysfunction, occurring in 50% by age 35.
Other long-­term complications include endocarditis, baffle leaks, baffle
obstruction, tricuspid valve regurgitation, and sinus node dysfunction
requiring pacemaker placement.

2841

The arterial switch operation is the procedure of choice to treat
TGA. The great arteries are transected and reanastomosed to the correct ventricle (LV to aorta, RV to pulmonary artery) with coronary
artery transfer. Operative survival after the arterial switch procedure
in the current surgical era is very good, with a surgical mortality rate of
2–5%. Long-­term data on survival and complications are not available,
but intermediate results are promising. Reported intermediate complications include endocarditis, pulmonary outflow tract obstruction (at
the supravalvular level or at the takeoff of the peripheral pulmonary
arteries), aortic valve regurgitation, and coronary artery compromise
(ranging from minor stenosis to complete occlusion).
The Rastelli operation represents a third type of repair for TGA,
typically when there is associated VSD and pulmonary outflow tract
obstruction. This operation involves the creation of an intracardiac
baffle that closes the VSD in a way that directs flow from the LV to the
aorta. The pulmonary valve is oversewn, and a valved conduit placed
between the RV and pulmonary artery. Operative mortality is low, but
patients require multiple reoperations for replacement of the pulmonary conduit during long-­term follow-­up. Other complications include
complete heart block and left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.
Because of the high incidence of observed and potential medical problems, all patients who have had atrial, arterial, or Rastelli repair of TGA
should have lifelong follow-­up by a cardiologist at a center specializing in
adult CHD.

Pulmonary Valve Stenosis

See Chapter 476.1.
Most patients with pulmonary valve stenosis are asymptomatic and
present with a cardiac murmur. Survival into adult life and the need for
intervention, however, are directly correlated to the degree of obstruction. Patients with trivial stenosis (defined as a peak gradient <25 mm
Hg) followed for 25 years remain asymptomatic and have no significant
progression of obstruction over time. For those patients with moderate pulmonary valve stenosis (defined as a peak gradient of 25-­49 mm
Hg), there is an approximately 20% chance of requiring intervention
by age 25. For those patients with severe stenosis (defined as a peak
gradient >50 mm Hg), the majority ultimately require an intervention,
either surgery or balloon valvuloplasty, by age 25.
After surgical valvotomy for isolated pulmonary stenosis, long-­term
survival is excellent. With longer follow-­up, the incidence of late complications and the need for reintervention do increase. The most common
indication for reintervention is pulmonary valve replacement for severe
pulmonary regurgitation. Other long-­term complications include recurrent atrial arrhythmias, endocarditis, and residual right ventricular outflow tract obstruction.
Patients with moderate to severe pulmonary stenosis (defined as a
peak gradient >50 mm Hg) should be considered for intervention even
in the absence of symptoms. Percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty has
been the accepted treatment for patients of all ages. Previously, surgical
valvotomy had been the gold standard. Surgical valvotomy is reserved
for patients who are unlikely to have successful results from balloon valvuloplasty, such as those with an extremely dysplastic or calcified valve.

Left-­Sided Obstructive Lesions
Coarctation of the Aorta

See Chapter 476.6.
The clinical presentation of coarctation of the aorta depends on the
severity of obstruction and the associated anomalies. Unrepaired coarctation typically presents with symptoms before adulthood. These symptoms
include headaches related to hypertension, leg fatigue or cramps, exercise
intolerance, and systemic hypertension (may be asymptomatic). Those
untreated patients surviving to adulthood thus typically have only mild
coarctation of the aorta. In the era before surgery, without treatment, the
mean age of death was 32 years. Causes of death included left ventricular
failure, intracranial hemorrhage, endocarditis, aortic rupture/dissection,
and premature coronary artery disease (CAD).
After surgical repair, long-­term survival is good but is directly correlated with the age at repair, with those repaired after age 14 years having
a lower 20-­year survival than those who were repaired earlier: 91% vs
79%. With longer follow-­up, the incidence of long-­term complications

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2842 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
continues to rise. The most common long-­term complication is persistent or new systemic hypertension at rest or during exercise. Other long-­
term complications include aneurysms of the ascending or descending
aorta, recoarctation at the site of previous repair, CAD, aortic stenosis
or regurgitation (in the setting of an associated bicuspid aortic valve),
rupture of an intracranial aneurysm, and endocarditis.
Patients with significant native or residual coarctation of the aorta
(symptomatic patients with a peak gradient across the coarctation >20
mm Hg) should be considered for intervention, either surgery or catheter intervention with balloon angioplasty, with or without stent placement. Surgical repair in the adult patient is technically difficult and
is associated with high morbidity. Catheter-­based intervention is the
preferred method in most experienced adult CHD centers.

Aortic Valve Stenosis

See Chapter 476.5.
The natural history of aortic valve stenosis in adults is quite variable but
is characterized by progressive stenosis over time. By age 45 years, approximately 50% of bicuspid aortic valves will have some degree of stenosis.
Most patients with aortic valve stenosis are asymptomatic and are
diagnosed after a murmur is detected. The severity of obstruction at
diagnosis correlates with the pattern of progression. Symptoms are rare
until patients have severe aortic valve stenosis (mean gradient by echocardiography >40 mm Hg). Symptoms include chest pain, exertional
dyspnea, near-­syncope, and syncope. When any of these symptoms
is present, the risk of sudden cardiac death is quite high, so surgical
intervention is mandated. For patients requiring surgical valvotomy to
relieve the stenosis before adulthood, the majority of patients do well.
However, at 25-­year follow-­up, up to 40% of patients will have required
a second operation for residual stenosis or regurgitation.
Patients with symptoms and severe aortic valve stenosis should be
considered for intervention. Treatment involves manipulating the valve
to reduce stenosis. This can be accomplished by balloon dilation of the
valve, open surgical valvotomy, or valve replacement. In absence of significant aortic regurgitation, most centers favor balloon dilation or surgical valvotomy for children and young adults who have pliable valves
with fusion of commissures. In older adults, aortic valve replacement is
the treatment of choice. Typically, surgery is performed for aortic valve
replacement in younger adults with congenital aortic valve stenosis; however, transcatheter aortic valve replacement is increasingly commonly
performed in older adults who may be higher-­risk surgical candidates.

categorization of risk stratification is shown in Figures 483.2 and 483.3.
Pulmonary artery hypertension presents a serious risk during pregnancy,
particularly when the pulmonary pressure exceeds 70% of systemic pressure, regardless of functional class. Other contraindications to pregnancy
include severe obstructive left-­sided lesions (coarctation of the aorta, aortic valve stenosis, mitral valve stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy),
Marfan syndrome with coexisting dilated ascending aorta (defined as >4
cm), persistent cyanosis, and systemic ventricular dysfunction (ejection
fraction of ≤40%). The need for full anticoagulation during pregnancy,
although not a contraindication, poses an increased risk to both mother
and fetus. The relative risks and benefits of the different anticoagulant
approaches need to be discussed fully with the mother.
Pregnancy counseling should begin early in adolescence and should be
part of the routine cardiac follow-­up visit. Counseling should include a
discussion about the risk of CHD in the offspring. In the general population, the incidence of CHD is 1%. In the offspring of a mother with CHD,
the risk increases to 5–6%. Often the cardiac lesion in the offspring is not
the same as that in the mother, except in the case of a syndrome with autosomal dominant inheritance (i.e., Marfan syndrome, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). Risk stratification should include the specific CHD lesion but
also needs to consider the maternal functional class. Although the specific
CHD lesion is important, multiple studies demonstrate that the maternal
functional class before pregnancy is highly predictive of both maternal and
fetal outcomes, with those in the best functional class having the best outcomes. A cardiopulmonary exercise test performed before conception can
predict maternal and neonatal outcomes in pregnant women with CHD.
A blunted heart rate response to exercise is associated with a higher risk
for adverse maternal and neonatal events. It is recommended that women
with CHD at higher risk for pregnancy-­related complications based on
anatomy, functional status, and exercise testing be managed collaboratively
during pregnancy by adult CHD cardiologists, obstetricians, and anesthesiologists with specialized experience in adults with CHD.
Risk of cardiac event during pregnancy per mWHO class
based on CARPREG II and ROPAC data

mWHO IV

mWHO III

mWHO II-III

mWHO II

Endocarditis Prophylaxis

See Chapter 486.
Only patients with cardiac conditions associated with the highest risk
for adverse outcomes should continue antibiotic prophylaxis before surgery: previous endocarditis, prosthetic valves (biological and mechanical), unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative shunts and conduits,
completely repaired congenital heart defects with prosthetic material or
device, surgically placed or by catheter intervention during the first 6
months after the procedure, and repaired CHD with residual defects at
or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device (which
inhibits endothelialization). Except for the conditions just listed, antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended for other forms of CHD.

mWHO I
0%

20%

30%

Predictors of cardiac event during pregnancy
CARPREG II Prior cardiac event or arrhythmia
NYHA III or IV or cyanosis

PREGNANCY AND CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE

CHD is the most common form of heart disease encountered during
pregnancy in developed countries. Heart disease does not preclude a
successful pregnancy but increases the risk to both the mother and
the baby. During pregnancy, substantial hemodynamic changes occur.
The hemodynamic changes in pregnancy result in a steady increase in
cardiac output during pregnancy until the 32nd week of gestation, at
which time the cardiac output reaches a plateau at 30–50% above the
prepregnancy level. At delivery, with uterine contractions, an additional 300-­500 mL of blood enters the circulation. This, in conjunction
with increased blood pressure and heart rate during labor, increases the
cardiac output at delivery to 80% of the prepregnancy level.
Despite these hemodynamic changes, the outcome of pregnancy
is favorable in most women with CHD, provided that functional class
and systemic ventricular function are good. The WHO modified

10%

ZAHARA

50%

OR in study
cohort

60%

Event rate in
study cohort

5.9

33%

4.9

46%

Mechanical valve

4.2

38%

Ventricular dysfunction

2.3

30%

High risk left-sided valve disease/left ventricular
outflow tract obstruction

2.1

22%

Pulmonary hypertension

3.3

32%

Coronary artery disease

3.0

29%

High risk aortopathy

2.7

18%

No prior cardiac intervention

1.6

18%

Late pregnancy assessment

1.6

20%

Cardiac medication, other than anticoagulation
Atrioventricular valve regurgitation

ROPAC

40%

Atrial fibrillation at pre-pregnancy visit
Signs of heart failure at pre-pregnancy visit

4.2

26%

2.0–2.3

17%

5.1

52%

3.3–4.2

63%

Fig. 483.2 Risk tools modified WHO (mWHO), CARdiac disease in

PREGnancy (CARPREG), Zwangerschap bij Aangeboren HARtAfwijking
(ZAHARA), Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac disease (ROPAC). ORs
and rates are derived from cohorts consisting of approximately 60%
of patients with congenital heart disease (63% in CARPREG II and 58%
in ROPAC). OR, Odds ratio. (From van Hagen IM, Roos-­Hesselink JW.
Pregnancy in congenital heart disease: risk prediction and counselling.
Heart. 2020;106:1853–1861, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 483 u General Principles of Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease
CONTRACEPTION

A critical part of caring for adults with CHD is to provide (or make
available) advice on contraception. Unfortunately, data are limited on
the safety of various contraceptive techniques in adult CHD patients.
The estrogen-­containing oral contraceptives (OCs) can be used in
many adult CHD patients but are not recommended in adult CHD
patients at risk for thromboembolism, such as those with cyanosis,
prior Fontan procedure, AF, or pulmonary artery hypertension. In
addition, OCs may disrupt anticoagulation control. Although slightly
less effective than OCs containing combined estrogen/progesterone,
medroxyprogesterone, the progesterone-­only pills, and levonorgestrel
are good options for most adult CHD patients. Medroxyprogesterone
and levonorgestrel, however, can cause fluid retention and thus need to
be used with caution in patients with heart failure. These medications
are also associated with depression and often breakthrough bleeding.
Tubal ligation, although the most secure method of contraception, can
be a high-­risk procedure in patients with complex CHD or those with
pulmonary hypertension. Hysteroscopic sterilization (Essure) may
be reasonable for high-­risk patients. In the past, intrauterine devices
(IUDs) were seldom used in cardiac patients because of the associated risk of bacteremia, pelvic inflammatory disease, and endocarditis.
IUDs such as Mirena appear to be safe and effective and are rapidly
becoming one of the most common forms of contraception in the adult
CHD population.

WHO I

WHO II

Pulmonary stenosis (small/mild)

Unrepaired ASD or VSD

Patent ductus arteriosus (small/mild)

Repaired tetralogy of Fallot

Mitral valve prolapse (small/mild)

Turner syndrome without aortic dilatation

2843

ADOLESCENT TRANSITION

It is well recognized that as part of the process of obtaining independence,
adolescents or young adults must develop a forward-­looking, independent
approach to their medical care. For children with heart disease, the transition process must begin during early adolescence and should be encouraged by both the primary care provider and the pediatric cardiologist, who
must identify an appropriate adult CHD program to which transition and
transfer will be made at an appropriate time (see Table 483.6).
A successful transition program includes the following elements:
• Development of a written transition plan that should begin by age
14 years
• B ecause adolescents and young adults are frequently unaware of
the details of their cardiac diagnosis and history, a complete, concise, portable medical record, including all pertinent aspects of
cardiac care, should be shared with adolescents and their family
and prepared for transmittal to the eventual adult care destination.
• The primary care provider and cardiologist must address unique
adolescent medical issues as they affect the cardiovascular system. In
addition to medical problems, education, vocational planning, psychosocial issues, and access to medical care should be discussed with
adolescents and their families.
Young adults tend to avoid medical care because of lack of education, denial, or difficulty with access to the medical care system. Thus a
critical goal of the adolescent transition process is to identify an appropriate site for ongoing medical care and ensure maintenance of the
medical record and continuity of care for the young adult. The site of
care for a young adult with CHD may be a pediatric program or facility
or a specialized center or program for the adult with CHD. The critical
issues are the continuity of care, the preparation of the patient, and the
patient’s participation in the process.

Successfully repaired simple shunt defects
(ASD, VSD, PDA, APVR)
Follow-up during pregnancy: Once or twice in
local hospital

Follow-up during pregnancy: Every
trimester in local hospital

Delivery: Local hospital

Delivery: Local hospital

WHO II-III

WHO III

Mild left ventricular impairment (EF>54%)

Left ventricular impairment (30–45%)

Native or tissue valve disease not considered

Mechanical valve

WHO I or IV

Systemic right ventricle with good or mildly
impaired function

Marfan or other HTAD syndrome without aortic
dilatation

Fontan (if otherwise well)

Aorta <45mm in bicuspid aortic valve

Unrepaired cyanotic disease

Repaired coarctation

Moderate mitral stenosis

AVSD

Severe asymptomatic aortic stenosis
Moderate aortic dilatation

Follow-up during pregnancy: Bimonthly in
expert center

Follow-up during pregnancy: (Bi)monthly
in expert center

Delivery: Expert center

Delivery: Expert center

WHO IV: Pregnancy not recommended
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Severe systemic ventricular dysfunction (EF<30%)
Moderate systemic right ventricular dysfunction
Severe mitral stenosis
Severe symptomatic aortic stenosis
Severe aortic dilatation
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos
Severe (re)coarctation
Fontan with any complication
Follow-up during pregnancy: Monthly in
expert center
Delivery: Expert center

Fig. 483.3 Advised counseling for pregnancy in congenital heart dis-

ease. APVR, Anomalous pulmonary venous return; ASD, atrial septal
defect; AVSD, atrioventricular septal defect; EF, ejection fraction; ESC,
European Society of Cardiology; HTAD, hereditary thoracic aorta disease; PDA, persistent ductus arteriosus; VSD, ventricular septal defect;
WHO, World Health Organization. (From van Hagen IM, Roos-­Hesselink
JW. Pregnancy in congenital heart disease: risk prediction and counselling. Heart. 2020;106:1853–1861, Fig. 2.)

HEART FAILURE AND TRANSPLANT

Heart failure is increasingly prevalent in adults with CHD and is
associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Causes for heart
failure in this population include unrepaired or residual valve dysfunction, shunts, arrhythmias, venous obstruction, and systolic and/
or diastolic ventricular dysfunction. Data on medical and device
therapy to treat heart failure in adults with CHD are limited because
of the relatively small study populations and heterogenous heart
defects. Concomitant failure of noncardiac organs, such as lung,
kidney, and liver failure, is common in adult CHD patients with
heart failure and further complicates the management. Currently,
management of symptomatic CHD patients with systolic ventricular dysfunction is primarily extrapolated from data in adults with
heart failure in the setting of acquired heart disease and includes:
• Medical therapy that includes angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, β blockers, aldosterone antagonists, and diuretics
• Electrical device therapies such as implantable cardioverter defibrillators to reduce the risk for sudden cardiac death and permanent
pacemaker placement for cardiac resynchronization therapy to improve symptoms of heart failure
• Mechanical circulatory support, such as ventricular assist devices,
for patients with severe, refractory heart failure symptoms
• Referral to adult CHD heart failure/transplant specialist and center
Proper timing for heart transplantation in adults with CHD is
unclear and may vary for individual lesions. Patients with single
ventricle anatomy and complex anatomy often have lower priority
with the current transplant allocation system, and therefore often
have longer wait times before receiving a heart transplant. Early
posttransplant mortality is higher in adults with CHD compared
with adults with acquired heart disease because of increased perioperative mortality. However, once beyond the perioperative period,
patients with ACHD do as well as or better than those with acquired
heart disease, with expected 10-­year survival equivalent to or better
than that of adults without CHD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2844 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Section 4

Cardiac Arrhythmias
Chapter 484

Disturbances of Rate and
Rhythm of the Heart
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
The term arrhythmia refers to a disturbance in heart rate or rhythm.
Such disturbances can lead to heart rates that are abnormally fast, slow,
or irregular. They may be transient or incessant; congenital or acquired;
or caused by infection, a toxin, or drugs. They may be associated with
particular forms of congenital heart disease (CHD), may be a complication after surgical repair of CHD, may be a result of genetic causes,
or may be the result of a maternal connective tissue disease. Arrhythmias, either slow or fast, may lead to acutely decreased cardiac output.
If incessant, they may lead to a cardiomyopathy. Initially stable and
organized arrhythmias can degenerate into a more dangerous arrhythmia such as ventricular fibrillation. Arrhythmias may lead to syncope
or to sudden death (see Chapter 485). When a patient has an arrhythmia, it is important to determine whether the rhythm is likely to lead to
symptoms or to deteriorate into a life-­threatening condition. Rhythm
abnormalities such as single premature atrial and ventricular beats are
common, and in children without heart disease, usually pose no risk
to the patient.
A number of pharmacologic agents are available for treating
arrhythmias; many have not been studied extensively in children.
Insufficient data are available regarding pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and efficacy in the pediatric population, and therefore
the selection of an appropriate agent is based on the judgement and
experience of the clinician. Fortunately, most rhythm disturbances
in children can be reliably controlled with a single agent (Table
484.1). Transcatheter ablation is acceptable therapy not only for
life-­threatening or drug-­resistant arrhythmias but also for the cure
of arrhythmias. For patients with bradycardia, implantable pacemakers are small enough for use in all ages, even in premature
infants. Implantable cardioverter-­defibrillators are available for use
in high-­risk patients with malignant ventricular arrhythmias and an
increased risk of sudden death.

484.1 Principles of Antiarrhythmic Therapy
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Many antiarrhythmic agents are available for rhythm control. The
majority are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for use in children; their use is therefore considered “off-­label.”
Pediatric cardiologists have experience with these drugs, with well-­
recognized standards for dosing.
With the availability of potentially curative ablation procedures,
medical therapy has become less important. Intolerable drug side
effects, as well as the potential for an arrhythmia induced by an antiarrhythmic drug, can seriously limit medical therapy and will lead the
physician and family toward a potentially curative ablation procedure.
Antiarrhythmic drugs are frequently categorized using the
Vaughan-­Williams classification. This system comprises four classes:
class I includes agents that primarily block the sodium channel, class
II drugs are the β blockers, class III includes agents that prolong repolarization by blocking potassium channels, and class IV drugs are the

calcium channel blockers. Class I is further divided by the strength of
the sodium channel blockade (see Table 484.1).

484.2 Sinus Arrhythmias and Extrasystoles
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Phasic sinus arrhythmia represents a normal physiologic variation
in impulse discharges from the sinus node related to respirations. The
heart rate slows during expiration and accelerates during inspiration.
Occasionally, if the sinus rate becomes slow enough, an escape beat
arises from the atrioventricular (AV) junction region (Fig. 484.1). Normal phasic sinus arrhythmia is caused by the activity of the parasympathetic nervous system and can be quite prominent in healthy children.
It may mimic frequent premature contractions, but the relationship to
the phases of respiration can be appreciated with careful auscultation.
Drugs that increase vagal tone, such as digoxin, may exaggerate sinus
arrhythmia; it is usually abolished by exercise. Other irregularities in
sinus rhythm, especially bradycardia associated with periodic apnea,
are common in premature infants.
Sinus bradycardia is a result of slow discharge of impulses from
the sinus node, the heart’s “natural pacemaker.” A sinus rate <90 beats/
min in neonates and <60 beats/min in older children is considered
sinus bradycardia. Sinus bradycardia is commonly seen in highly conditioned athletes. In healthy individuals without symptoms, it has no
clinical significance. Sinus bradycardia may occur in systemic disease
(hypothyroidism, anorexia nervosa), and it resolves when the disorder
is under control. It may also be seen in association with conditions in
which there is high vagal tone, such as gastrointestinal obstruction or
intracranial processes. Low birthweight infants display great variation
in sinus rate. Sinus bradycardia is common in these infants, in conjunction with apnea, and may be associated with junctional escape beats;
premature atrial contractions are also frequent. These rhythm changes,
especially bradycardia, appear more often during sleep and are not
associated with symptoms. Usually, no therapy is necessary.
A wandering atrial pacemaker is defined as an intermittent shift in
the pacemaker of the heart from the sinus node to another part of the
atrium. It is not uncommon in childhood and usually represents a normal variant. It may also be seen in association with sinus bradycardia in
which the shift in atrial focus is an escape phenomenon.
Extrasystoles are produced by the premature discharge of an ectopic focus that may be situated in the atrium, the AV junction, or the
ventricle. Usually, isolated extrasystoles are of no clinical or prognostic
significance. Under certain circumstances, however, premature beats
may be caused by organic heart disease (inflammation, ischemia, fibrosis) or drug toxicity.
Atrial extrasystoles, also known as premature atrial contractions or complexes (PACs), are common in childhood, usually in the
absence of cardiac disease. Depending on the degree of prematurity
of the beat (coupling interval) and the preceding R-­R interval (cycle
length), PACs may result in a normal, a prolonged (aberrancy), or an
absent (blocked PAC) QRS complex. Blocked PACs occur when the
premature impulse cannot conduct to the ventricle because of refractoriness of the AV node or distal conducting system (Fig. 484.2). Atrial
extrasystoles must be distinguished from premature ventricular contractions. Careful scrutiny of the electrocardiogram (ECG) for a premature P wave preceding the QRS will show either a premature P wave
superimposed on and deforming the preceding T wave or a P wave that
is premature and has a different contour from that of the other sinus
P waves. PACs usually reset the sinus node pacemaker, leading to an
incomplete compensatory pause, but this feature is not always present
and so is not regarded as a completely reliable means of differentiating
atrial from ventricular premature complexes in children.
Ventricular extrasystoles, also known as premature ventricular
contractions or complexes (PVCs), may arise in any region of either
ventricle. PVCs are characterized by premature, widened, bizarre QRS
complexes that are not preceded by a premature P wave (Fig. 484.3).
When all premature beats have identical contours, they are classified

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2845
Table 484.1  Antiarrhythmic Drugs Commonly Used in Pediatric Patients, by Class
DRUG

INDICATIONS

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

CLASS IA: INHIBITS NA+ FAST CHANNEL, PROLONGS REPOLARIZATION
Quinidine
SVT, atrial fibrillation,
Oral: 30-­60 mg/
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
atrial flutter, VT; in
kg/24 hr divided
fever, cinchonism, QRS
atrial flutter, an AV
q6h (sulfate) or q8h
and QT prolongation,
node–blocking drug
(gluconate)
AV nodal block, asystole,
(digoxin, verapamil, 200 mg q6 (1-1.5 g/
syncope, thrombocytopenia,
propranolol) must
day divided q6),
hemolytic anemia, SLE,
be given first
sulfate; 324 mg
blurred vision, convulsions,
to prevent 1:1
q8-12h (1.5 g/day
allergic reactions,
conduction
divided q8-12h),
exacerbation of periodic
gluconate
paralysis
Max dose: 2.4 g/24 hr
Procainamide

SVT, atrial fibrillation,
atrial flutter, VT

Oral: 15-­50 mg/kg/day
divided q3-6h
Max dose: 4 g/24 hr
IV: 10-­15 mg/kg over
30-­60 min load
followed by 20-­80
μg/kg/min
Max dose: 2 g/24 hr

PR, QRS, QT interval
prolongation, anorexia,
nausea, vomiting, rash,
fever, agranulocytosis,
thrombocytopenia,
Coombs-­positive hemolytic
anemia, SLE, hypotension,
exacerbation of periodic
paralysis, proarrhythmia

Disopyramide

SVT, atrial fibrillation,
atrial flutter

Oral (immediate
release):
<1 yr: 10-30 mg/kg/
day divided q6h
1-4 yr: 10-20 mg/kg/
day divided q6h
>4-12 yr: 10-15 mg/
kg/day divided q6h
>12- ≤18 yr: 6-15 mg/
kg/day divided q6h
Max dose: 1.6 g/day
Adults: <50 kg: 100
mg q6h; >50kg:150
mg q6h
Long-acting dosing is
200-300 q12h

Anticholinergic effects,
urinary retention, blurred
vision, dry mouth, QT and
QRS prolongation, hepatic
toxicity, negative inotropic
effects, agranulocytosis,
psychosis, hypoglycemia,
proarrhythmia

CLASS IB: INHIBITS NA+ FAST CHANNEL, SHORTENS REPOLARIZATION
Lidocaine
VT, VF
IV: 1 mg/kg repeat
CNS effects, confusion,
q 5 min 2 times
convulsions, high-­grade
followed by 20-­
AV block, asystole, coma,
50 μg/kg/min (max
paresthesias, respiratory
dose: 3 mg/kg)
failure
Adult infusion rate:
1-4 mg/min

DRUG INTERACTIONS

DRUG
LEVEL

Enhances digoxin, may
increase PTT when
given with warfarin

2-­6 μg/mL

Toxicity increased by
amiodarone and
cimetidine

4-­8 μg/mL
With NAPA
<40 μg/mL

2-­7 μg/mL

Propranolol,
cimetidine, increases
toxicity

1.5-5.0 μg/
mL

Mexiletine

VT

Oral: 6-­15 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q8h
Max dose: 15 mg/kg/
day or 1.2 g/day.
Adults: 150-300 mg
q8-12h (max 1.2 g/
day)

GI upset, skin rash, neurologic

Cimetidine

0.5-­2 mcg/mL

Phenytoin

Digitalis intoxication

Oral: 4-8 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q12h
Max dose: 300-600
mg/day
IV: 10-­15 mg/kg over
1 hr load

Rash, gingival hyperplasia,
ataxia, lethargy, vertigo,
tremor, macrocytic anemia,
bradycardia with rapid push

Amiodarone, oral
anticoagulants,
cimetidine,
nifedipine,
disopyramide,
increase toxicity

10-­20 μg/mL

BSA dosing: 50-200
mg/m2/day divided
q8-12h
Weight based: 3-6 mg/
kg/day divided q8h
Max dosing: 8 mg/
kg/day
Max adult dosing: 400
mg/day

Blurred vision, nausea,
decrease in contractility,
proarrhythmia

Amiodarone increases
toxicity

0.2-­1 μg/mL

CLASS IC: INHIBITS NA+ CHANNEL
Flecainide
SVT, atrial tachycardia,
VT

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2846 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 484.1  Antiarrhythmic Drugs Commonly Used in Pediatric Patients, by Class—cont’d
DRUG

INDICATIONS

DOSING

SIDE EFFECTS

DRUG INTERACTIONS

Propafenone

SVT, atrial tachycardia,
atrial fibrillation, VT

Oral: 150-­300 mg/
m2/24 hr divided
q8h

Hypotension, decreased
contractility, hepatic toxicity,
paresthesia, headache,
proarrhythmia

Increases digoxin
levels

Oral: 1-­4 mg/kg/24 hr
divided q6h
Max dose 60 mg/24
hr
IV: 0.01-­0.15 mg/kg/
dose SLOW over
5-10 min
Max dose: 1-3 mg/dose

Bradycardia, loss of
concentration, school
performance problems,
bronchospasm,
hypoglycemia, hypotension,
heart block, CHF

Co-­administration
with disopyramide,
flecainide, or
verapamil may
decrease ventricular
function

CLASS II: β BLOCKERS
Propranolol
SVT, long QT

DRUG
LEVEL
0.2-­1 μg/mL

Atenolol

SVT

Oral: 0.5-­1 mg/
kg/24 hr once daily
or divided q12h

Bradycardia, loss of
concentration, school
performance problems

Co-­administration
with disopyramide,
flecainide, or
verapamil may
decrease ventricular
function

Nadolol

SVT, long QT

Oral: 1-­2 mg/kg/24 hr
given once daily

Bradycardia, loss of
concentration, school
performance problems,
bronchospasm,
hypoglycemia, hypotension,
heart block, CHF

Co-­administration
with disopyramide,
flecainide, or
verapamil may
decrease ventricular
function

Oral: 10-15 mg/kg/day
IV: 2.5-­5 mg/kg over
30-­60 min, may
repeat 3 times, then
5-20 mg/kg/day
continuous infusion
Max daily dose: 2.2
g/day

Hypothyroidism or
hyperthyroidism, elevated
triglycerides, hepatic
toxicity, pulmonary fibrosis

Digoxin (increases
levels), flecainide,
procainamide,
quinidine, warfarin,
phenytoin

1-­2.5 mg/L

PAC, PVC, bradycardia, AV
block, nausea, vomiting,
anorexia, prolongs PR
interval

Quinidine
Amiodarone,
verapamil, increase
digoxin levels

1-­2 mg/mL

Use with β blocker
or disopyramide
exacerbates CHF,
increases digoxin
level and toxicity

CLASS III: PROLONGS REPOLARIZATION
Amiodarone
SVT, JET, VT

CLASS IV AND MISCELLANEOUS MEDICATIONS
Digoxin
SVT (not WPW),
Oral/load instructions:
atrial flutter, atrial
Premature: 20 μg/kg
fibrillation
Newborn: 30 μg/kg
>6 mo: 40 μg/kg
Give 1/2 total dose
followed by 1/4 q8-­
12h × 2 doses
Maintenance: 10 μg/
kg/24 hr divide q12h
Max dose: 0.5 mg
IV: 3/4 PO dose
Max dose: 0.5 mg
Verapamil

SVT (not WPW)

Oral: 2-­8 mg/kg/day
divided q8h
Max dose: 480 mg/
day
IV: 0.1-­0.3 mg/kg/
dose
Max dose: 5-­10 mg/
dose

Bradycardia, asystole,
high-­degree AV block, PR
prolongation, hypotension,
CHF

Adenosine

SVT

IV: 50-­300 μg/kg by
need rapid IV push
Begin with 50 μg/kg
and increase by 50-­
100 μg/kg/dose
Max dose: 18 mg

Chest pain, flushing, dyspnea,
bronchospasm, atrial
fibrillation, bradycardia,
asystole

AV, Atrioventricular; CHF, congestive heart failure; CNS, central nervous systems; GI, gastrointestinal; IV, intravenous; JET, junctional ectopic tachycardia; NAPA, N-­acetyl
procainamide; PAC, premature atrial contraction; PTT, partial thromboplastin time; PVC, premature ventricular contraction; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus–like illness; SVT,
supraventricular tachycardia; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia; WPW, Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2847

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 484.1 Phasic sinus arrhythmia. Note the variation in P-­P interval with no significant change in P-­wave morphology or PR interval. This rhythm
is normal.

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 484.2 Premature atrial contraction (PAC). The second and tenth beats are premature, and deformation of the previous T wave identifies the
presence of a premature atrial contraction.

as uniform or monomorphic, suggesting origin from a common site.
When PVCs vary in contour, they are designated as multiform or
polymorphic, suggesting origin from more than one ventricular site.
Ventricular extrasystoles are often, but not always, followed by a full
compensatory pause because of a lack of resetting of the sinus node.
The presence of fusion beats, that is, complexes with morphologic features that are intermediate between those of normal sinus beats and
those of PVCs, proves the ventricular origin of the premature beat.

Extrasystoles produce a smaller stroke and pulse volume than normal
and, if quite premature, may not be audible with a stethoscope or palpable at the radial pulse. When frequent, extrasystoles may assume a
definite rhythm, for example, alternating with normal beats (bigeminy) or occurring after two normal beats (trigeminy). Most patients
are unaware of single PVCs, although some may be aware of a “skipped
beat” over the precordium. This sensation is caused by the increased
stroke volume of the normal beat after a compensatory pause. Anxiety,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2848 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

I

aVR

V1

V4

V3R

II

aVL

V2

V5

V4R

III

aVF

V3

V6

V7

II

Fig. 484.3 Premature ventricular contractions in a bigeminal rhythm. Note that the premature beat is wide and has a completely different mor-

phology from that of the sinus beat. The premature beat is not preceded by a discernible premature P wave or any appreciable deformation of the
preceding T wave.

a febrile illness, or ingestion of various drugs or stimulants may make
PVCs more frequent.
It is important to distinguish PVCs that are benign from those that
are likely to lead to more severe arrhythmias. The former usually disappear (or are “suppressed) at higher sinus rates, as seen during exercise.
If they persist or become more frequent during exercise, the arrhythmia may have greater significance. The following criteria are indications for further investigation of PVCs that could require suppressive
therapy: (1) ≥2 PVCs in a row; (2) multiform PVCs; (3) increased
ventricular ectopic activity with exercise; (4) R-­on-­T phenomenon
(premature ventricular depolarization occurs on the T wave of the
preceding beat); (5) extreme frequency of beats (e.g., >20% of total
beats on Holter monitoring); and (6) most importantly, the presence
of underlying heart disease, a history of heart surgery, or both. The
best therapy for benign PVCs is reassurance that the arrhythmia is not
life threatening, although highly symptomatic individuals may benefit
from suppressive therapy.
Malignant PVCs are usually secondary to another medical problem
(electrolyte imbalance, hypoxia, drug toxicity, cardiac injury, or a channelopathy). Successful treatment includes correction of the underlying
abnormality if possible. An intravenous lidocaine bolus and drip is
the first line of therapy, with more effective drugs such as amiodarone
reserved for refractory cases or for patients with underlying ventricular
dysfunction or hemodynamic compromise.

484.3 Supraventricular Tachycardia
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is a general term that includes
essentially all forms of paroxysmal or incessant tachycardia except
ventricular tachycardia. The category of SVT can be divided into three
major subcategories: reentrant tachycardias using an accessory pathway, reentrant tachycardias without an accessory pathway, and ectopic
or automatic tachycardias. Atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia (AVRT) involves an accessory pathway and is the most common

mechanism of SVT in infants. Atrioventricular node reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) is rare in infancy but increases during childhood and
into adolescence. Atrial flutter is rarely seen in children with normal
hearts, whereas intraatrial reentry tachycardia (also known as atrial
flutter) is sometimes seen in patients after cardiac surgery. Atrial and
junctional ectopic tachycardias are more often associated with abnormal hearts (cardiomyopathy) and the immediate postoperative period
after surgery for CHD.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Reentrant SVT is characterized by an abrupt onset and termination;
it may occur when the patient is at rest or exercising, and in infants it
may be precipitated by an acute infection. Attacks may last only a few
seconds or may persist for hours. The heart rate usually exceeds 180
beats/min in older children and adolescents and 220 bpm in infants
and younger children. Rates of SVT are often as high as 300 beats/min
in newborns and infants. The only complaint may be awareness of the
rapid heart rate.
Many older children tolerate these episodes extremely well, and it is
unlikely that short paroxysms are a danger to life. If heart rate is exceptionally rapid or the episode is prolonged, precordial discomfort and
heart failure may occur. In children, SVT may be exacerbated by exposure to caffeine, nonprescription decongestants, or bronchodilators.
In young patients, the diagnosis may be more obscure because of
their inability to communicate their symptoms. The heart rate during
infancy is normally higher than in older children and increases greatly
with crying. Occasionally, infants with SVT initially present with heart
failure because the tachycardia may go unrecognized for a long time,
leading to tachycardia-­induced cardiomyopathy. The heart rate during SVT episodes is frequently in the range of 240-­300 beats/min. If the
episode lasts 6-­24 hours or more, heart failure may be recognized, and
the infant may present with poor feeding; an ashen color; and will be
restless and irritable, with tachypnea, poor pulses, and hepatomegaly.
When tachycardia occurs in the fetus, it can cause hydrops fetalis, the
in utero manifestation of heart failure.
In neonates, SVT is usually manifested as a narrow QRS complex
(<0.08 second). The P wave is visible on a standard ECG in only 50–60%

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2849
of neonates with SVT, but it is detectable with a transesophageal lead
in most patients. Differentiation from sinus tachycardia may be difficult but is important because sinus tachycardia requires treatment of
the underlying problem (e.g., sepsis, hypovolemia) rather than antiarrhythmic medication. If the rate is >230 beats/min with an abnormal
P-­wave axis (a normal P wave is positive in leads I and aVF), sinus
tachycardia is not likely. The heart rate in SVT also tends to be relatively
fixed, whereas in sinus tachycardia the heart rate varies with changes
in parasympathetic and sympathetic tone. AVRT uses a bypass tract
that may be able to conduct bidirectionally (Wolff-­Parkinson-­White
[WPW] syndrome) or may be retrograde only (concealed accessory
pathway). Patients with WPW syndrome have a small but real risk of
sudden death. If the accessory pathway rapidly conducts in antegrade
fashion, the patient is at risk for atrial fibrillation begetting ventricular

fibrillation. Risk stratification, including 24-­hour Holter monitoring
and exercise study, may help differentiate patients at higher risk for
sudden death from WPW. However, it is important to note that intermittent preexcitation may not decrease a patient’s risk profile. Syncope
is an ominous symptom in WPW, and any patient with syncope and
WPW syndrome should have an electrophysiology study (EPS) and
consideration for catheter ablation.
The typical electrocardiographic features of WPW syndrome
are seen when the patient is not having tachycardia. These features
include a short P-­R interval and slow upstroke of a widened QRS
(delta wave) (Fig. 484.4). This may not be evident in every lead on
an ECG. Although most often presenting in patients with a normal
heart, WPW syndrome may also be associated with Ebstein anomaly
of the tricuspid valve, congenitally corrected transposition of the great

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

A

B

II

Fig. 484.4 A, Supraventricular tachycardia in a child with Wolff-­Parkinson-­White (WPW) syndrome. Note the normal QRS complexes during the

tachycardia, as well as clear retrograde P waves seen on the upstroke of the T waves. B, Later, the typical features of WPW syndrome are apparent
(short P-­R interval, wide QRS with slurred upstroke known as a delta wave).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2850 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
arteries, or certain forms of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. WPW may
also be associated with hypokalemic periodic paralysis, Danon disease,
tuberous sclerosis, and rarely with pathogenic variants in PRKAG2.
The critical anatomic structure is an accessory pathway consisting of
an electrically active myocardial fiber connecting atrium to ventricle on
either the right or the left side of the AV ring (Fig. 484.5). During sinus
rhythm, the impulse is carried over both the AV node and the accessory pathway; it produces some degree of fusion of the two depolarization fronts that results in an abnormal QRS complex. During AVRT, an
impulse is carried in antegrade fashion through the AV node (orthodromic tachycardia), which results in a normal QRS complex, and in
retrograde fashion through the accessory pathway to the atrium, thereby
perpetuating the tachycardia. In these cases, only after cessation of the
tachycardia is the typical ECG features of WPW syndrome recognized
(see Fig. 484.4). When rapid antegrade conduction occurs through
the accessory pathway during tachycardia and the retrograde reentry
pathway to the atrium is by the AV node (antidromic tachycardia), the
QRS complexes are wide and the potential for more serious arrhythmias
(ventricular fibrillation) is greater, especially if atrial fibrillation occurs.
AVNRT involves the use of two functional pathways within the
AV node: the slow and fast AV node pathways. This arrhythmia is
more often seen in adolescence and young adulthood. It is one of the
few forms of SVT that is occasionally associated with syncope. This
arrhythmia is often seen in association with exercise.

TREATMENT

In infants, vagal stimulation can be induced by transiently placing an
ice bag over the entire face to abort the attack for 15-­30 seconds (this
can be repeated if needed). Older children may be taught vagal maneuvers such as the Valsalva maneuver, straining, breath holding, or standing on their head. Ocular pressure must never be performed, and carotid
sinus massage is rarely effective. When these measures fail, several pharmacologic alternatives are available (see Table 484.1). In stable patients,
adenosine by rapid intravenous push is the treatment of choice (0.1
mg/kg, up to 6 mg) because of its rapid onset of action and minimal
effects on cardiac contractility. The dose may need to be increased (0.2
mg/kg, up to 12 mg) if no effect on the tachycardia is seen. Because of
the potential for adenosine to initiate atrial fibrillation, it should never
be administered without a means for direct current (DC) cardioversion near at hand. Calcium channel blockers such as verapamil have
also been used in the initial treatment of SVT in older children. Verapamil may reduce cardiac output and produce hypotension and cardiac
arrest in infants younger than 1 year and therefore is contraindicated
in this age-­group. In urgent situations when symptoms of severe heart
failure have already occurred, synchronized DC cardioversion (0.5-­2 J/
kg) is recommended as the initial management (see Chapter 79). Pace
termination using esophageal pacing catheter is also an option.
Once the patient has been converted to sinus rhythm, a longer-­
acting agent is selected for maintenance therapy. In patients without an

*
a

n
a

NSR

Fig. 484.5 Schematic representation of the heart with a right-­sided

accessory pathway (WPW syndrome). The asterisk indicates initiation of
the sinus beat. The arrows indicate the direction and spread of excitation. The electrocardiographic complex shown represents a fusion beat
that combines activation over the normal (n) and accessory (a) pathways. The latter inscribes the delta wave. NSR, Normal sinus rhythm.

antegrade accessory pathway (non-­WPW), the β-­adrenergic blockers
are the mainstay of drug therapy. Digoxin has been used for decades
and may be effective in infants, but less so in older children. In children with WPW, digoxin or calcium channel blockers may increase the
rate of antegrade conduction of impulses through the bypass tract, with
the possibility of ventricular fibrillation, and are therefore contraindicated. These patients are usually managed with β blockers. In patients
with resistant tachycardias, flecainide, propafenone, sotalol, and amiodarone are all acceptable next-­line agents. Most antiarrhythmic agents
have the potential of causing new dangerous arrhythmias (proarrhythmia) and decreasing heart function. Flecainide and propafenone
should be limited to use in patients with hearts having otherwise normal cardiac function.
If cardiac failure occurs because of prolonged tachycardia in an infant
with a normal heart, cardiac function usually returns to normal after
sinus rhythm is reinstituted, although it may take days to weeks. Infants
with SVT diagnosed within the first 3-­4 months of life have a lower incidence of recurrence than those initially diagnosed at a later age. These
patients have up to an 80% chance of resolution by the first year of life,
although approximately 30% will have recurrences later in childhood;
if medical therapy is required, it can be tapered by 12-­18 months and
the patient watched for signs of recurrence. Parents should be taught to
measure the heart rate in their infants, so that prolonged asymptomatic
episodes of SVT may be detected before heart failure occurs.
The use of 24-­
hour electrocardiographic (Holter) monitoring
assists in following the course of therapy and detecting brief runs
of asymptomatic tachycardia, particularly in younger children and
infants. Direct-­to-­consumer heart monitoring devices (“wearables”)
are beginning to replace traditional monitors as newer technology
allows for miniaturization and improved accuracy of at-­home monitoring devices. These devices have helped identify asymptomatic
tachycardia in infants and young children. Some centers use transesophageal pacing to evaluate the effects of therapy in infants. More
detailed electrophysiology studies performed in the cardiac catheterization laboratory are often indicated in patients with refractory SVT
who are candidates for catheter ablation. During an EPS, multiple electrode catheters are placed transvenously in different locations in the
heart. Pacing is performed to evaluate the conduction characteristics
of the accessory pathway and to initiate the tachyarrhythmia, and mapping is performed to locate the accessory pathway. Catheter ablation
of an accessory pathway is frequently used in children and teenagers
and in patients who require multiple agents or find drug side effects
intolerable or for whom arrhythmia control is poor. Ablation may be
performed either by radiofrequency ablation, which creates tissue
heating, or cryoablation, in which tissue is frozen (Fig. 484.6). The
overall initial success rate for catheter ablation in experienced pediatric
laboratories ranges from 90% to 98%, depending on the location of the
accessory pathway. Surgical ablation of bypass tracts is rarely done and
proposed only in carefully selected patients.
The management of SVT caused by AVNRT is almost identical to
that for AVRT. Children with AVNRT are not at increased risk of sudden death because they do not have a manifest accessory pathway. In
practice, their episodes are more likely to be brought on by exercise or
other forms of stress, and the heart rates can be quite fast, leading to
chest pain, dizziness, and occasionally syncope. If chronic antiarrhythmic medication is desired, β blockers are the drugs of choice; acutely,
AVNRT responds to adenosine. Less is known about the natural history, but patients with AVNRT are seen quite frequently in adulthood,
so spontaneous resolution seems unlikely. Patients are quite amenable
to catheter ablation, either using radiofrequency energy or cryoablation, with high success rates and low complication rates.
Atrial ectopic tachycardia is an uncommon tachycardia in childhood. It is characterized by a variable rate (seldom >200 beats/min),
identifiable P waves with an abnormal axis, and either a sustained
or incessant nonsustained tachycardia (Fig. 484.7). This form of
atrial tachycardia has a single automatic focus. Identification of this
mechanism is aided by monitoring the ECG while initiating vagal or
pharmacologic therapy. Unlike reentrant tachycardias, which “break”
suddenly, automatic tachycardias such as atrial tachycardia tend to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2851

A

B
Fig. 484.6 Three-­dimensional electroanatomic map of focal atrial tachycardias. Focal site of early activation (red) is shown, with radial propaga-

tion away from that central site. The activation map was superimposed onto the patient’s cardiac CT scan, taken the day before the procedure and
imported into the mapping system. This patient had two separate atrial foci. A, Tachycardia #1: Earliest site of activation, mapped to the posterior
aspect of the LSPV ostium. Posterior external view (left side) and endoluminal or internal view looking posterior to anterior from within the left atrium
into the mouth of the LSPV (right side) are shown. B, Tachycardia #2: Earliest site mapped to the aortomitral continuity. The anatomic relation between the mitral annulus and the aortic root can be clearly appreciated (left side). The location of the ablation catheter at the site of earliest atrial
activation during atrial tachycardia is shown on the TEE image (right side). AMC, Aortomitral continuity; AoV, aortic valve; LA, left atrium; LAA, left
atrial appendage; LAO, left anterior oblique; LIPV, left inferior pulmonary vein; LMCA, left main coronary artery; LSPV, left superior pulmonary vein;
LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral valve; RIPV, right inferior pulmonary vein; RSPV, right superior pulmonary vein; TEE, transesophageal echocardiogram.
(From Lee G, Sanders P, Kalman JM. Catheter ablation of atrial arrhythmias: state of the art. Lancet. 2012;380:1509–1518, Fig 3.)

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 484.7 Atrial ectopic tachycardia. Note the abnormal P waves and relative prolongation of the PR interval.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2852 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
“warm up” and “cool down” (i.e., rates tend to gradually increase and
decrease). Atrial ectopic tachycardias are usually more difficult to control pharmacologically than the more common reentrant tachycardias.
If pharmacologic therapy with a single agent is unsuccessful, catheter
ablation is suggested and has a high success rate, usually >90%. Long-­
term treatment or ablation may not be necessary in some cases, as atrial
ectopic tachycardia may resolve spontaneously in some patients.
Chaotic or multifocal atrial tachycardia is defined as atrial tachycardia with ≥3 ectopic P-­
wave morphologies, frequent blocked P
waves, and varying P-­R intervals of conducted beats. This arrhythmia
occurs most often in infants younger than 1 year of age, usually without
concomitant cardiac disease, although some evidence suggests an association with viral myocarditis or pulmonary disease. The goal of drug
treatment is rate control, or slowing of the ventricular rate, because
conversion to sinus rhythm may not be possible. Multiple agents are
often required. When this arrhythmia occurs in infancy, it usually terminates spontaneously by 3 years of age.
Accelerated junctional ectopic tachycardia (JET) is an automatic
(non-­reentry) arrhythmia in which the junctional rate exceeds that of
the sinus node and AV dissociation may result. This arrhythmia is most
often recognized in the early postoperative period after cardiac surgery
and may be extremely difficult to control. Reduction of the infusion
rate of exogenous catecholamines and mitigating causes of endogenous
catecholamines such as fever and pain are important adjuncts to management. Intravenous amiodarone and procainamide are effective in
the treatment of postoperative JET. Congenital JET may be seen in the
absence of surgery. It is often incessant, can be difficult to treat, and can
lead to a dilated cardiomyopathy. Patients who require chronic therapy
may respond to amiodarone or sotalol. Congenital JET can be cured by
catheter ablation, but long-­term AV block requiring a pacemaker is an
occasional important complication.
Atrial flutter, also known as intraatrial reentrant tachycardia, is an
atrial tachycardia characterized by atrial activity at a rate of 250-­300
beats/min in children and adolescents and 400-­600 beats/min in neonates. The mechanism of common atrial flutter consists of a reentrant
rhythm originating in the right atrium circling the tricuspid valve
annulus. Because the AV node cannot transmit such rapid impulses,

some degree of AV block is virtually always present, and the ventricles respond to every second to fourth atrial beat (Fig. 484.8). Occasionally, the response is variable, and the rhythm appears irregular.
In older children, atrial flutter usually occurs in the setting of CHD;
neonates with atrial flutter frequently have normal hearts. Atrial flutter
may occur during acute infectious illnesses but is most often seen in
patients with large stretched atria, such as those associated with long-­
standing mitral or tricuspid insufficiency, tricuspid atresia, Ebstein
anomaly, or rheumatic mitral stenosis. Atrial flutter can also occur
after any palliative or corrective cardiac surgery involving an atriotomy. Uncontrolled atrial flutter may precipitate heart failure. Vagal
maneuvers or adenosine may produce a temporary slowing of the heart
rate as a result of increased AV block, allowing a diagnosis to be made.
The diagnosis is confirmed by ECG, which demonstrates the rapid and
regular atrial saw-­toothed flutter waves. Atrial flutter usually converts
immediately to sinus rhythm by synchronized DC cardioversion, which is
most often the treatment of choice. If pacing wires or atrial pacemaker
leads are present, pace termination with atrial overdriving pacing may
be a treatment option. In infants, an esophageal pacing lead can also
be used, but care must be taken to avoid inadvertent ventricular pacing. Patients with chronic atrial flutter in the setting of CHD may be
at increased risk for thromboembolism and stroke and should thus
undergo anticoagulation before elective cardioversion. β Blockers or
calcium channel blockers may be used to slow the ventricular response
in atrial flutter by prolonging the AV node refractory period. Other
agents may be used to maintain sinus rhythm, including class I agents
such as procainamide or propafenone or class III agents such as amiodarone and sotalol. Catheter ablation has been used in patients with
normal hearts and those with CHD with moderate success. After cardioversion, neonates with normal hearts may be followed off antiarrhythmic therapy or may be treated with digoxin, propranolol, or
sotalol for 6-­12 months, after which the medication can usually be
discontinued, because neonatal atrial flutter generally does not recur.
Atrial fibrillation is uncommon in children and is rare in infants.
The atrial excitation is chaotic and more rapid (400-­700 beats/min)
and produces an irregularly irregular ventricular response and pulse
(Fig. 484.9). This rhythm disorder is often associated with atrial

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

V1

II

V5

Fig. 484.8 Neonatal atrial flutter. Note that there is variable AV conduction and the flutter waves have a cycle length of 160 msec, corresponding
to an atrial rate of 375 bpm.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2853

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 484.9 Atrial fibrillation, characterized by the absence of clear P waves and an irregularly irregular ventricular response. One can appreciate the

irregular, rapid undulations (F waves). Fibrillatory waves may not be visible in all leads and should be carefully sought in every tracing with irregular
R-­R intervals. Note that no two R-­R intervals are the same.

enlargement or disease. Atrial fibrillation may be seen in older children with rheumatic mitral valve stenosis. It is also seen rarely as a
complication of atrial surgery, in patients with left atrial enlargement
secondary to left AV valve insufficiency, and in patients with WPW
syndrome. Thyrotoxicosis, pulmonary embolism, pericarditis, or cardiomyopathy may be suspected in a previously normal older child
or adolescent who presents with atrial fibrillation. Very rarely, atrial
fibrillation may be familial and is usually an autosomal dominant
disorder often affecting the potassium or sodium channel genes. The
best initial treatment is rate control, most effectively with calcium
channel blockers, to limit the ventricular rate during atrial fibrillation. Digoxin is not given if WPW syndrome is present. Normal sinus
rhythm may be restored with intravenous procainamide, ibutilide, or
amiodarone; DC cardioversion is the first choice in hemodynamically
unstable patients. Patients with chronic atrial fibrillation are at risk
for thromboembolism and stroke and should undergo anticoagulation with warfarin. Patients being treated by elective cardioversion
should also undergo anticoagulation.

484.4 Ventricular Tachyarrhythmias
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is much less common than SVT in pediatric patients. VT is defined as at least three PVCs at >120 beats/min
(Fig. 484.10). It may be paroxysmal or incessant. VT can be seen in
congenital or acquired heart disease, including inherited arrhythmia
syndromes secondary to channelopathies, myopathies, or laminopathies. VT may be associated with structural disease such as myocarditis, anomalous origin of a coronary artery, mitral valve prolapse,
primary cardiac tumors, arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (previously
known as arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy), dilated or
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and cardiac laminopathies (associated
with lamin A/C gene pathogenic variants). Patients with laminopathies
associated with a variant in the lamin A/C gene (LMNA), as seen in
Emery Dreifuss muscular dystrophy or 1B limb girdle muscular dystrophy are at risk of primary ventricular arrhythmias in addition to
development of cardiomyopathies. VT can also be seen in patients with

channelopathies such as catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, Brugada syndrome, TANGO2-­related encephalopathy
and arrhythmias, and long QT syndrome. A prolonged QT interval of
either congenital or acquired (proarrhythmic medication or hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia) causation can increase a patient’s
risk of arrhythmias. Other causes include WPW syndrome and drug use
(cocaine, amphetamines). VT may develop years after intraventricular
surgery (especially tetralogy of Fallot and related defects) or occur without obvious organic heart disease. VT must be distinguished from SVT
with aberrancy or rapid conduction over an accessory pathway (Table
484.2). The presence of clear capture and fusion beats confirms the diagnosis of VT. Although some children tolerate rapid ventricular rates for
many hours, this arrhythmia should be promptly treated because hypotension and degeneration into ventricular fibrillation may result. For
patients who are hemodynamically stable, intravenous amiodarone, lidocaine, and procainamide are the initial drugs of choice. If treatment is to
be successful, it is critical to search for and correct any underlying abnormalities, such as electrolyte imbalance, hypoxia, or drug toxicity. Amiodarone is the treatment of choice during cardiac arrest (see Chapter 79).
Hemodynamically unstable patients with VT should be immediately
treated with DC cardioversion. Overdrive ventricular pacing, through
temporary pacing wires or a permanent pacemaker, may also be effective, although it may cause the arrhythmia to deteriorate into ventricular
fibrillation. In the neonatal period, VT may be associated with an anomalous left coronary artery (see Chapter 481.2) or a myocardial tumor.
Unless a clearly reversible cause is identified, an electrophysiology
study is usually indicated for patients in whom VT has developed,
and depending on the findings, catheter ablation and/or implantable
cardioverter-­defibrillator (ICD) implantation may be indicated.
A related arrhythmia, ventricular accelerated rhythm, is occasionally seen in infants. It is defined the same way as VT, but the rate is only
slightly faster than the coexisting sinus rate (within 10%). It is generally
benign and resolves spontaneously.
Ventricular fibrillation (VF) is a chaotic rhythm that results in
death unless an effective ventricular beat is rapidly reestablished.
Usually, cardiopulmonary resuscitation and DC defibrillation are
necessary. If defibrillation is ineffective or VF recurs, amiodarone or
lidocaine may be given intravenously and defibrillation repeated (see
Chapter 79). After recovery from VF, a search should be made for the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2854 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

I

aVR

V1

V4

II

aVL

V2

V5

III

aVF

V3

V6

II

Fig. 484.10 Ventricular tachycardia. The QRS complexes are wide and abnormal. Atrioventricular dissociation can be best appreciated in the lead
II rhythm strip at the bottom.

Table 484.2  Diagnosis of Tachyarrhythmias: Electrocardiographic Findings
HEART RATE (BEATS/MIN)

P WAVE

QRS DURATION

REGULARITY

Sinus tachycardia

<230

Always present, normal axis

Normal

Rate varies with respiration

Atrial tachycardia

180-­320

Present
Abnormal P-­wave
morphology and axis

Normal or prolonged (with
aberration)

Usually regular, but
ventricular response may
be variable because of
Wenckebach conduction

Atrial fibrillation

120-­180

Fibrillatory waves

Normal or prolonged (with
aberration)

Irregularly irregular (no two
R-­R intervals alike)

Atrial flutter

Atrial: 250-­400
Ventricular response
variable: 100-­320

Saw-­tooth flutter waves

Normal or prolonged (with
aberration)

Regular ventricular
response (e.g., 2:1, 3:1,
3:2)

Junctional tachycardia

120-­280

Atrioventricular dissociation
with no fusion, and normal
QRS capture beats

Normal or prolonged (with
aberration)

Regular (except with
capture beats)

Ventricular tachycardia

120-­300

Atrioventricular dissociation
with capture beats and
fusion beats

Prolonged for age

Regular (except with
capture beats)

underlying cause. EPS is indicated for patients who have survived VF
unless a clearly reversible cause is identified. If WPW syndrome is
noted, catheter ablation should be performed. For patients in whom no
correctable abnormality can be found, an ICD is almost always indicated because of the high risk of sudden death.

484.5 Long QT Syndromes
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Long QT syndrome is a genetic abnormality of ventricular repolarization, with an estimated incidence of about 1 per 10,000 births
(Table 484.3; also includes other genetic arrhythmia syndromes). It
presents as a long QT interval on the surface ECG and is associated
with malignant ventricular arrhythmias (torsades de pointes and

VF). Long QT syndrome can cause syncope and sudden death and
may be the cause of some cases of sudden infant death syndrome,
drowning, and intrauterine fetal demise (Fig. 484.11). In perhaps
80% of cases, there is an identifiable pathogenic variant. The distinction between dominant and recessive forms of the disease (Romano-­
Ward syndrome vs Jervell-­Lange-­Nielsen syndrome) is no longer
made because the latter recessive condition is known to result from
the homozygous state. Jervell-­L ange-­Nielsen syndrome is associated with congenital sensorineural deafness. Asymptomatic but at-­
risk patients carrying the gene variant may not all have a prolonged
QT duration. QT interval prolongation may become apparent with
exercise, position change or during catecholamine infusions.
Genetic studies have identified pathogenic variants in cardiac potassium and sodium channels (see Table 484.3). Additional forms (up to 13
variants) of long QT syndrome (LQTS) have been described, but these
are much less common. Genotype may predict clinical manifestations;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2855
LQTS type 1 (LQT1) events are usually induced by stress or exertion,
whereas events in LQT3 often occur at rest, especially during sleep
(see Fig. 484.11). LQT2 events have an intermediate pattern, often
occurring in the postpartum period or with auditory triggers. LQT3
has the highest probability for sudden death, followed by LQT2 and
then LQT1. Drugs may prolong the QT interval directly but more often
do so when drugs such as erythromycin or ketoconazole inhibit their
metabolism (Table 484.4).
The clinical manifestation of LQTS in children is most often a syncopal episode brought on by exercise, fright, or a sudden startle; some
events occur during sleep (LQT3). Patients can initially be seen with
seizures, presyncope, or palpitations; approximately 10% are initially
in cardiac arrest. The diagnosis is based on electrocardiographic and
clinical criteria. Not all patients with long QT intervals have LQTS, and
patients with normal QT intervals on a resting ECG may have LQTS. A
heart rate–corrected QT interval (QTc) of >0.47 second is highly indicative, whereas a QTc interval of >0.44 second is suggestive. Other features
include notched T waves in three leads, T-­wave alternans, a low heart
rate for age, a history of syncope (especially with stress), and a familial
history of either LQTS or unexplained sudden death. Exercise testing,
provocative drug testing, and 24-­hour Holter monitoring are adjuncts
to the diagnosis. Genotyping is available and can identify the pathogenic variant in approximately 80% of patients known to have LQTS by
clinical criteria. Genotyping is not useful in ruling out the diagnosis in
individuals with suspected disease, but when positive is very useful in
identifying asymptomatic affected relatives of the index case.
Short QT syndromes manifest with atrial or ventricular fibrillation
and are associated with syncope and sudden death (see Table 484.3).

They are often caused by a gain-­of-­function mutation in cardiac potassium channels.
Treatment of LQTS includes the use of β-­blocking agents at doses
that blunt sympathetic tone. Nonselective β blockers such as propranolol and nadolol seem to be more effective than atenolol and metoprolol for some genotypes. Some patients require a pacemaker because
of drug-­induced bradycardia. An implantable cardiac defibrillator
(ICD) is indicated in patients with continued syncope despite treatment with β blockers and those who have experienced cardiac arrest.
Genotype-­phenotype correlative studies suggest that β blockers are not
as effective in patients with LQT3, but these patients may respond to
mexiletine with shortening of the QT interval.

484.6 Sinus Node Dysfunction
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Sinus arrest and sinoatrial block may cause a sudden pause in the
heartbeat. Sinus arrest is presumably caused by failure of impulse formation within the sinus node. Sinoatrial block results from a block
between the sinus pacemaker complex and the surrounding atrium.
These arrhythmias are rare in childhood except in patients who have
had extensive atrial surgery.
Sick sinus syndrome is the result of abnormalities in the sinus node
or atrial conduction pathways, or both. This syndrome may occur in
the absence of CHD and has been reported in siblings, but it is most
commonly seen after surgical correction of congenital heart defects,

Table 484.3  Heritable Arrhythmia Syndrome Susceptibility Genes
GENE

LOCUS

PROTEIN

LONG QT SYNDROME (LQTS)
Major LQTS Genes
KCNQ1 (LQT1)

11p15.5

IKs potassium channel alpha subunit (KVLQT1, Kv7.1)

KCNH2 (LQT2)

7q35-­36

IKr potassium channel alpha subunit (HERG, Kv11.1)

SCN5A (LQT3)

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

Minor LQTS Genes (Listed Alphabetically)
AKAP9

7q21-­q22

Yotiao

CACNA1C

12p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

CALM1

14q32.11

Calmodulin 1

CALM2

2p21

Calmodulin 2

CALM3

19q13.2-­q13.3

Calmodulin 3

CAV3

3p25

Caveolin-­3

KCNE1

21q22.1

Potassium channel beta subunit (MinK)

KCNE2

21q22.1

Potassium channel beta subunit (MiRP1)

KCNJ5

11q24.3

Kir3.4 subunit of IKACH channel

SCN4B

11q23.3

Sodium channel beta4 subunit

SNTA1

20q11.2

Syntrophin-­alpha1

TRIADIN KNOCKOUT (TKO) SYNDROME
TRDN

6q22.31

Cardiac triadin

ANDERSEN-­TAWIL SYNDROME (ATS)
KCNJ2 (ATS1)

17q23

IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)

TIMOTHY SYNDROME (TS)
CACNA1C

12p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

Cardiac-­Only TS (COTS)
CACNA1C

12p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

SHORT QT SYNDROME (SQTS)
KCNH2 (SQT1)

7q35-­36

IKr potassium channel alpha subunit (HERG, Kv11.1)

KCNQ1 (SQT2)

11p15.5

IKs potassium channel alpha subunit (KVLQT1, Kv7.1)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

2856 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 484.3  Heritable Arrhythmia Syndrome Susceptibility Genes—cont’d
GENE

LOCUS

PROTEIN

KCNJ2 (SQT3)

17q23

IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)

CACNA1C (SQT4)

12p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

CACNB2 (SQT5)

10p12

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel beta2 subunit

CACN2D1 (SQT6)

7q21-­q22

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel 2 delta1 subunit

CATECHOLAMINERGIC POLYMORPHIC VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA (CPVT)
RYR2 (CPVT1)
1q42.1-­q43
Ryanodine receptor 2
CASQ2 (CPVT2)

1p13.3

Calsequestrin 2

KCNJ2 (CPVT3)

17q23

IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)

CALM1

14q32.11

Calmodulin 1

CALM3

19q13.2-­q13.3

Calmodulin 3

TRDN

6q22.31

Cardiac triadin

BRUGADA SYNDROME (BRS)
SCN5A (BrS1)

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

Minor Brs Genes (Listed Alphabetically)
ABCC9

12p12.1

ATP-­binding cassette, subfamily C member 9

CACNA1C

2p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

CACNA2D1

7q21-­q22

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel 2 delta1 subunit

CACNB2

10p12

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel beta2 subunit

FGF12

3q28

Fibroblast growth factor 12

GPD1L

3p22.3

Glycerol-­3-­phosphate dehydrogenase 1–like

KCND3

1p13.2

Voltage-­gated potassium channel (Ito) subunit Kv4.3

KCNE3

11q13.4

Potassium channel beta3 subunit (MiRP2)

KCNJ8

12p12.1

Inward rectifier K+ channel Kir6.1

HEY2

6q

Hes-­related family BHLH transcription factor with YRPW motif 2

PKP2

12p11

Plakophilin-­2

RANGRF

17p13.1

RAN guanine nucleotide release factor 1

SCN1B

19q13

Sodium channel beta1

SCN2B

11q23

Sodium channel beta2

SCN3B

11q24.1

Sodium channel beta3

SCN10A

3p22.2

Sodium voltage-­gated channel alpha10 subunit (Nav1.8)

SLMAP

3p14.3

Sarcolemma-­associated protein

EARLY REPOLARIZATION SYNDROME (ERS)
ABCC9
12p12.1

ATP-­binding cassette, subfamily C member 9

CACNA1C

2p13.3

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel (Cav1.2)

CACNA2D1

7q21-­q22

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel 2 delta1 subunit

CACNB2

10p12

Voltage-­gated L-­type calcium channel beta2 subunit

KCNJ8

12p12.1

Inward rectifier K+ channel Kir6.1

SCN5A

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

SCN10A

3p22.2

Sodium voltage-­gated channel alpha10 subunit (Nav1.8)

IDIOPATHIC VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION (IVF)
ANK2
4q25-­q27

Ankyrin B

CALM1

14q32.11

Calmodulin 1

DPP6

7q36

Dipeptidyl-­peptidase-­6

KCNJ8

12p12.1

Inward rectifier K+ channel Kir6.1

RYR2

1q42.1-­q43

Ryanodine receptor 2

SCN3B

11q23

Sodium channel beta3 subunit

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2857
Table 484.3  Heritable Arrhythmia Syndrome Susceptibility Genes—cont’d
GENE

LOCUS

PROTEIN

SCN5A

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

PROGRESSIVE CARDIAC CONDUCTION DISEASE/DEFECT (PCCD)
SCN5A
3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

TRPM4

19q13.33

Transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily M, member 4

SICK SINUS SYNDROME (SSS)
ANK2

4q25-­q27

Ankyrin B

HCN4

15q24-­q25

Hyperpolarization-­activated cyclic nucleotide–gated channel 4

MYH6

14q11.2

Myosin, heavy chain 6, cardiac muscle, alpha

SCN5A

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

“ANKYRIN-­B SYNDROME”
ANK2

4q25-­q27

Ankyrin B

FAMILIAL ATRIAL FIBRILLATION (FAF)
ANK2

4q25-­q27

Ankyrin B

GATA4

8p23.1-­p22

GATA-­binding protein 4

GATA5

20q13.33

GATA-­binding protein 5

GJA5

1q21

Connexin 40

KCNA5

12p13

IKur potassium channel (Kv1.5)

KCNE2

21q22.1

Potassium channel beta subunit (MiRP1)

KCNH2

7q35-­36

IKr potassium channel alpha subunit (HERG, Kv11.1)

KCNJ2

17q23

IK1 potassium channel (Kir2.1)

KCNQ1

11p15.5

IKs potassium channel alpha subunit (KVLQT1, Kv7.1)

NPPA

1p36

Atrial natriuretic peptide precursor A

NUP155

5p13

Nucleoporin 155 kD

SCN5A

3p21-­p24

Cardiac sodium channel alpha subunit (Nav1.5)

From Tester DJ, Ackerman MJ. Genetics of cardiac arrhythmias. In Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019, Table
33.1, p. 605.

KCNH2 (LQT2)

KCNQ1 (LQT1)

Swimming

35%

Exertion/emotion

C676

N1

30%

C1159

N1
Auditory
triggers
Postpartum
period

SCN5A (LQT3)
Sleep
Rest
10%

C2016

N1

Fig. 484.11 Genotype-­phenotype correlations in long QT syndrome (LQTS). About 75% of clinically strong LQTS is caused by mutations in three
genes (35% KCNQ1, 30% KCNH2, and 10% SCN5A) encoding for ion channels that are critically responsible for the orchestration of the cardiac
action potential. Observed genotype-­phenotype correlations include swimming/exertion/emotion and LQT1, auditory triggers/postpartum period
and LQT2, and sleep/rest and LQT3. (From Tester DJ, Ackerman MJ. Genetics of cardiac arrhythmias. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds.
Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig 33-­3, p. 607.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2858 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 484.4  Acquired Causes of QT Prolongation*
DRUGS
Antibiotics—erythromycin, clarithromycin, azithromycin,
telithromycin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, fluoroquinolones†
Antifungal agents†—fluconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole
Antiprotozoal agents—pentamidine isethionate
Antihistamines—astemizole, terfenadine (Seldane; Seldane has been
removed from the market for this reason)
Antidepressants—tricyclics such as imipramine (Tofranil),
amitriptyline (Elavil), desipramine (Norpramin), and doxepin
(Sinequan)
Antipsychotics—haloperidol, risperidone, phenothiazines such as
thioridazine (Mellaril) and chlorpromazine (Thorazine), selective
serotonin uptake inhibitors
Antiarrhythmic agents
Class 1A (sodium channel blockers)—quinidine, procainamide,
disopyramide
Class III (prolong depolarization)—amiodarone (rare), bretylium,
dofetilide, N-­acetyl-­procainamide, sotalol
Lipid-­lowering agents—probucol
Antianginals—bepridil
Diuretics (through K+ loss)—furosemide (Lasix), ethacrynic acid
(bumetanide [Bumex])
Opiates—methadone, oxycodone
Oral hypoglycemic agents—glibenclamide, glyburide
Organophosphate insecticides
Motility agents—cisapride, domperidone
Vasodilators—prenylamine
Other drugs—ondansetron, HIV protease inhibitors, Chinese herbs
ELECTROLYTE DISTURBANCES
Hypokalemia—diuretics, hyperventilation
Hypocalcemia
Hypomagnesemia
UNDERLYING MEDICAL CONDITIONS
Bradycardia—complete atrioventricular block, severe bradycardia,
sick sinus syndrome
Myocardial dysfunction—anthracycline cardiotoxicity, congestive
heart failure, myocarditis, cardiac tumors
Endocrinopathy—hyperparathyroidism, hypothyroidism,
pheochromocytoma
Neurologic—encephalitis, head trauma, stroke, subarachnoid
hemorrhage
Nutritional—alcoholism, anorexia nervosa, starvation
*A more exhaustive updated list of medications that can prolong the QTc interval
is available at the University of Arizona Center for Education and Research of
Therapeutics website (www.crediblemeds.org).
†Combinations of quinolones plus azoles increase the risk of prolonged QT intervals.
From Park MY. Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008:
Box 24-­1, p. 433.

Continuous monitor lead

2.52 sec

2.0 sec

Fig. 484.12 The “tachy-­brady” syndrome with sinus node dysfunction. Note the bursts of supraventricular tachycardia, probably multifocal atrial in origin, followed by long periods of sinus arrest and by sinus
bradycardia. Often, symptoms are caused by the long sinus pauses after
termination of tachycardia, rather than by the tachycardia itself.

p

p

p

p

First Degree AV Block

Second Degree AV Block
Mobitz Type I
(Wenckebach Phenomenon)

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Mobitz Type II

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

2:1 AV Block
R
Complete (Third Degree)
AV Block

p

R
p

p

p

R
p

R
p

p

p

Fig. 484.13 Atrioventricular (AV) block. (From Park MY. Pediatric Car-

diology for Practitioners, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008: Fig 25-­1,
p. 446.)

especially the Fontan procedure and the atrial switch (Mustard or
Senning) operation for transposition of the great arteries. Clinical
manifestations depend on the heart rate. Most patients remain asymptomatic without treatment, but dizziness and syncope can occur during periods of marked sinus slowing with failure of junctional escape.
Pacemaker therapy is indicated in patients who experience symptoms
such as exercise intolerance or syncope.
Patients with sinus node dysfunction may also have episodes of
SVT (“tachy-­brady” syndrome) with symptoms of palpitations, exercise intolerance, or dizziness (Fig. 484.12). Treatment must be individualized. Drug therapy to control tachyarrhythmias (propranolol,
sotalol, amiodarone) may suppress sinus and AV node function to
such a degree that further symptomatic bradycardia may be produced.
Therefore insertion of a pacemaker in conjunction with drug therapy
is usually necessary for such patients, even in the absence of symptoms
ascribable to low heart rate.

484.7 Atrioventricular Block
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Atrioventricular block may be divided into three forms (Fig. 484.13).
In first-­degree AV block, the PR interval is prolonged but all the atrial
impulses are conducted to the ventricle. In second-­degree AV block,
not every atrial impulse is conducted to the ventricle. In the variant
of second-­degree block known as the Wenckebach type (also called
Mobitz type I), the PR interval increases progressively until a P wave
is not conducted. In the cycle following the dropped beat, the PR interval normalizes. In Mobitz type II there is no progressive conduction
delay or subsequent shortening of the PR interval after a blocked beat.
This conduction defect is less common but has more potential to cause
syncope and may be progressive. A related condition is high-­grade
second-­degree AV block, in which two or more P waves in a row fail
to conduct. This is even more dangerous. In third-­degree AV block
(complete heart block), no impulses from the atria reach the ventricles. An independent escape rhythm is usually present but may not be
reliable, leading to syncope or even sudden death.
Congenital complete AV block in children is presumed to be caused
by autoimmune injury of the fetal conduction system by maternally
derived immunoglobulin G antibodies (anti-­SSA/Ro, anti-­SSB/La) in a
mother with overt or, more often, asymptomatic systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or Sjögren syndrome. Autoimmune disease accounts for
60–70% of all cases of congenital complete AV block and 80% of cases
in which the heart is structurally normal (Fig. 484.14). A pathogenic
variant in NKX2-­5 is associated with congenital AV block and an atrial
septal defect.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 484 u Disturbances of Rate and Rhythm of the Heart 2859

I

aVR

V1

V4

V3R

II

aVL

V2

V5

V4R

III

aVF

V3

V6

V7

II

Fig. 484.14 Congenital complete atrioventricular (AV) block. The ventricular rate is regular at 44 beats/min. The atrial rate is approximately 100
beats/min and completely dissociated from the ventricle. The QRS morphology is normal, which is common in congenital complete AV block.

Complete AV block is also seen in patients with complex CHD
and abnormal embryonic development of the conduction system.
It has been associated with myocardial tumors and myocarditis.
Acquired heart block (first, second, or third degree) is seen in Lyme
disease and COVID-­19–associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome. In these syndromes, first-­degree heart block may progress to
second-­or third-­degree heart block. Complete AV block is a known
complication of myocardial abscess secondary to endocarditis. It is
also seen in genetic conditions, including LQTS, Emery Dreifuss
muscular dystrophy, and Kearns-­Sayre syndrome. Postoperative AV
block can be a complication of CHD repair—in particular, those
repairs involving closure of a ventricular septal defect.
The incidence of congenital complete AV block is 1 per 20,000-­
25,000 live births; a high fetal loss rate may cause an underestimation
of its true incidence. In some infants of mothers with SLE, complete AV
block is not present at birth but develops within the first 3-­6 months
after birth. The arrhythmia is often diagnosed in the fetus (secondary
to the dissociation between atrial and ventricular contractions seen on
fetal echocardiography) and may produce hydrops fetalis. Maternal
treatment with corticosteroids to halt progression or reverse AV block
is controversial. Infants with associated CHD and heart failure have a
high mortality rate.
In older children with otherwise normal hearts, complete AV
block is often asymptomatic, although syncope and sudden death
may occur. Infants and toddlers may have night terrors, tiredness
with frequent naps, and irritability. The peripheral pulse is prominent because of the compensatory large ventricular stroke volume
and peripheral vasodilation; systolic blood pressure is elevated.
Jugular venous pulsations occur irregularly and may be large when
the atrium contracts against a closed tricuspid valve (cannon wave).
Exercise and atropine may produce an acceleration of 10-­20 beats/
min. Systolic murmurs are frequently audible along the left sternal
border, and apical mid-­diastolic murmurs are not unusual. The first

heart sound is variable because of variable ventricular filing with
AV dissociation. AV block may result in enlargement of the heart
because of slow rates and increased diastolic ventricular filling.
The diagnosis is confirmed by electrocardiography; the P waves
and QRS complexes have no constant relationship (see Fig. 484.14).
The QRS duration may be prolonged, or it may be normal if the
heartbeat is initiated high in the AV node or bundle of His.
The prognosis for congenital complete AV block is usually favorable; patients who have been observed to age 30-­40 have lived
normal, active lives. Some patients have episodes of exercise intolerance, dizziness, and syncope (Stokes-­Adams attacks); syncope
requires the implantation of a permanent cardiac pacemaker. Pacemaker implantation should be considered for patients who develop
symptoms such as progressive cardiac dilation, prolonged pauses,
or daytime average heart rates of ≤50 beats/min. In addition, prophylactic pacemaker implantation in adolescents is reasonable considering the low risk of the implant procedure and the difficulty in
predicting who will develop sudden severe symptoms.
Cardiac pacing is recommended in neonates with low ventricular rates (≤55 beats/min), evidence of heart failure, wide complex
rhythms, or CHD (with ventricular rates <70 beats/min). Isoproterenol, atropine, or epinephrine may be tried to increase the heart rate
temporarily until pacemaker placement can be arranged. Transthoracic
epicardial pacemaker implants have traditionally been used in infants;
transvenous placement of pacemaker leads is available for young children. Postsurgical complete AV block can occur after any open heart
procedure requiring suturing near the AV valves or crest of the ventricular septum. Postoperative heart block is initially managed with
temporary pacing wires. The likelihood of a return of normal conduction after 10-­14 days is low; a permanent pacemaker is recommended
after that time.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2860 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
(dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, long QT interval, arrhythmogenic [right ventricular] cardiomyopathy, Brugada or Marfan
syndromes) or sudden unexplained death. Death often follows exertion or exercise. Some patients with sudden death during sports have
anatomically normal hearts at autopsy; these patients should undergo
genetic testing for hereditary arrhythmia syndromes.

Chapter 485

Sudden Death
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare

MECHANISM OF SUDDEN DEATH

Sudden death other than sudden infant death syndrome is rare in
children. The causes of sudden death can be divided into traumatic
versus nontraumatic in origin. Traumatic causes of sudden death are
the most common in children; these include motor vehicle crashes,
violent deaths, recreational deaths, and occupational deaths. Nontraumatic sudden deaths are often the result of specific cardiac causes.
The incidence of sudden death varies from 0.8 to 6.2 per 100,000 per
year in children and adolescents, in contrast to the higher incidence
of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in adults of 1 per 1,000. Approximately 65% of sudden deaths are a result of heart-­related problems
in patients with either normal or congenitally (repaired, palliated,
or unoperated) abnormal hearts. Competitive high school sports
(basketball, soccer, football) are high-­risk environmental factors.
Common identifiable causes of death in competitive athletes include
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, with or without obstruction to left
ventricular outflow, other cardiomyopathies, channelopathies, and
anomalous coronary arteries; most are sudden unexplained deaths
(Fig. 485.1). Table 485.1 lists other potential causes. These can be
classified as structural abnormalities, including aortic stenosis and
coronary artery abnormalities; myocardial disease, such as myocarditis; conduction system disease, including long QT syndrome; and
miscellaneous causes, including seizures, pulmonary hypertension,
and commotio cordis. Symptoms may be absent before the event but,
if present, include syncope, chest pain, dyspnea, exercise intolerance,
and palpitations. Patients may have a family history of heart disease

WPW
3%

DCM
3%

Long QT
1% Commotio
2%

There are three recognized mechanisms of sudden death: arrhythmic,
nonarrhythmic cardiac (circulatory and vascular causes), and noncardiac. Ventricular fibrillation (VF), although the most common final
cause of sudden death in adults, is only the final cause in 10–20% of
children with SCD. More often, bradycardia leads either to VF or asystole (see Chapter 484).

CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE

Valvar aortic stenosis is the congenital defect most often associated
with sudden death in children. Historically, approximately 5% of children with this disease die, although this has become quite rare in the
modern era. A history of syncope, chest pain, and evidence of severe
obstruction and left ventricular hypertrophy are risk factors (see Chapter 476.5).
Coronary artery anomalies are also frequently associated with
sudden death in children and adolescents. The most common
abnormality associated with sudden death is the origin of the left
main coronary artery from the right sinus of Valsalva. The coronary artery takes an interarterial course between the aorta and
pulmonary artery and may also have an intramural course, traveling within the ventricular myocardium. Exercise results in a rise in
pulmonary and aortic pressure, and this is thought to compress the
left main coronary artery and results in ischemia caused by compression or kinking. Anomalous origin of the right coronary artery
from the left sinus of Valsalva is much more common, but only
rarely is a cause of sudden death.

Kawasaki
disease
2%

Anomalous coronary

Aortic dissection
5%

Aortic dissection
Male non-exertional death

ARVC
ARVC
5%

SUD
25%

Cardiomyopathy NOS

Male unknown death
Female non-exertional death
Female exertional death

DCM

Anomalous
coronary
11%

Cardiomyopathy
NOS
8%

HCM

Female unknown death

Idiopathic LVH/possible cardiomyopathy

CAD
9%

A

Male exertional death

Commotio cordis

HCM
8%

Idiopathic
LVH/possible
cardiomyopathy
8%

CAD

Idiopathic LVH/SCT

Myocarditis
9%

Kawasaki disease
Long QT

Idiopathic
LVH/possible
SCT
1%

Myocarditis
AN-SUD

B

WPW

Fig. 485.1 A, Causes of sudden cardiac death in adolescent and young adult athletes. B, Cause and activity at time of death. One person figure

equals one death; female figures follow male figures unless no male deaths were present. AN-­SUD, Autopsy-­negative sudden unexplained death;
ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; CAD, coronary artery disease; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; NOS, not otherwise specified; SCT, sickle cell trait; SUD, sudden unexplained death; WPW, Wolff-­
Parkinson-­White syndrome. (From Harmon KG, Asif I, Maleszewski JJ, et al. Incidence, cause, and comparative frequency of sudden cardiac death
in National Collegiate Athletic Association athletes. Circulation. 2015;132:10–19, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 485 u Sudden Death
CARDIOMYOPATHY

All three major types of cardiomyopathy (hypertrophic, dilated, and
restrictive) are associated with sudden death in the pediatric population; cardiac arrest or sudden death may be the initial manifestation of
the cardiomyopathy (see Chapter 488.1).
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common cause
of sudden death in the athletic adolescent in the United States. The
annual risk of sudden death in young patients with HCM is 2% per year.
Risk factors for sudden death include a history of syncope, symptoms,
Table 485.1  Potential Causes of Sudden Death in Infants,
Children, and Adolescents
SIDS AND SIDS “MIMICS”
SIDS
Long QT syndromes*
Inborn errors of metabolism
Child abuse
Myocarditis
Ductal-­dependent CHD
CORRECTED OR UNOPERATED CHD
Aortic stenosis
Tetralogy of Fallot
Transposition of great vessels (postoperative atrial switch)
Mitral valve prolapse
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
Eisenmenger syndrome
CORONARY ARTERIAL DISEASE
Anomalous origin*
Anomalous tract (tunneled)
Kawasaki disease
Periarteritis
Arterial dissection
AORTOPATHIES (DISSECTION, RUPTURED AORTA)
Marfan syndrome
Loeys-­Dietz syndrome
Takayasu aortitis
Smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome
Vascular Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection syndrome
Mycotic aneurysm
MYOCARDIAL DISEASE
Myocarditis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy*
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic (right ventricular) cardiomyopathy
Lyme carditis
Takotsubo syndrome
Nonischemic left ventricular scar
Myocardial infarction
CONDUCTION SYSTEM ABNORMALITY/ARRHYTHMIA
Long QT syndromes*
Brugada syndrome
Proarrhythmic drugs
Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome
Complete AV block
Commotio cordis
Idiopathic ventricular fibrillation
Arrhythmogenic (right ventricular) cardiomyopathy
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
Heart tumor
MISCELLANEOUS
Seizures
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary embolism
Heat stroke
Cocaine and other stimulant drugs or medications
Anorexia nervosa
Electrolyte disturbances
*Common.
CHD, Congenital heart disease; SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome.

2861

myocardial size, ventricular arrhythmias, and presentation at an early
age. Many patients with HCM have left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction (LVOTO). The mechanism of sudden death is arrhythmic
and may be secondary to the development of dynamic obstruction with
exercise and resultant loss of cardiac output, or may be related to cardiac ischemia. Thus patients without LVOTO are also at risk of sudden
death. The dilated cardiomyopathies are also associated with SCD in
children, although the risk is clearly lower than in adults.
Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (also referred to as arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy) is a specific form of cardiomyopathy associated with exercise-­induced ventricular arrhythmias and
sudden death. It mainly affects the right ventricle, but the left can be
involved as well. The diagnosis can be difficult; MRI, electrophysiology
study, or endomyocardial biopsy is used with limited reliability. Pathologically, the disease is characterized by transmural fatty replacement
of right ventricular myocardium, with patchy areas of fibrosis. Pathogenic variants are noted in ∼60% of this autosomal dominant (with
incomplete penetrance) disorder; associated genes include PKP2, DSP,
DSC2, DSG2, JUP, CTNNA3, PLN, TMEN43, SCN5A, CDH2, and DES.
Myocarditis has often been found on pathology of patients with sudden death of unknown etiology. Symptoms before sudden death may
be absent or may include overt heart failure or subtle findings such as a
high heart rate. Pediatric patients with this disease may have complete
atrioventricular block or ventricular arrhythmias.

CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIA

A primary conduction system abnormality may result in sudden death.
Causes include Wolff-­Parkinson-­White (WPW) syndrome, long QT
syndrome, short QT syndrome, and Brugada syndrome. Besides causing supraventricular tachycardia, WPW syndrome can result in atrial
fibrillation with rapid conduction across the accessory pathway, leading to VF and sudden death (Fig. 485.2). This is unusual in pediatric
patients but has an increasing incidence in adolescence. In adults, there
is an incidence of sudden death in asymptomatic patients of 1 per 1,000
patient-­years, but this rate may well be higher in children, who have
not yet survived to adulthood. As digoxin and verapamil can augment
conduction down accessory pathways, these drugs are contraindicated
in WPW syndrome.
Long QT syndrome (LQTS; see Chapter 484), a group of channelopathies that affect ventricular repolarization, is also associated with
sudden death (Fig. 485.3). The mechanism of sudden death is polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (torsades de pointes) (Fig. 485.4). An
initial presentation of SCD is found in 9% of patients. Thus treatment
of asymptomatic patients with a long QT interval on electrocardiogram
(ECG) and positive family history is advised.
Acquired long QT interval may be seen in patients with marked
electrolyte abnormalities, central nervous system injury, or starvation
(including bulimia and anorexia nervosa). Medications can also result
in prolongation of the QT interval (see Table 484.4). These patients are
also at risk of malignant ventricular arrhythmias, and correction of the
underlying problem or withdrawal of the inciting medication may be
necessary to reduce the risk of sudden death.
Brugada syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder associated
with SCD, often occurs with fever, drugs, nighttime electrolyte disorders, or after a large meal (Fig. 485.5). The most common pathogenic
variant is a loss of function in SCN5A, seen in up to 30% of patients.
Typical ECG findings include coved ST segment elevations in leads V1-­
V3; death results from either VF or ventricular tachycardia.

MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES

Commotio cordis is an often fatal condition that follows blunt nonpenetrating trauma to the chest (e.g., from a baseball or hockey puck).
Occasionally, innocent-­appearing chest blows incurred at home or at
a playground may be fatal. Patients experience immediate VF in the
absence of identifiable cardiac trauma (contusion, hematoma, lacerated
coronary artery). This risk is highest in children before adolescence.
Historically, death results from VF that is unresponsive to resuscitative efforts in 85–90% of children. Immediate direct current (DC)
defibrillation may be effective, if available, particularly if employed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2862 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

I

aVR

II

aVL

III

aVF

V1
V2

V3

V4

V5
V6

V1
V2

V3

Fig. 485.2 Atrial fibrillation in a patient with Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome and rapid conduction to the ventricle. Note the wide QRS complexes, a result of full preexcitation, and the irregularly irregular ventricular response, caused by the atrial fibrillation.

I

II

aVR

V1

V4

aVL

V2

V5

aVF

V8

V6

III

Fig. 485.3 Long QT syndrome in a neonate. QTc is markedly prolonged, and T-­wave alternans is evident.
death, with the exception of correctable causes such as WPW (see
Chapter 484).

MEDICATION FOR ATTENTION-­DEFICIT/
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER

Fig. 485.4 Episode of torsades de pointes in a patient with long QT
syndrome.

immediately; however, it is reported to be successful in only approximately 25% of cases.

EVALUATION AND THERAPY FOR RESUSCITATED
PATIENTS

It is important to focus therapy on potentially reversible causes of sudden death. These include correction of major hemodynamic defects,
pacing therapy for a patient with bradycardia, or supportive therapy for myocarditis. Unfortunately, reversible causes are not always
found in young cardiac arrest survivors. Adding to this dilemma is
the limited ability to predict antiarrhythmic drug response or risk of
recurrence. The implantable-­cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is the
therapy of choice for survivors of most forms of arrhythmic sudden

Concern has been raised that stimulant medications prescribed for
children with attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder might increase
the risk of sudden death (see Chapter 50). The concern arises from
a limited number of reports to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of sudden death of unknown etiology in individuals taking
stimulant medications, mostly adults. In a few cases, left ventricular
hypertrophy caused by hypertension, coarctation of the aorta, or HCM
has been identified at postmortem examination. No prospective studies
support the notion that these medications increase the risk, and there
is no evidence that ECG screening will reliably identify a subgroup at
risk. Some have suggested ECG screening of children before starting
these medications, but there is no consensus that such an approach is
effective. The current recommendations do not support ECG screening
before the initiation of stimulant medication in the absence of a positive cardiac history.

PREVENTION OF SUDDEN DEATH

The probability of survival to hospital discharge for a young patient
who experiences an out-­
of-­
hospital cardiac arrest is <20%. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 485 u Sudden Death

2863

A

II

III

V1

B

I

aVR

II

aVL

III

aVF

V1

V2

V3

V4

V5

V6

II

Fig. 485.5 Brugada syndrome. A, Frequent ventricular ectopy and sustained polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. B, Persistent coved-­type ST

segment elevation in lead V1 and V2 characteristic of Brugada type I. (A from Talib S, van de Poll SE. Brugada syndrome diagnosed after Ramadan.
Lancet. 2013;382:100.)

presence of immediate automatic external defibrillators (AEDs),
when combined with standard cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
at the site of exercise (gym, track, basketball, or football arena),
improves survival substantially. Thus identifying patients at risk is
extremely important. The American Academy of Pediatrics Policy
Statement on Sudden Death in the Young provides primary care
providers with guidelines screening for life-­threatening conditions,
regardless of athletic status.
Some of the more common causes of sudden death in children
and adolescents can be identified from the patient’s history (prodromal symptoms), the family history, and physical examination.
The American Heart Association (AHA) has a recommended 14-­
point preparticipation evaluation (PPE) that includes questions
about personal and family history in addition to physical exam
findings (Table 485.2). The screening for sudden cardiac arrest
and SCD should be performed at the time of PPE or upon entry
into middle school and high school. The AAP’s Preparticipation

Physical Evaluation form is available at https://www.aap.org/. Of
paramount importance is the careful evaluation of any child who
experiences syncope in association with exercise because this may
be the last opportunity to diagnose a life-­threatening condition in
such a patient.
Patient avoidance of high-­risk behavior (cocaine use, anorexia
nervosa) and knowledge of drug side effects or drug interactions
and contraindications are critical. Chest-­protecting equipment has
not been shown to prevent commotio cordis. Prompt bystander
CPR and rapid defibrillation with an AED has the highest chance
of leading to survival. Family survivors of victims of sudden death
should also be evaluated for genetic etiologies of SCD (e.g., LQTS,
HCM).
The 14-­
element screening checklist underperforms and may
miss high-­risk cardiac lesion. Depending on the population (elite
vs recreational athletes) and the screening protocol (checklist, with
ECG, with echocardiogram, with cardiac MRI), the incidence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2864 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 485.2  Fourteen-­Element Cardiovascular Screening
Checklist for Congenital and Genetic Heart
Disease
PERSONAL HISTORY
1.	Chest pain/discomfort/tightness/pressure related to exertion
2.	Unexplained syncope/near-­syncope: Judged not to be of
neurocardiogenic (vasovagal) origin; of particular concern when
occurring during or after physical exertion
3.	Excessive exertional and unexplained dyspnea/fatigue or
palpitations, associated with exercise
4.	Prior recognition of a heart murmur
5.	Elevated systemic blood pressure
6.	Prior restriction from participation in sports
7.	Prior testing for the heart, ordered by a physician
FAMILY HISTORY
8.	Premature death (sudden and unexpected, or otherwise) before
age 50 attributable to heart disease in at least one relative
9.	Disability from heart disease in close relative <50 yr of age
10.	Hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy, long QT syndrome,
or other ion channelopathies, Marfan syndrome, or clinically
significant arrhythmias; specific knowledge of certain cardiac
conditions in family members
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
11.	Heart murmur: Refers to heart murmurs judged likely to be
organic and unlikely to be innocent; auscultation should be
performed with the patient in both the supine and standing
positions (or with Valsalva maneuver), specifically to identify
murmurs of dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction
12.	Femoral pulses to exclude aortic coarctation
13.	Physical stigmata of Marfan syndrome
14.	Brachial artery blood pressure (sitting position): Preferably taken
in both arms
From American College of Cardiology: ACC/AHA release recommendations for
congenital and genetic heart disease screenings in youth. https://www.acc.org/latest-­in-­
cardiology/articles/2014/09/15/14/24/acc-­aha-­release-­recommendations-­for-­congenital-­
and-­genetic-­heart-­disease-­screenings-­in-­youth

at-­risk cardiac lesions varies from 0.3–0.4% to 1.4%. The use of a
preparticipation ECG for the detection of those athletes at risk for
sudden death has long been controversial. Because many athletes
either have no pre-­event symptoms or are unwilling to admit to
symptoms for concern of not being able to play, some have proposed that the ECG may identify a small but at-­risk group with
HCM or prolonged QT, Brugada, or WPW syndromes. These ECGs
would fail to identify patients with phenotype-­negative LQTS or
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, as well as
coronary artery anomalies. In addition, many false positives may
be identified, requiring further evaluation to exclude worrisome
diagnoses. Preparticipation ECG testing is mandatory in several
European countries but not in the United States, although many
athletic groups with varsity-­level or professional membership (e.g.,
collegiate or professional sports organizations) require such testing
as part of the medical evaluation. If the ECG is abnormal, echocardiography is performed. Cost-­effectiveness studies suggest that
the cost for implementation of a national program in the United
States would be prohibitive because of the low incidence of sudden death in the pediatric population, the high rate of false-­positive
ECGs, and the difficulty in definitively excluding cardiac disease in
patients with borderline ECG findings. Although studies of regional
or national screening programs have suggested some benefit (e.g.,
the Veneto region of Italy), others have failed to demonstrate any
effect of screening on the background incidence of sudden death in
young individuals.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 5

Acquired Heart Disease
Chapter 486

Infective Endocarditis*
Erin Faherty and Thomas S. Murray
Infective endocarditis includes acute and subacute bacterial endocarditis, as well as nonbacterial endocarditis, caused by viruses,
fungi, and other microbiologic agents. It is a significant cause
of morbidity and mortality in children and adolescents despite
advances in the management and prophylaxis of the disease with
antimicrobial agents. The inability to eradicate infective endocarditis by prevention or early treatment stems from several factors.
The disease represents a complex interplay between a pathogen and
host factors such as endothelial disruption and immune function
that is still not completely understood; the nature of the infecting
organism changes over time; and diagnosis may be difficult during
early stages and thus is often delayed until a more serious manifestation has developed. Special risk groups include intravenous drug
users; survivors of cardiac surgery, especially those with mechanical prosthesis; patients taking immunosuppressant medications;
and patients who require chronic intravascular catheters. Some
patients have endocarditis on a native valve previously thought to
be healthy but found to have mild structural abnormalities on surgical inspection.

ETIOLOGY

Viridans-­type streptococci (α-­hemolytic streptococci groups such
as Streptococcus mitis, S. anginosus, S. mutans, S. salivarius, S. bovis,
S. sanguinis, and S. mitis) and Staphylococcus aureus remain the
leading causative agents for endocarditis in pediatric patients. Other
organisms cause endocarditis less frequently, and in approximately
6% of cases, blood cultures are negative for any organisms (Table
486.1). No relationship exists between the infecting organism and
the type of congenital defect, duration of illness, or age of the child.
Staphylococcal endocarditis is more common in patients with no
underlying heart disease. Viridans group streptococcal infection is
more common after dental procedures; enterococci are seen more
often after lower bowel or genitourinary manipulation.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Serratia marcescens is seen more frequently in intravenous drug users, and fungal organisms are encountered after open heart surgery. Coagulase-­negative staphylococci are
common in the presence of an indwelling central venous catheter.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Infective endocarditis is often a complication of congenital or
rheumatic heart disease but can also occur in children without any
abnormal valves or cardiac malformations. In developed countries,
congenital heart disease (CHD) is the overwhelming predisposing
factor. Endocarditis is rare in infancy; in this age-­group it usually
follows open heart surgery or is associated with a central venous
line.
Patients with congenital heart lesions where there is turbulent
blood flow because of a hole or stenotic orifice, especially if there is
a high-­pressure gradient across the defect, are most susceptible to
* The authors would like to thank Dr Robert S. Baltimore for his work on previous editions
of this chapter.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 486 u Infective Endocarditis
Table 486.1  Bacterial Agents in Pediatric Infective
Endocarditis
COMMON: NATIVE VALVE OR OTHER CARDIAC LESIONS
Viridans group streptococci (S. mutans, S. sanguinis, S. mitis)
Staphylococcus aureus
Group D streptococcus (enterococcus) (S. bovis, S. faecalis)
UNCOMMON: NATIVE VALVE OR OTHER CARDIAC LESIONS
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae
Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
Abiotrophia defectiva (nutritionally variant streptococcus)
Coxiella burnetii (Q fever)*
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Brucella*
Chlamydia psittaci*
Chlamydia trachomatis*
Chlamydia pneumoniae*
Legionella*
Bartonella*
Tropheryma whipplei* (Whipple disease)
HACEK group†
Streptobacillus moniliformis*
Pasteurella multocida*
Campylobacter fetus
Culture negative (6% of cases)
PROSTHETIC VALVE
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Staphylococcus aureus
Viridans group streptococcus
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Serratia marcescens
Diphtheroids
Legionella spp.*
HACEK group†
Fungi‡
*These fastidious bacteria plus some fungi may produce culture-­negative endocarditis.
Detection may require special media, incubation for >7 days, polymerase chain
reaction on blood or valve for 16SrRNA (bacteria) or 18SrRNA (fungi), or serologic tests.
†The HACEK group includes Haemophilus spp. (H. paraphrophilus, H. parainfluenzae,
H. aphrophilus), Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis,
Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella spp.
‡Candida spp., Aspergillus spp., Pseudallescheria boydii, Histoplasma capsulatum.

endocarditis. This turbulent flow traumatizes the vascular endothelium, creating a substrate for deposition of fibrin and platelets, leading to the formation of a nonbacterial thrombotic embolus (NBTE)
that is thought to be the initiating lesion for infective endocarditis.
Biofilm forms on the surface of implanted mechanical devices such
as valves, catheters, or pacemaker wires, which also serves as the
adhesive substrate for infection. The development of transient bacteremia then colonizes this NBTE or biofilm, leading to proliferation of bacteria within the lesion. Bacterial surface proteins, such as
the FimA antigen in viridans streptococci, act as adhesion factors
to the NBTE or biofilm, after which bacteria can rapidly proliferate
within the vegetation. Given the heavy colonization of mucosal surfaces (the oropharynx or gastrointestinal, vaginal, or urinary tracts)
by potentially pathogenic bacteria, these surfaces are thought to be
the origin of this transient bacteremia. There is controversy over
the extent to which daily activities (e.g., brushing or flossing the
teeth) vs invasive procedures (e.g., dental cleaning or surgery) contribute to this bacteremia. Transient bacteremia is reported to occur
in 20–68% of patients after tooth brushing and flossing, and even
in 7–51% of patients after chewing food. The magnitude of this
bacteremia is also similar to that resulting from dental procedures.
Maintenance of good oral hygiene may be a more important factor in decreasing the frequency and magnitude of bacteremia. Case

2865

reports suggest that body piercing and tattoos may be additional
risk factors.
Children at highest risk of adverse outcome after infective endocarditis include those with prosthetic cardiac valves or other prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair, unrepaired cyanotic
CHD (including those palliated with shunts and conduits), completely repaired defects with prosthetic material or device during
the first 6 months after repair, repaired CHD with residual defects at
or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or device, valve stenosis
or insufficiency occurring after heart transplantation, permanent
valve disease from rheumatic fever (mitral stenosis, aortic regurgitation), and previous infective endocarditis. Patients with high-­
velocity blood flow lesions such as ventricular septal defects (VSDs)
and aortic stenosis are also at high risk. In older patients, congenital
bicuspid aortic valves and mitral valve prolapse with regurgitation
pose additional risks for endocarditis. Surgical correction of CHD
may reduce but does not eliminate the risk of endocarditis, except
for the repair of a simple atrial septal defect or patent ductus arteriosus without prosthetic material.
In ∼30% of patients with infective endocarditis, a predisposing factor is presumably recognized. Although a preceding dental
procedure may be identified in 10–20% of patients, the time of the
procedure may range from 1 to 6 months before the onset of symptoms—thus the continued controversy over the absolute risk of
infective endocarditis after dental procedures. Primary bacteremia
with S. aureus is thought to be another risk for endocarditis. The
occurrence of endocarditis directly after most routine heart surgery is relatively low, but it can be an antecedent event, especially
if prosthetic material is used. In the small group of patients with
culture-­negative endocarditis, epidemiologic or exposure factors
may contribute to the diagnosis (Table 486.2).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Table 486.3 outlines the manifestations of infective endocarditis.
Early manifestations are usually mild, especially when viridans group
streptococci are the infecting organisms. Prolonged fever without
other manifestations (except occasionally weight loss) that persists
for as long as several months may be the only symptom. Alternatively, with pathogenic organisms such as S. aureus, the onset may be
acute and severe, with high intermittent fever and prostration. Usually, the onset and course vary between these two extremes. Fever in
the absence of signs of URI in a patient with congenital heart disease
must be considered as endocarditis. The symptoms are often nonspecific and consist of low-­grade fever with afternoon elevations, fatigue,
myalgia, arthralgia, headache, and at times chills, nausea, and vomiting. The cardiac examination often depends on the underlying heart
disease and the location of infection. A new pathologic murmur or
changing heart murmur may be appreciated and can be associated
with heart failure. Of note, children with palliated congenital heart
disease, such as those palliated with a shunt, may not present with a
change in murmur. Splenomegaly and petechiae are seen in <50% of
patients. Serious neurologic complications such as embolic strokes,
cerebral abscesses, mycotic aneurysms, and hemorrhage are most
often associated with staphylococcal disease and may be late manifestations. Meningismus, increased intracranial pressure, altered
sensorium, and focal neurologic signs are manifestations of these
complications. Meningitis may be seen together with pneumococcal endocarditis. Myocardial abscesses may occur with staphylococcal disease and may damage the cardiac conducting system, causing
heart block, or may rupture into the pericardium and produce purulent pericarditis. Pulmonary (with right-­
sided endocarditis) and
systemic emboli (with left-­sided lesions) are infrequent, except with
fungal disease.
Many of the classic skin findings develop late in the disease; they
are seldom seen in appropriately treated patients. Such manifestations include Osler nodes (tender, pea-­size intradermal nodules in
the pads of the fingers and toes), Janeway lesions (painless, small,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2866 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 486.2  Epidemiologic Clues in the Etiologic Diagnosis of Culture-­Negative Endocarditis
EPIDEMIOLOGIC
FEATURE

COMMON MICROORGANISM

Injection drug use (IDU)

Staphylococcus aureus, including
community-­acquired oxacillin-­resistant
strains
Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
β-­Hemolytic streptococci
Fungi
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli, including
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Polymicrobial

EPIDEMIOLOGIC
FEATURE

COMMON MICROORGANISM

Diabetes mellitus

S. aureus
β-­Hemolytic streptococci
S. pneumoniae

Early (≤1 yr) prosthetic
valve placement

Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
S. aureus
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli
Fungi
Corynebacterium spp.
Legionella spp.

Late (>1 yr) prosthetic
valve placement

Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
S. aureus
Viridans group streptococci
Enterococcus spp.
Fungi
Corynebacterium spp.

Indwelling cardiovascular
medical devices

S. aureus
Coagulase-­negative staphylococci
Fungi
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli
Corynebacterium spp.

Genitourinary disorders,
infection, and
manipulation, including
pregnancy, delivery, and
abortion

Enterococcus spp.
Group B streptococci (S. agalactiae)
Listeria monocytogenes
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli
Neisseria gonorrhoeae

Dog or cat exposure

Bartonella spp.
Pasteurella spp.
Capnocytophaga spp.

Chronic skin disorders,
including recurrent
infections

S. aureus
β-­Hemolytic streptococci

Contact with
contaminated milk or
infected farm animals

Brucella spp.
Coxiella burnetii
Erysipelothrix spp.

Poor dental health, dental
procedures

Viridans group streptococci
Nutritionally variant streptococci
Abiotrophia defectiva
Granulicatella spp.
Gemella spp.
HACEK organisms

Homeless, body lice

Bartonella spp.

HIV/AIDS

Salmonella spp.
S. pneumoniae
S. aureus

Pneumonia, meningitis

S. pneumoniae

Alcohol use, cirrhosis

Bartonella spp.
Aeromonas spp.
Listeria spp.
Streptococcus pneumoniae
β-­Hemolytic streptococci

Solid-­organ
transplantation

S. aureus
Aspergillus fumigatus
Enterococcus spp.
Candida spp.

Gastrointestinal lesions

Burns

S. aureus
Aerobic gram-­negative bacilli, including
P. aeruginosa
Fungi

Streptococcus gallolyticus (bovis)
Enterococcus spp.
Clostridium septicum

HACEK, Haemophilus spp., Aggregatibacter spp., Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella spp.; HIV/AIDS, human immunodeficiency virus infection and acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome.
From Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, et al. Infective endocarditis in adults: diagnosis, antimicrobial therapy, and management of complications. A scientific statement for
healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132:1435–1486.

erythematous, or hemorrhagic lesions on the palms and soles), and
splinter hemorrhages (linear lesions beneath the nails). These
lesions may represent vasculitis produced by circulating antigen-­
antibody complexes. Retinal lesions are seen in 10–20%.
In the newborn infant the major risk factor for infective endocarditis is the presence of a central intravenous line. Thus prematurity
is a risk, as are other severe congenital abnormalities. CHD is less
likely to be the underlying condition than it is for older children.
The clinical conditions are variable and may be indistinguishable
from sepsis or congestive heart failure. Identification of infective
endocarditis is most often based on a high index of suspicion during evaluation of an infection in a child with an underlying risk
factor.

DIAGNOSIS

The critical information for appropriate treatment of infective
endocarditis is obtained from blood cultures. All other laboratory
data are secondary in importance (see Table 486.3). Blood specimens for culture should be obtained as promptly as possible, even

if the child feels well and has no other physical findings. Although
increased blood volume can increase the sensitivity of the blood
culture, smaller volumes are reasonable in neonates and small
children. When small volumes of blood are present, a single aerobic blood culture bottle should be inoculated. Ideally, for patients
weighing 2-­12.7 kg, the volume of the first blood culture is 4 mL
(repeat culture is 2 mL); for patients 12.8-­36.3 kg it is 10 mL for
initial and repeat, and for patients >36.3 kg, 20-­30 mL for both.
Three to five separate blood collections should be obtained after
careful preparation of the phlebotomy site. Contamination presents
a special problem because bacteria found on the skin may cause
infective endocarditis. The timing of collections is not important
because bacteremia can be expected to be relatively constant. In
90% of cases of endocarditis, the causative agent is recovered from
the first two blood cultures. Bacteremia is low grade in 80% (<100
colony-­forming units/mL of blood). The laboratory should be notified that endocarditis is suspected so that, if necessary, the blood
can be cultured on enriched media for longer than usual (>5 days)
to detect nutritionally deficient and fastidious bacteria or fungi.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 486 u Infective Endocarditis
Table 486.3  Manifestations of Infectious Endocarditis
HISTORY
Prior congenital or rheumatic heart disease
Preceding dental, urinary tract, or intestinal procedure
Intravenous drug use
Central venous catheter
Prosthetic heart valve

2867

Table 486.4  Diagnostic Approach to Uncommon
Pathogens Causing Endocarditis
PATHOGEN

DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURE

Brucella spp.

Blood cultures; serology; culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

Coxiella burnetii

Serology (IgG phase I >1
in 800); tissue culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

Bartonella spp.

Blood cultures; serology; culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

SIGNS
Elevated temperature
Tachycardia
Embolic phenomena (Roth spots, petechiae, splinter nail bed
hemorrhages, Osler nodes, CNS or ocular lesions)
Janeway lesions
New or changing murmur
Splenomegaly
Arthritis
Heart failure
Arrhythmias
Metastatic infection (arthritis, meningitis, mycotic arterial aneurysm,
pericarditis, abscesses, septic pulmonary emboli)
Clubbing

Chlamydia spp.

Serology; culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

Mycoplasma spp.

Serology; culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

Legionella spp.

Blood cultures; serology; culture,
immunohistology, and mNGS
of surgical material or blood/
plasma

LABORATORY STUDIES
Positive blood culture
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate; may be low with heart or
renal failure
Elevated C-­reactive protein
Anemia
Leukocytosis
Immune complexes
Hypergammaglobulinemia
Hypocomplementemia
Cryoglobulinemia
Rheumatoid factor
Hematuria
Renal failure: azotemia, high creatinine (glomerulonephritis)
Chest radiograph: bilateral infiltrates, nodules, pleural effusions
Echocardiographic evidence of valve vegetations, prosthetic valve
dysfunction or leak, myocardial abscess, or new-­onset valve
insufficiency

Tropheryma whipplei

Histology and mNGS of surgical
material or blood/plasma

SYMPTOMS
Fever
Chills
Chest and abdominal pain
Arthralgia, myalgia
Dyspnea
Malaise, weakness
Night sweats
Weight loss
CNS manifestations (stroke, seizures, headache)

CNS, Central nervous system.

Although bacteremia may occur in the absence of endocarditis,
bacteremia secondary to S. mutans, S. bovis I, S. mitis, S. sanguinis,
and S. aureus (in the absence of focal musculoskeletal infection) is
highly concerning for endocarditis. Antimicrobial pretreatment of
the patient reduces the yield of blood cultures by 50–60%. Other
specimens that may be cultured include scrapings from cutaneous lesions, urine, synovial fluid, abscesses, and in the presence of
manifestations of meningitis, cerebrospinal fluid. Serologic diagnosis or metagenomic next-­generation sequencing or polymerase
chain reaction for 16S and 28S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) for bacteria and fungi, respectively, of resected valve tissues is necessary
in patients with unusual or fastidious microorganisms when there
is suspicion of culture-­negative endocarditis or if the patient has
received prior antibiotics (Table 486.4 and Fig. 486.1). Metagenomic

IgG, Immunoglobulin G; mNGS, metagenomic next-­generation sequencing; PCR,
polymerase chain reaction
From Moreillon P, Que YA. Infective endocarditis Lancet. 2004;363:139–148.

next-­generation sequencing on blood and plasma may help identify
pathogens in patients with culture-­negative endocarditis. Suspicion
should be high when evaluating infection in a child with an underlying contributing factor.
Echocardiography remains the mainstay of diagnosis. Two-­
dimensional echocardiography can identify the size, shape, location, and mobility of the lesion; when combined with Doppler
interrogation, the presence of valve dysfunction (regurgitation,
obstruction) can be determined. (Fig. 486.2). In pediatric patients,
transthoracic echocardiogram is usually adequate for detection of
lesions, especially for children <60 kg. Transesophageal echocardiogram should be considered in pediatric patients with limited
transthoracic views; it is superior to transthoracic echocardiogram
in evaluating prosthetic valves or complications of infective endocarditis, such as aortic root abscess. Intracardiac echocardiography
can be useful for patients with suspicion for an infected pacemaker
lead or implanted percutaneous pulmonary valve. Cardiac MRI may
be useful in suspected perivalvular complications, and PET-­CT may
aid in the diagnosis of endocarditis for those patients with prosthetic valves.
Echocardiography may also be helpful in predicting embolic
complications, given that lesions >1 cm and fungating masses are at
greatest risk for embolization. The absence of vegetations does not
exclude endocarditis, and vegetations are often not visualized in the
early phases of the disease or in patients with complex congenital
heart lesions. Electrocardiography should be part of the evaluation
and can demonstrate new rhythm disorders such as ventricular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2868 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Priority: blood specimen

Valvular specimen available

Q fever and Bartonella serology
+
Determination of rheumatoid factors
and antinuclear antibodies
If negative

Fig. 486.1 Algorithm of diagnostic
tests applied to clinical specimens
for the identification of the causative
agents of blood culture–negative
endocarditis. Septifast, LightCycler
SeptiFast (Roche). Serum should be
considered a priority specimen, with
Q fever and Bartonella serologic
analysis routinely done. We also suggest that detection of antinuclear
antibodies and rheumatoid factor
be routinely done for the diagnosis
of noninfective endocarditis. (From
Thuny F, Grisoli D, Collart F, et al.
Management of infective endocarditis: challenges and perspectives.
Lancet. 2012;379:965–975, Fig. 2.)

Dedicated PCR for Bartonella sp and Tropheryma
whipplei, broad range PCR for fungi

Septifast blood PCR
specifically targeting
streptococci and
staphylococci
(if previous
antibiotic therapy)

Other serologies
(Mycoplasma
pneumoniae,
Legionella
pneumophila,
Brucella melitensis)
and Western blot
for Bartonella spp

LV

LA

A

If negative

If negative

Ao
Ao

LV

Broad range PCR for bacteria (16S rRNA) and
fungi (18S rRNA)
+
Histological examination

LA

B

Fig. 486.2 Infective endocarditis of the native aortic valve. A, Tran-

sthoracic echocardiography shows vegetations (small arrows) attached
to the left ventricular aspects of the valve cusps and prolapsing into
the left ventricular outflow tract (large arrow) during diastole. B, Severe
aortic regurgitation (arrow) is shown by color Doppler. Ao, Ascending
aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle. (From Baddour LM, Freeman
WK, Suri RM, Wilson WR. Cardiovascular infections. In: Zipes DP, Libby
P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 73-­1, p. 1490.)

ectopy and conduction disorders such as complete heart block. The
presence of either of these findings, particularly heart block, may signal a serious or even life-­threatening complication of endocarditis.
The Duke criteria help in the diagnosis of endocarditis (Table 486.5).
Two major criteria, one major and three minor, or five minor criteria
suggest definite endocarditis. Additional minor criteria to those listed
include newly diagnosed clubbing, splenomegaly, splinter hemorrhages,
or petechiae; high erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-­reactive protein
level; presence of central nonfeeding or peripheral lines; and microscopic
hematuria.

PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS

Despite the use of antibiotic agents, mortality remains high, up to
25%. Serious morbidity occurs in 50–60% of children with documented infective endocarditis; the most common is heart failure
caused by worsening valvular regurgitation due to aortic or mitral

Primer extension
enrichment
reaction

Autoimmunohistochemistry

valve vegetations, accompanied by ventricular dysfunction. Myocardial abscesses and toxic myocarditis may also lead to heart failure
without characteristic changes in auscultatory findings and, occasionally, to life-­threatening arrhythmias. Systemic emboli, often
with central nervous system manifestations, are a major threat.
Pulmonary emboli may occur in children with VSD or tetralogy
of Fallot, although massive life-­
threatening pulmonary embolization is rare. Other complications include mycotic aneurysms,
rupture of a sinus of Valsalva, obstruction of a valve secondary to
large vegetations, acquired VSD, and heart block as a result of
involvement (abscess) of the conduction system. Additional
complications include meningitis, osteomyelitis, arthritis, renal
abscess, purulent pericarditis, and immune complex–mediated
glomerulonephritis.

TREATMENT

Antibiotic therapy should be instituted immediately once a definitive diagnosis of infectious endocarditis is made. When virulent
organisms are responsible, small delays may result in progressive
endocardial damage and are associated with a greater likelihood of
severe complications. The choice of antibiotics, method of administration, and length of treatment should be coordinated with consultants from both cardiology and infectious diseases (Tables 486.6
and 486.7). Empirical therapy after appropriate blood cultures are
drawn but before the identifiable agent is recovered may be initiated
with vancomycin plus gentamicin in patients without a prosthetic
valve and when there is a high risk of S. aureus, enterococcus, or
viridans streptococci (the three most common organisms). High
serum bactericidal levels must be maintained long enough to eradicate organisms that are growing in relatively inaccessible avascular
vegetations. Between 5 and 20 times the in vitro minimal inhibitory concentration must be produced at the site of infection to
destroy bacteria growing at the core of these lesions. Several weeks
are required for a vegetation to organize completely; therapy must
be continued through this period so that recrudescence can be
avoided. A total of 4-­6 weeks of treatment is usually recommended.
Depending on the clinical and laboratory responses, antibiotic
therapy may require modification, and some patients require more

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 486 u Infective Endocarditis
Table 486.5  Definition of Infective Endocarditis (IE):
Modified Duke Criteria
DEFINITE INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
Pathologic Criteria
• Microorganisms demonstrated by results of cultures or histologic
examination of a vegetation, a vegetation that has embolized, or
an intracardiac abscess specimen; or
• Pathologic lesions; vegetation, or intracardiac abscess confirmed
by results of histologic examination showing active endocarditis
Clinical Criteria
• Two major criteria, or
• One major criterion and three minor criteria, or
• Five minor criteria
Possible Infective Endocarditis
• One major criterion and one minor criterion, or
• Three minor criteria
Rejected Diagnosis of Infective Endocarditis
• Firm alternative diagnosis explaining evidence of suspected IE, or
• Resolution of IE syndrome with antibiotic therapy for ≤4 days, or
• No evidence of IE at surgery or autopsy, on antibiotic therapy for
≤4 days, or
• Does not meet criteria for possible IE
DEFINITION OF TERMS USED IN MODIFIED DUKE CRITERIA
Major Criteria
• Blood culture findings positive for IE
Typical microorganisms consistent with IE from two separate
blood cultures:
• Viridans streptococci, Streptococcus gallolyticus (formerly
known as S. bovis), Staphylococcus aureus, HACEK group, or
• Community-­acquired enterococci, in the absence of a primary
focus, or
Microorganisms consistent with IE from persistently positive blood
culture findings, defined as:
• At least two positive culture findings of blood samples drawn
>12 hr apart, or
• Three or most of at least four separate culture findings of
blood (with first and last sample drawn ≥1 hr apart)
• Single positive blood culture for Coxiella burnetii or anti–
phase I IgG titer ≥1:800
• Evidence of endocardial involvement
Echocardiographic findings positive for IE (TEE recommended
in patients with prosthetic valves, rated at least possible IE by
clinical criteria or complicated IE [paravalvular abscess]; TTE as
first test in other patients), defined as follows:
• Oscillating intracardiac mass on valve or supporting
structures, in the path of regurgitant jets, or on implanted
material in the absence of an alternative anatomic
explanation, or
• Abscess, or
• New partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve
New valvular regurgitation; worsening or changing of preexisting
murmur not sufficient
Minor Criteria
• Predisposition, predisposing heart condition, or intravenous drug
use
• Fever—temperature >38°C
• Vascular phenomena, major arterial emboli, septic pulmonary
infarcts, mycotic aneurysm, intracranial hemorrhage, conjunctival
hemorrhages, and Janeway lesions
• Immunologic phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Osler nodes, Roth
spots, and rheumatoid factor
• Microbiologic evidence: positive blood culture finding but does
not meet a major criterion as noted earlier (excludes single
positive culture findings for coagulase-­negative staphylococci and
organisms that do not cause endocarditis) or serologic evidence
of active infection with organism consistent with IE
TEE, Transesophageal echocardiography; TTE, transthoracic echocardiography.
Modified from Li JS, Sexton DJ, Mick N, et al. Proposed modifications to the Duke
criteria for the diagnosis of infective endocarditis. Clin Infect Dis. 2000;30:633.

2869

prolonged treatment. With highly sensitive viridans group streptococcal infections, shortened regimens that include oral penicillin
for some portion have been recommended for certain adults, but
effectiveness studies in children are lacking. In nonstaphylococcal
disease, bacteremia usually resolves in 24-­48 hours, whereas fever
resolves in 5-­6 days with appropriate antibiotic therapy. Resolution
with staphylococcal disease takes longer.
If the infection occurs on a valve and induces or increases symptoms and signs of heart failure, appropriate therapy should be instituted, including diuretics, inotropic medications, and afterload
reducing agents. Surgical intervention for infective endocarditis
is indicated for severe aortic, mitral, or prosthetic valve involvement with intractable heart failure (Table 486.8). Severe heart failure may be associated with acute valve regurgitation, obstruction of
conduits or shunts, or periannular extension of infection, including
fistula formation. Rarely, a mycotic aneurysm, rupture of an aortic
sinus, intraseptal abscess causing complete heart block, or dehiscence of an intracardiac patch requires emergency surgery. Other
surgical indications include failure to sterilize the blood despite
adequate antibiotic levels in 7-­10 days in the absence of extracardiac
infection, myocardial abscess, recurrent emboli, and increasing size
of vegetations while receiving therapy. Vegetations (aortic, mitral,
prosthetic valve) >10-­15 mm are at high risk of embolism. Although
antibiotic therapy should be administered for as long as possible
before surgical intervention, active infection is not a contraindication if the patient is critically ill as a result of severe hemodynamic
deterioration from infective endocarditis. Emergent surgical intervention in patients with severe heart failure may improve the likelihood of survival. Removal of vegetations and, in some instances,
valve replacement may be lifesaving, and sustained antibiotic
administration will most often prevent reinfection. Replacement of
infected prosthetic valves carries a higher risk.
Fungal endocarditis is difficult to manage and has a poorer
prognosis. It has been encountered after cardiac surgery, in severely
debilitated or immunosuppressed patients, and in patients on a prolonged course of antibiotics. The drugs of choice are amphotericin
B (liposomal or standard preparation) and 5-­fluorocytosine. Surgery to excise infected tissue is occasionally attempted, but often
with limited success. Recombinant tissue plasminogen activation
may help lyse intracardiac vegetations and avoid surgery in some
high-­risk patients.

PREVENTION

The American Heart Association (AHA) recommendations for antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental and other surgical procedures
has resulted in a substantial reduction in the number of patients
who require prophylactic treatment, and the procedures requiring
coverage were recommended. The primary reasons for these revised
recommendations were that (1) infective endocarditis is much more
likely to result from exposure to the more frequent random bacteremias associated with daily activities than from a dental or surgical procedure, (2) routine prophylaxis may prevent “an exceedingly
small” number of cases, and (3) the risk of antibiotic-related adverse
events exceeds the benefits of prophylactic therapy. Improving general dental hygiene was thought to be a more important factor in
reducing the risk of infective endocarditis resulting from routine
daily bacteremias. The current recommendations limit the use of
prophylaxis to those patients with cardiac conditions associated
with the greatest risk of an adverse outcome from infective endocarditis (Table 486.9). Patients with permanently damaged valves
from rheumatic heart disease should also be considered for prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for these patients is recommended for “all
dental procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissue or
the periapical region of teeth or perforation of the oral mucosa.”
Furthermore, “placement of removable prosthodontic or endodontic appliances, adjustment of orthodontic appliances, placement
of orthodontic brackets, shedding of deciduous teeth and bleeding from trauma to the lips or oral mucosa” are not indications for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2870 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 486.6  Therapy of Pediatric Native Valve Endocarditis Caused by Highly Penicillin-­Susceptible^ Viridans Group
Streptococci and Streptococcus bovis
REGIMEN

DOSAGE*† AND ROUTE

DURATION

COMMENTS

Penicillin G

200,000-­300,000 U/kg/24 hr IV given
every 4 hr up to 12-­24 million U/day

4 wk

Avoids nephrotoxicity of gentamicin

100 mg/kg/24 hr IV given every 12 hr
or 80 mg/kg/24 hr given every 24
hr up to 4 g/day (If total amount is
over 2 g/day then dosing should
be every 12 hr)

4 wk

Avoids nephrotoxicity of gentamicin

40 mg/kg/24 hr IV given every 8-­12 hr
up to 2g/day

4 wk

Vancomycin therapy recommended only for patients
unable to tolerate penicillin or ceftriaxone;
vancomycin dosage should be adjusted to obtain a
trough concentration range of 10-­15 μg/mL

Or
Ceftriaxone sodium

Or
Vancomycin hydrochloride¶

^Defined as minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) ≤0.10 μg/mL.

*Dosages recommended are for patients with normal renal function.
†Pediatric dose should not exceed that of a normal adult.
¶Vancomycin dosages should be infused during course of at least 1 hr to reduce risk of histamine release and facial flushing. Peak vancomycin levels should only be obtained to
calculate the area under the curve to mean MIC ratio.
Data from Baltimore RS, Gewitz M, Baddour LM, et al. Infective endocarditis in childhood: 2015 update. A scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2015;132:1487–1515.

Table 486.7  Therapy for Pediatric Endocarditis Caused by Staphylococci in the Absence of Prosthetic Materials
DOSAGE*§ AND ROUTE

REGIMEN

OXACILLIN-­SUSCEPTIBLE STRAINS
Nafcillin or oxacillin†
200 mg/kg/24 hr IV given every
± gentamicin‡ for first 3-­5
4-­6 hr up to 12 g/day AND
days
consider gentamicin 3-­6 mg/
kg/24 hr IV every 8 hr

DURATION

COMMENTS

4-­6 wk

Clinical benefit of aminoglycosides has not been
established. Gentamicin trough levels of <1-­2 μg/mL
should be targeted to avoid risk of toxicity. Gentamicin
peak levels should be obtained 30 min after the
completion of an infusion with a peak goal of 3-­5 μg/mL
(for synergy).

For penicillin-­allergic
(non-­anaphylactoid-­type)
patients:
Cefazolin
± gentamicin‡ for first 3-­5
days

Consider skin testing for oxacillin-­susceptible staphylococci
and questionable history of immediate-­type
hypersensitivity to penicillin.
100 mg/kg/24 hr IV given every 8
hr up to 12 g/day AND consider
gentamicin 3-­6 mg/kg/24 hr IV
given every 8 hr

OXACILLIN-­RESISTANT STRAINS
Vancomycin¶
40 mg/kg/24 hr IV given every
± gentamicin‡ for first 3-­5
8-­12 hr up to 2 g/day
days
AND consider gentamicin 3-­6
mg/kg/24 hr IV given every 8 hr

Daptomycin
± gentamicin‡ for first 3-­5
days

6 mg/kg/24 hr given every 24 hr
<6 yr of age; 10 mg/kg/24 hr
given every 24 hr AND consider
gentamicin 3-­6 mg/kg/24 hr IV
given every 8 hr

4-­6 wk

Cephalosporins should be avoided in patients with
anaphylactoid-­type hypersensitivity to β-­lactams;
vancomycin should be used in these cases.§ Gentamicin
trough levels of <1-­2 μg/mL should be targeted to avoid
risk of toxicity. Gentamicin peak levels should be obtained
30 min after the completion of an infusion with a peak
goal of 3-­5 μg/mL (for synergy).

6 wk

Adjust vancomycin dosage to achieve trough concentration
of 10-­15 μg/mL. Gentamicin trough levels of <1-­2 μg/mL
should be targeted to avoid risk of toxicity. Gentamicin
peak levels should be obtained 30 min after the
completion of an infusion with a peak goal of 3-­5 μg/mL
(for synergy).

4-­6 wk

Gentamicin trough levels of <1-­2 μg/mL should be targeted
to avoid risk of toxicity. Gentamicin peak levels should be
obtained 30 min after the completion of an infusion with a
peak goal of 3-­5 μg/mL (for synergy).

*Dosages recommended are for patients with normal renal function.
§Pediatric dose should not exceed that of a normal adult.
†Penicillin G 200,000-­300,000 U/kg/24 hr IV given every 4 hr up to 12-­24 million U/day may be used in place of nafcillin or oxacillin if strain is penicillin susceptible (minimum inhibitory
concentration ≤0.1 μg/mL) and does not produce β-­lactamase.
‡Gentamicin should be administered in close temporal proximity to nafcillin, or oxacillin dosing and blood levels monitored to reduce the risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity.
¶For specific dosing adjustment and issues concerning vancomycin, see Table 464.6 footnotes.
IE, Infective endocarditis; IV, intravenously.
Data from Baltimore RS, Gewitz M, Baddour LM, et al. Infective endocarditis in childhood: 2015 update. A scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2015;132:1487–1515.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 486 u Infective Endocarditis
Table 486.8  Echocardiographic Features that Suggest
Potential Need for Surgical Intervention
VEGETATION
Persistent vegetation after systemic embolization
Anterior mitral valve leaflet vegetation, particularly if it is highly
mobile with size >10 mm*
One or more embolic events during the first 2 wk of antimicrobial
therapy*
Increase in vegetation size despite appropriate antimicrobial therapy*†
VALVULAR DYSFUNCTION
Acute aortic or mitral insufficiency with signs of ventricular failure†
Heart failure unresponsive to medical therapy†
Valve perforation or rupture†
PERIVALVULAR EXTENSION
Valvular dehiscence, rupture, or fistula†
New heart block†‡
Large abscess or extension of abscess despite appropriate
antimicrobial therapy†

2871

prophylaxis. The 2023 recommendations of the European Society
of Cardiology are noted in Table 486.10. Given that many invasive
respiratory tract procedures do cause bacteremia, prophylaxis for
many of these procedures is considered reasonable. In contrast to
prior recommendations, prophylaxis for gastrointestinal or genitourinary procedures is no longer recommended in the majority of cases. Prophylaxis for patients undergoing cardiac surgery
with placement of prosthetic material is still recommended. Given
the highly individual nature of these recommendations, direct
consultation with the child’s cardiologist is still the best method
for determining a specific patient’s ongoing need for prophylaxis
(Table 486.11).
Continuing education regarding both oral hygiene and, in appropriate cases, the need for prophylaxis is important, especially in teenagers and young adults. Vigorous treatment of sepsis and local infections
and careful asepsis during heart surgery and catheterization reduce the
incidence of infective endocarditis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

*Surgery may be required because of risk of embolization.
†Surgery may be required because of heart failure or failure of medical therapy.
‡Echocardiography should not be the primary modality used to detect or monitor heart block.
From Baddour LM, Freeman WK, Suri RM, et al. Cardiovascular infections. In: Zipes
DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2019: Table 73-­5, p. 1492.

Table 486.9  Cardiac Conditions Associated with Highest
Risk of Adverse Outcome from Infective
Endocarditis for Which Prophylaxis with
Dental Procedures Is Reasonable (2007 AHA
Statement)

Table 486-­10  2023 European Recommendations for
Antibiotic Prophylaxis in Patients with
Cardiovascular Diseases Undergoing
Oro-­Dental Procedures at Increased Risk
of Infective Endocarditis

Prosthetic cardiac valve or prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair
Previous infective endocarditis
Congenital heart disease (CHD)*
• Unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative shunts and conduits
• Completely repaired CHD with prosthetic material or device,
whether placed by surgery or catheter intervention, during the
first 6 mo after the procedure†
• Repaired CHD with residual defects at the site or adjacent
to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device (which
inhibits endothelialization)
• Cardiac transplantation recipients who develop cardiac valvulopathy

• Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended in patients with previous IE.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended in patients with surgically
implanted prosthetic valves and with any material used for
surgical cardiac valve repair.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended in patients with
transcatheter implanted aortic and pulmonary valvular prostheses.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis should be considered in patients with
transcatheter mitral and tricuspid valve repair.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended in patients with untreated
cyanotic CHD, and patients treated with surgery or transcatheter
procedures with post-­operative palliative shunts, conduits,
or other prostheses. After surgical repair, in the absence of
residual defects or valve prostheses, antibiotic prophylaxis is
recommended only for the first 6 months after the procedure.

*Except for the conditions listed here, antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended
by the AHA for any other form of CHD.
†Prophylaxis is reasonable because endothelialization of prosthetic material occurs
within 6 mo after the procedure.
From Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis:
guidelines from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2007;116:1736–1754.

From Delgado V, Marsan NA, de Waha S, et al: 2023 ESC Guidelines for the Management
of endocarditis. Eur Heart J 2023;193:1-­95 https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehad193.

Table 486.11  Prophylactic Antibiotic Regimens for a Dental Procedure (2007 AHA Statement)
SITUATION

AGENT

ADULTS

CHILDREN

Oral

Amoxicillin

2g

50 mg/kg

Unable to take oral medication

Ampicillin
or
Cefazolin or ceftriaxone

2 g IM or IV
1 g IM or IV

50 mg/kg IM or IV
50 mg/kg IM or IV

Allergic to penicillins or
ampicillin—oral

Cephalexin* †
or
Clindamycin
or
Azithromycin or clarithromycin

2g
600 mg
500 mg

50 mg/kg
20 mg/kg
15 mg/kg

Allergic to penicillins or ampicillin
and unable to take oral
medication

Cefazolin or ceftriaxone†
or
Clindamycin

1 g IM or IV
600 mg IM or IV

50 mg/kg IM or IV
20 mg/kg IM or IV

*Or other first-­or second-­generation oral cephalosporin in equivalent adult or pediatric dosage.
†Cephalosporins should not be used in an individual with a history of anaphylaxis, angioedema, or urticaria with penicillins or ampicillin.

IM, Intramuscularly; IV, intravenously.
From Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines from the American Heart Association Circulation. 2007;116:1736–1754.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2872 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Chapter 487

Rheumatic Heart Disease
Michael R. Carr and Stanford T. Shulman
Rheumatic involvement of the cardiac valves is the most important
sequela of acute rheumatic fever (ARF), and the second most common major manifestation after arthritis (see Chapter 229.1). The definitions of three subgroups of rheumatic heart disease (RHD) are noted
in Table 487.1. The valvular lesions begin as small verrucae composed
of fibrin and blood cells along the borders of one or more of the heart
valves. The mitral valve is affected most often, followed in frequency by
the aortic valve. Isolated aortic valve disease is rare and generally seen
with concomitant mitral valve involvement. Right-­sided heart manifestations are rarer and are virtually only associated with left-­sided valve
disease. As the inflammation subsides, the verrucae tend to disappear
and leave scar tissue. With repeated attacks of rheumatic fever, new
verrucae form near the previous ones and the mural endocardium and
chordae tendineae become involved. A single episode of acute rheumatic carditis often results in complete healing of the valvular lesions,
whereas repeated episodes, especially involving previously affected
valves, result in chronic RHD, which is the rationale for secondary prophylaxis. The prevalence of RHD ranges from 3 to 4 cases per 100,000
population in nonendemic countries to >1,000 cases per 100,000 in
endemic countries (Fig. 487.1). On a global scale, the sequelae of RHD
is significant, with up to 300,000 deaths per year related to the disease
process, as well as an exponential degree of related comorbidity.
The diagnosis of ARF requires the fulfillment of the Jones criteria
(see Chapter 229.1), with carditis being a major criterion. The diagnosis
of RHD was once only based on cardiac auscultatory findings of mitral
or aortic valve involvement, which was insensitive for early valve involvement/injury. This was based on valvulitis being seen more frequently in
ARF compared with pericarditis or myocarditis, both of which lack more
readily apparent physical examination findings. Screening large, high-­risk
populations with echocardiography demonstrated a substantially greater
number of patients with RHD than those detected by auscultation alone.
Because access to echocardiography is often available, the current version of the Jones criteria focused on the concept of subclinical carditis
(SCC) detected by echocardiography (see Table 487.1). SCC is defined as
echocardiographic evidence of mitral or aortic valvulitis in the absence of
auscultatory findings and not consistent with physiologic mitral or aortic insufficiency (Table 487.2). Echocardiography with Doppler should
be performed for all cases of confirmed or suspected ARF (Table 487.3).
Additional recommendations are that echocardiography should be performed in moderate-­to high-­risk patient populations if ARF is considered
likely and that echocardiography can be used to exclude cardiac findings
consistent with ARF in patients with cardiac murmurs thought to be suggestive of rheumatic carditis. Additionally, serial echocardiography should
be considered in patients with diagnosed or suspected ARF even if there
is no evidence of valvulitis by echocardiography at diagnosis. The echocardiographic finding of SCC fulfills the major criterion for carditis. The
category of latent RHD is another approach to include patients with mild
asymptomatic valve changes not typically detected on physical exam but
identified by screening high-­risk populations with echocardiography (see
Table 487.1).

PATTERNS OF VALVULAR DISEASE
Mitral Insufficiency

Mitral insufficiency is the result of structural changes that may include
some loss of valvular substance and/or changes to the subvalvular apparatus, including elongation of the chordae, both of which can lead to valve
dysfunction. During ARF with severe cardiac involvement, heart failure
is caused by a combination of mitral insufficiency coupled with a pancarditis involving the pericardium and myocardium in addition to the
endocardium/valve. Because of the increased volume load from the mitral

insufficiency and the inflammatory process, the left ventricle dilates. The
left atrium also enlarges to accommodate the regurgitant volume. Increased
left atrial pressure results in pulmonary congestion and symptoms of left-­
sided heart failure. Spontaneous improvement often occurs with time,
even in patients in whom mitral insufficiency is severe at the onset. The
resultant chronic lesion is most often mild or moderate in severity, and the
patient is often asymptomatic. More than half of patients with acute mitral
insufficiency no longer have an audible mitral insufficiency murmur 1 year
later, although they still may demonstrate insufficiency on echocardiography. In patients with severe chronic mitral insufficiency, pulmonary artery
pressure (PAP) becomes elevated, the right ventricle and atrium become
enlarged, and right-­sided heart failure subsequently develops.

Clinical Manifestations

Physical signs of mitral insufficiency depend on its severity. With mild
disease, signs of heart failure are not present, the precordium is quiet,
and auscultation reveals a high-­pitched holosystolic murmur at the
apex that radiates to the axilla. With severe mitral insufficiency, signs of
acute or chronic heart failure may be noted. The heart is enlarged, with
a heaving apical left ventricular (LV) impulse and often an apical systolic thrill. The second heart sound (S2) may be accentuated if pulmonary hypertension is present. A third heart sound or gallop is generally
prominent. A holosystolic murmur is heard at the apex with radiation
to the axilla. A short mid-­diastolic rumbling murmur is caused by
increased blood flow across the mitral valve as a result of the significant insufficiency. Therefore auscultation of a diastolic murmur, often
referred to as relative mitral stenosis (Carey-­Coombs murmur), does
not necessarily mean that true mitral stenosis is present. The latter
lesion takes many years to develop and is characterized by a diastolic
murmur of greater length, usually with presystolic accentuation.
The electrocardiogram and chest radiographs are normal if the mitral
insufficiency is mild. With more severe insufficiency, the ECG shows a
prominent, longer duration and often bifid P waves, signs of LV hypertrophy, and associated right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy if pulmonary
hypertension is present. On chest radiograph, prominence of the left
atrium and ventricle can be seen, the former of which is better seen on
lateral projections. Congestion of the perihilar vessels, a sign of pulmonary
venous hypertension, may also be evident. Calcification of the mitral valve
is rare in children. Echocardiography in the acute phase may demonstrate
enlargement of the left atrium and ventricle. LV systolic function can be
impaired if there is also a component of myocardial inflammation. Mitral
annular dilation, chordal elongation, and at times, evidence of chordal
rupture resulting in a flail leaflet may be noted. The leaflet tips demonstrate
a nodular appearance, and prolapse of the anterior mitral valve leaflet tip
(much more often than the posterior leaflet) is seen. Doppler evaluation
demonstrates the severity of the mitral regurgitation. Chronic mitral insufficiency from RHD is characterized on echocardiography by leaflet and
chordal thickening, chordal fusion, and restricted leaflet motion. These
changes often lead to stenosis, but poor coaptation of the abnormal leaflets
can also lead to variable degrees of regurgitation. Cardiac catheterization
and left ventriculography are considered only if diagnostic questions are
not completely resolved by noninvasive assessment or in rare cases with a
concern for significantly elevated PAP.

Complications

Severe mitral insufficiency may result in cardiac failure that may be precipitated by progression of the rheumatic process, recurrent episodes
of ARF, the onset of atrial fibrillation (AF) or other arrhythmias, or
infective endocarditis. The effects of chronic mitral insufficiency may
become manifest after many years and include LV and RV failure and
atrial and ventricular arrhythmias.

Treatment

In patients with mild mitral insufficiency, prophylaxis against recurrences
of rheumatic fever is all that is required in addition to the typical treatment for ARF (Table 487.4). For more significant insufficiency, corticosteroids are added in the acute phase. Treatment of complicating heart
failure (see Chapter 491), arrhythmias (see Chapter 484), and infective
endocarditis (see Chapter 486) is described elsewhere. Afterload-­reducing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 487 u Rheumatic Heart Disease
agents—angiotensin-­converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin
receptor blockers (ARBs)—may reduce the regurgitant volume, attenuate pathologic compensatory mechanisms, and preserve LV function, but
these have not been proven to alter the natural history of the disease process. Diuretics may also provide some symptomatic and clinical benefit
in select cases. In rare cases, phosphodiesterase inhibitors such as milrinone may be used in the acute stage because of their inotropic, lusitropic,
and systemic vascular dilating effects. Surgical treatment is indicated for
patients who, despite adequate medical therapy, have persistent heart failure, dyspnea with moderate activity, and progressive cardiomegaly, often
with pulmonary hypertension. Although annuloplasty and other forms of
mitral valve repair provide good results in some children and adolescents,
mitral valve replacement may be required, which can be more complicated
in younger children. In patients with a prosthetic mitral valve replacement,
prophylaxis against bacterial endocarditis is warranted for dental procedures, as the routine antibiotics taken by these patients for rheumatic fever
prophylaxis are insufficient to prevent endocarditis. Additionally, current
recommendations suggest selecting a different class of antibiotic for such
procedures, rather than increasing the dose of the antibiotic taken for
rheumatic fever prophylaxis. Lastly, it is important to remember that all

Table 487.1  Proposed RHD Definitions
Latent RDH

All cases of RHD diagnosed through
echocardiographic screening, to include
previously unrecognized clinical RHD and
subclinical RHD.

Clinical RDH

All cases of RHD that have clinical signs or
symptoms, including pathologic heart
murmur* diagnosed either through
echocardiographic screening or clinical
evaluation. Clinical RHD is typically more
advanced than subclinical RHD.

Subclinical RDH

All cases of RHD that do not have clinical signs or
symptoms, including heart murmur.* Subclinical
RHD is only diagnosed by echocardiography
and is typically less advanced than clinical RHD.

*Detection of a pathologic heart murmur without echocardiography has been shown to
be poorly sensitive and specific in echocardiographic screening studies for RHD.
RHD, Rheumatic heart disease.
Modified from Beaton A, Engelman D, Mirabel M. Echocardiographic screening for
rheumatic heart disease. In: Dougherty S, Carapetis J, Zühlke, Wilson N, eds. Acute
Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Table 13.1.

17

200

400

600

2873

attempts should be made at maximizing medical management of severe
mitral insufficiency during the acute phase of the disease process, before
considering surgical intervention, because surgery carries a poorer prognosis and an increased risk for reoperation when performed during the
acute phase.

Mitral Stenosis

Mitral stenosis of rheumatic origin results from fibrosis of the mitral ring,
commissural adhesions, and contracture of the valve leaflets, chordae,
and papillary muscles over time. This is a chronic process and often takes
≥10 years for the lesion to become fully established, although the process
may occasionally be accelerated. In the developed world, rheumatic mitral
stenosis is seldom encountered before adolescence and is not usually recognized until adult life. Significant mitral stenosis results in increased left
atrial pressure and subsequent enlargement and hypertrophy of the left
atrium, pulmonary venous hypertension, increased pulmonary vascular
resistance, and eventually overt pulmonary hypertension (Fig. 487.2). RV
hypertrophy and right atrial dilation ensue and are followed by RV dilation, tricuspid regurgitation, and clinical signs of right-­sided heart failure.

Clinical Manifestations

Generally, the correlation between symptoms and the severity of
obstruction is good. Patients with mild stenosis are asymptomatic.
More severe degrees of obstruction are associated with exercise intolerance and dyspnea. Critical lesions can result in orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and overt pulmonary edema, as well as atrial
arrhythmias. When pulmonary hypertension has developed, RV dilation may result in functional tricuspid insufficiency, hepatomegaly,
ascites, and edema. Hemoptysis caused by rupture of bronchial or
pleurohilar veins and, occasionally, pulmonary infarction may occur.
Jugular venous pressure is increased in severe disease with heart failure,
tricuspid valve disease/regurgitation, or severe pulmonary hypertension.
In mild disease, the heart size is normal; however, moderate cardiomegaly
is typical with severe mitral stenosis. Cardiac enlargement can be massive
when AF and heart failure supervene. A parasternal RV lift is palpable
when PAP is high. The principal auscultatory findings are a loud first heart
sound, an opening snap of the mitral valve, and a long, low-­pitched, rumbling mitral diastolic murmur with presystolic accentuation at the apex.
The mitral diastolic murmur may be virtually absent in patients who are
in significant heart failure from the elevated LV filling pressures. A holosystolic murmur secondary to tricuspid insufficiency may be audible at the
left lower sternal border. In the presence of pulmonary hypertension, the
pulmonic component of S2 is accentuated. An early diastolic murmur may

800

1k

1.2k

1.4k

Fig. 487.1 Prevalence of rheumatic heart disease global map showing prevalence/100,000 population in 2017 by country. (From the Institute
for Health Metrics and Evaluation Global Burden of Disease 2019, Non-communicable disease data. Seattle: University of Washington IHME.
https://www.healthdata.org/research-analysis/gbd.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2874 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
be caused by associated rheumatic aortic insufficiency or pulmonary valvular insufficiency secondary to pulmonary hypertension.
ECGs and chest radiographs are normal if the stenosis is mild; as the
severity increases, prominent and notched P waves and varying degrees of
RV hypertrophy become evident. AF or other atrial arrhythmias are common late manifestations. Moderate to severe lesions are associated with
radiographic signs of left atrial enlargement and prominence of the pulmonary artery and right-­sided heart chambers; calcifications may be noted
in the region of the mitral valve (see Fig. 487.2). Severe stenosis is associated with a redistribution of pulmonary blood flow so that the apices of the
lung have greater perfusion (the reverse of normal). Lastly, horizontal lines
in the lower lung periphery, called Kerley B lines, may be evident.
Echocardiography demonstrates thickening of the mitral valve and
chordal apparatus, as well as restricted motion of the valve (Fig. 487.3). The
typical “elbow” or “dog leg” appearance of the anterior leaflet of the mitral
valve can aid in the distinction of a rheumatic valve from the various forms
of congenital mitral stenosis. Left atrial dilation is common; color Doppler flow across the mitral valve shows a narrow jet with flow acceleration,
and variable degrees of tricuspid insufficiency can be seen from left atrial
hypertension. Doppler can estimate the transmitral pressure gradient but
can underestimate the gradient if there is LV dysfunction. Estimates of the
RV/PAP can be made by echocardiographic assessment of the tricuspid
and pulmonary insufficiency, as well as changes in the RV size and function and the systolic septal position. Cardiac catheterization quantitates

Table 487.2  Echocardiographic Findings in Rheumatic
Valvulitis
PATHOLOGIC MITRAL
REGURGITATION*

PATHOLOGIC AORTIC
REGURGITATION*

1.	Seen in at least two views
2.	Jet length ≥2 cm in at least
one view
3.	Peak velocity >3 meters/sec
4.	Pan-­systolic jet in at least one
envelope

1.	Seen in at least two views
2.	Jet length ≥1 cm in at least
one view
3.	Peak velocity >3 meters/sec
4.	Pan-­diastolic jet in at least
one envelope

*All four criteria need to be met.
Adapted from Gewitz MH, Baltimore RS, Tani LY, et al., On behalf of the American Heart
Association Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis and Kawasaki Disease of the
Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young. Revision of the Jones criteria for the
diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever in the era of Doppler echocardiography: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;131:1806–1818.

the diastolic gradient across the mitral valve well, allows for the calculation
of cross-­sectional valve area in older children, and assesses the degree of
left atrial hypertension and PAP elevation.

Treatment

Intervention is indicated in patients with clinical signs and hemodynamic evidence of severe obstruction, but before the onset of severe
manifestations. Pharmacologic therapy (diuretics and β blockers)
Table 487.4  Recommended Durations of Secondary
Prophylaxis According to International
Guidelines
GUIDELINE
American (AHA)

SECONDARY PROPHYLAXIS
DURATION RECOMMENDED
ARF with carditis and residual heart
disease: until age 40 yr or for 10 yr after
last ARF (whichever is longer); lifetime
prophylaxis may be needed
ARF with carditis but no residual heart
disease: until age 21 yr or for 10 yr after
last ARF (whichever is longer)
ARF without carditis: until age 21 yr or for
5 yr after last ARF (whichever is longer)

WHO Expert
Consultation Geneva
(2004)

Lifelong if severe valvular disease or after
valve surgery
For 10 yr after last ARF or until age 25 yr
in patients with a previous diagnosis of
carditis
For 5 yr after last ARF or until age 18 yr in
patients without proven carditis

AHA, American Heart Association; ARF, acute rheumatic fever; RHD, rheumatic heart
disease; WHO, World Health Organization.
Modified from Kumar RK, Antunes MJ, Beaton A, et al. Contemporary diagnosis and
management of rheumatic heart disease: implications for closing the gap: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142(2):e337–e357,
Table 2.

Table 487.3  Morphologic Findings in Echocardiogram in
Rheumatic Vasculitis
ACUTE MITRAL VALVE CHANGES
Annular dilation
Chordal elongation
Chordal rupture resulting in flail leaflet with severe mitral
regurgitation
Anterior (or, less commonly, posterior) leaflet tip prolapse
Beading/nodularity of leaflet tips
CHRONIC MITRAL VALVE CHANGES: NOT SEEN IN ACUTE
CARDITIS
Leaflet thickening
Chordal thickening and fusion
Restricted leaflet motion
Calcification
AORTIC VALVE CHANGES IN EITHER ACUTE OR CHRONIC
CARDITIS
Irregular or focal leaflet thickening
Coaptation defect
Restricted leaflet motion
Leaflet prolapse
From Kumar RK, Antunes MJ, Beaton A, et al. Contemporary diagnosis and
management of rheumatic heart disease: implications for closing the gap: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142(2):e337–e357,
Supplemental Table 2.

Fig. 487.2 Chest x-­ray from an 8-­yr-­old child with advanced juvenile

mitral valve stenosis. Severe pulmonary venous hypertension is shown
by the prominent upper lobe vasculature, interstitial edema, and visible interlobar fissure (black arrow). The left heart border is straightened, indicating enlargement of the main pulmonary artery and left
atrial appendage (white arrow). (From Kumar RK, Antunes MJ, Beaton
A, et al. Contemporary diagnosis and management of rheumatic heart
disease: implications for closing the gap: a scientific statement from
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142(2):e337–e357,
Supplemental Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 487 u Rheumatic Heart Disease
can be attempted but is generally used only for symptom control and
much less often in children. However, it should not be considered
adequate treatment in severe, symptomatic disease. Surgical valvotomy or balloon catheter mitral valvuloplasty generally yields good
results (see Fig. 487.3); mitral valve replacement is avoided unless
absolutely necessary. Balloon valvuloplasty is indicated for symptomatic, stenotic, pliable, noncalcified valves in patients without significant atrial arrhythmias or thrombi. Unfortunately, neither surgical
nor interventional options may exist in areas of the world with high
disease burden.

Aortic Insufficiency

In acute rheumatic aortic insufficiency, poor coaptation of the leaflets
or leaflet prolapse is seen. Chronic rheumatic aortic insufficiency leads
to sclerosis of the valve and results in distortion and retraction of the
cusps. In both settings, regurgitation of blood leads to LV volume overload with dilation and hypertrophy of the left ventricle as it attempts to
compensate for the excessive volume load. Concomitant mitral annular dilation accompanying LV dilation can further exacerbate mitral
valve disease, specifically regurgitation. Combined mitral and aortic
insufficiency in the acute phase of ARF is much more common than
aortic involvement alone. However, in cases of isolated significant aortic insufficiency, RHD should not be discounted, even given the rare
nature of this finding.

Clinical Manifestations

Symptoms are unusual except in severe aortic insufficiency or in the
presence of significant concomitant mitral valve involvement or myocardial dysfunction. The large stroke volume and forceful LV contractions may result in palpitations. Sweating and heat intolerance are
related to excessive vasodilation. Dyspnea on exertion can progress to
orthopnea and pulmonary edema; angina may be precipitated by heavy
PRE

POST
AO

AO

LAA

AL

LAA

PL

PL

A

AL

AO
AO
AL
PL

PL

B

exercise. Nocturnal attacks with sweating, tachycardia, chest pain, and
hypertension may occur.
The pulse pressure is wide with bounding peripheral pulses (water hammer or Corrigan pulse). Systolic blood pressure is elevated, and diastolic
pressure is lowered. In severe aortic insufficiency, the heart is enlarged,
with an LV apical heave. A diastolic thrill may be present. The typical
murmur begins immediately with S2 and continues until late in diastole.
The murmur is heard over the upper left and mid-­left sternal border with
radiation to the apex and upper right sternal border. Characteristically, it
has a high-­pitched blowing quality and is easily audible in full expiration
with the diaphragm of the stethoscope placed firmly on the chest and the
patient leaning forward. An aortic systolic ejection murmur is frequently
heard because of the increased stroke volume. An apical presystolic murmur (Austin Flint murmur) resembling that of mitral stenosis is sometimes heard and is caused by the large regurgitant aortic flow in diastole
preventing the mitral valve from opening fully.
Chest radiographs demonstrate enlargement of the left ventricle and
aorta. The ECG may be normal, but in advanced cases it reveals signs
of LV hypertrophy with a strain pattern and prominent P waves. Echocardiography shows a dilated left ventricle and diastolic mitral valve
flutter or oscillations caused by aortic regurgitant flow hitting the valve
leaflets. The aortic valve may demonstrate irregular or focal thickening,
decreased systolic excursion, a coaptation defect, and leaflet prolapse.
Doppler evaluation demonstrates the degree of aortic insufficiency. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging/angiography (cMRI/MRA) can be
useful in quantitating regurgitant volume and in assessing LV size and
systolic function. Cardiac catheterization is generally only necessary
when echocardiographic or axial imaging data are equivocal.

Prognosis and Treatment

Mild and moderate degrees of aortic insufficiency are well tolerated.
Unlike mitral insufficiency, aortic insufficiency does not generally regress.
Patients with combined lesions during the episode of ARF may have only
aortic involvement 1-­2 years later. Treatment consists of ACE inhibitors
or ARBs and prophylaxis against ARF recurrence. Surgical intervention,
which is typically aortic valve repair but occasionally can involve aortic
valve prosthetic (biologic or mechanical) replacement, should be done
well in advance of the onset of heart failure, pulmonary edema, and angina
or when signs of decreasing myocardial performance become evident, as
manifested by increasing LV dimensions and decreasing systolic function
on echocardiography. Surgery is considered when early symptoms are
present, significant ST-­T wave changes are seen on the ECG, or evidence
of decreasing LV ejection fraction is noted.

Tricuspid Valve Disease

C

AL

2875

D

Fig. 487.3 Balloon mitral valvotomy. Real-time three-dimensional

transesophageal echocardiographic images obtained before, during, and after balloon mitral valvotomy in a patient with mitral stenosis. A and B illustrate the stenotic mitral orifice as seen from the
left atrium (A) and from the left ventricle (B) immediately prior to
the procedure. C and D, obtained immediately after the procedure,
show the commissure splitting and the larger mitral valve orifice. AL,
anterior leaflet; AO, aorta; LAA, left atrial appendix; PL, posterior
leaflet. (From Salcedo EE, Carroll JD. Imaging guidance of transcatheter valve procedures. In Otto CM, Bonow RO (eds). Valvular Heart
Disease: A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2013. Fig 16.11.)

Primary tricuspid valve involvement is rare during both the acute and
chronic stages of rheumatic fever. Tricuspid insufficiency is more common secondary to RV dilation, resulting from significant left-­sided
cardiac lesions. The clinical signs of tricuspid insufficiency include
prominent pulsations of the jugular veins, systolic pulsations of the liver,
and a blowing holosystolic murmur at the lower left sternal border that
increases in intensity during inspiration. Concomitant signs of mitral
or aortic valve disease, with or without AF, are common. In these cases,
signs of tricuspid insufficiency often decrease or even disappear when
heart failure produced by the left-­sided valvular lesions is successfully
treated. Tricuspid valvuloplasty may be required in very rare cases.

Pulmonary Valve Disease

Pulmonary insufficiency secondary to ARF is rare and usually occurs
on a functional basis secondary to pulmonary hypertension and is a
late finding with severe mitral stenosis. The murmur (Graham Steell
murmur) is similar to that of aortic insufficiency, but peripheral arterial signs (bounding pulses) are absent. The correct diagnosis is confirmed by two-­dimensional echocardiography and Doppler studies
demonstrating nonphysiologic pulmonary insufficiency, evidence of
pulmonary hypertension, and the presence of mitral valve disease. Surgical intervention on the pulmonary valve is highly unusual.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2876 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Section 6

Diseases of the
Myocardium and
Pericardium
Chapter 488

Diseases of the
Myocardium
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
The heterogeneous heart muscle diseases associated with structural
remodeling and abnormalities of cardiac function (cardiomyopathy) are important causes of morbidity and mortality in the pediatric
population. Several classification schemes have been formulated in an
effort to provide logical, useful, and scientifically based etiologies for
the cardiomyopathies. Insight into the molecular genetic basis of cardiomyopathies has increased exponentially, and etiologic classification
schemes continue to evolve (Table 488.1).
Table 488.2 classifies the cardiomyopathies based on their anatomic
(ventricular morphology) and functional pathophysiology. Dilated
cardiomyopathy, the most common form of cardiomyopathy, is characterized predominantly by left ventricular (LV) dilation and decreased
LV systolic function (Fig. 488.1). Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy demonstrates increased ventricular myocardial wall thickness, normal or
increased systolic function, and often, diastolic (relaxation) abnormalities with fibrosis of varying degrees (Table 488.3 and Figs. 488.2 and
488.3). Restrictive cardiomyopathy is characterized by near-­normal
ventricular chamber size and wall thickness with preserved systolic
function but dramatically impaired diastolic function leading to elevated filling pressures and atrial enlargement (Fig. 488.4). Arrhythmogenic right ventricular (RV) cardiomyopathy is characterized by
fibrofatty infiltration and replacement of the normal RV myocardium
and occasionally the left ventricle, leading to RV (and LV) systolic and
diastolic dysfunction and arrhythmias. Left ventricular noncompaction is characterized by a hypertrabeculated LV apex and lateral wall,
with a heterogeneous group of associated phenotypes (most often
a dilated phenotype with LV dilation and dysfunction). Cardiomyopathies may be primary or associated with other organ involvement
(Tables 488.4-­488.6).

488.1 Dilated Cardiomyopathy
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), the most common form of cardiomyopathy in children, is the cause of significant morbidity and mortality
and a common indication for cardiac transplantation. The etiologies
are diverse. Unlike adult patients with DCM, ischemic etiologies are
rare in children, although these include anomalous origin of the left
coronary artery from the pulmonary artery, premature coronary atherosclerosis (homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, rare genetic
syndromic diseases such as progeria), and coronary inflammatory
diseases such as Kawasaki disease. It is estimated that up to 50% of
cases are genetic (usually autosomal dominant; some are autosomal
recessive or X-­linked), including some with metabolic causes (see

Tables 488.1 and 488.2). Although the most common etiology of DCM
remains idiopathic, it is likely that undiagnosed familial/genetic conditions and myocarditis predominate. The annual incidence of DCM in
children younger than 18 years is 0.57 cases per 100,000 per year. The
incidence is higher in males, Blacks, and infants <1 year old.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of the ventricular dilation and altered contractility
seen in DCM varies depending on the underlying etiology; systolic
dysfunction and myocyte injury are common. Genetic abnormalities
of several components of the cardiac muscle, including sarcomere
proteins, the cytoskeleton, and the proteins that bridge the contractile apparatus to the cytoskeleton, have been identified in autosomal
dominant and X-­linked inherited disorders. DCM can occur after viral
myocarditis. Although the primary pathogenesis varies from direct
myocardial injury to viral-­induced inflammatory injury, the resulting
myocardial damage, ventricular enlargement, and poor function likely
occur by a final common pathway similar to that in genetic disorders.
In 20–50% of cases, the DCM is familial, with autosomal dominant
inheritance most common (see Table 488.3). Duchenne and Becker
muscular dystrophies are X-­linked cardiomyopathies that account
for 5–10% of DCM cases (see Chapter 649.1). These dystrophinopathies result in an abnormal sarcomere-­cytoskeleton connection, causing impaired myocardial force generation, myocyte damage/scarring,
chamber enlargement, and altered function (see Table 488.6). Female
carriers of dystrophinopathies may also manifest DCM.
Mitochondrial myopathies, as with the muscular dystrophies,
may present clinically with a predominance of extracardiac findings,
although in some children cardiomyopathy may be the first symptom.
These are inherited in a recessive or mitochondrial pattern (see Tables
488.4 and 488.5). Disorders of fatty acid oxidation present with systemic derangements of metabolism (hypoketotic hypoglycemia, acidosis, and hepatic dysfunction), some with peripheral myopathy and
neuropathy, and others with sudden death or life-­threatening cardiac
arrhythmias.
Anthracycline cardiotoxicity (doxorubicin [Adriamycin]) on rare
occasion causes acute inflammatory myocardial injury, but more
classically results in DCM and occurs in up to 30% of patients given
a cumulative dose of doxorubicin exceeding 550 mg/m2. The risk of
toxicity appears to be exacerbated by concomitant radiation therapy.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although more prevalent in patients <1 year of age, all age-­groups
may be affected. Clinical manifestations of DCM are typically those
of heart failure but can also include palpitations, syncope, and sudden
death. Irritability or lethargy can be accompanied by additional nonspecific complaints of failure to thrive, nausea, vomiting, or abdominal
pain. Respiratory symptoms (tachypnea, wheezing, cough, orthopnea, or dyspnea on exertion) are often present. Infrequently, patients
may present acutely with pallor, altered mentation, hypotension, and
shock. Patients can be tachycardic with narrow pulse pressure and
may have hepatic enlargement and rales or wheezing. The precordial
cardiac impulse is increased, and the heart may be enlarged to palpation or percussion. Auscultation may reveal a gallop rhythm in addition to tachycardia, and occasionally murmurs of mitral or, less often,
tricuspid insufficiency may be present. The presence of hypoglycemia,
acidosis, hypotonia, or signs of liver dysfunction suggests an inborn
error of metabolism. Neurologic or skeletal muscle deficits are associated with mitochondrial disorders or muscular dystrophies (see Tables
488.4-­488.6).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Electrocardiographic screening reveals atrial or ventricular hypertrophy, nonspecific T-­wave abnormalities, and occasionally, atrial or
ventricular arrhythmias. The chest radiograph may demonstrate cardiomegaly and pulmonary vascular prominence or pleural effusions.
The echocardiogram is often diagnostic, demonstrating the characteristic findings of LV enlargement, decreased ventricular contractility,
and occasionally a globular (remodeled) LV contour (see Fig. 488.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 488.1  Classification of the Cardiomyopathies by Phenome and Genome
PHENOTYPE

GENOME
NONSYNDROMIC,
USUALLY SINGLE GENE

TYPE

MORPHOLOGY

PHYSIOLOGY

PATHOLOGY

Dilated (DCM)

Dilation of LV and RV
with minimal or no
wall thickening

Reduced contractility
is the primary defect;
variable degree of
diastolic dysfunction

Myocyte
hypertrophy;
scattered fibrosis

Hypertension, alcohol,
thyrotoxicosis, myxedema,
persistent tachycardia, toxins
(e.g., chemotherapy, especially
anthracyclines), radiation

Diverse gene ontology
with >50 genes
implicated

SYNDROMIC
Diverse array of associated
conditions, especially
muscular dystrophies:
Emery-­Dreifuss, limb-­
girdle, Duchenne/Becker;
Laing distal myopathy;
Barth syndrome; Kearns-­
Sayre syndrome; other
mitochondrial disorders;
fatty acid oxidation
disorders; Alstrom
syndrome, others

Restrictive (RCM)

Usually normal
chamber sizes;
minimal wall
thickening

Contractility normal or
near-­normal with a
marked increase in
end-­diastolic filling
pressure

Specific to type,
diagnosis: amyloid,
iron, glycogen
storage disease,
others

Endomyocardial fibrosis, amyloid,
sarcoid, scleroderma, Churg-­
Strauss syndrome, cystinosis,
lymphoma, pseudoxanthoma
elasticum, hypereosinophilic
syndrome, carcinoid

If not associated with
systemic genetic
disease, genetic cause
usually from sarcomeric
pathogenic gene
variants

Gaucher disease,
hemochromatosis,
Fabry disease,
familial amyloidosis,
mucopolysaccharidoses,
Noonan syndrome

Hypertrophic
(HCM)

Usually normal or
reduced internal
chamber dimension;
wall thickening
pronounced,
especially septal
hypertrophy

Systolic function
increased or normal

Myocyte
hypertrophy,
classically with
disarray

Severe hypertension can confound
clinical, morphologic diagnosis

Pathogenic variants
of genes encoding
sarcomeric proteins

Noonan syndrome, Noonan
syndrome with multiple
lentigines, Danon
syndrome, Fabry disease,
Wolff-­Parkinson-­White
syndrome, Friedreich
ataxia, MERRF, MELAS,
other mitochondrial
disorders, fatty acid
oxidation disorders

Arrhythmogenic
right ventricular
cardiomyopathy
(ARVC)

Scattered fibrofatty
infiltration, classically
of RV but also of LV;
dilation of RV or LV, or
both, is common but
not universal

Ventricular arrhythmias
(VT, VF) early or late,
reduced contractility
with progressive
disease; can mimic
DCM

Islands of fatty
replacement;
fibrosis

Palmoplantar keratoderma, wooly
hair in Naxos syndrome

Pathogenic variants of
genes encoding proteins
of desmosome

Naxos syndrome

Left ventricular
noncompaction
(LVNC)

Ratio of noncompacted
to compacted
myocardium
increased with normal
LV or RV or any other
phenotype

Normal to reduced
systolic function

Myocardium normal
and ranging
to findings
consistent with
other coexisting
cardiomyopathies

Phenotype observed in setting of
other types of cardiomyopathy

Various cardiomyopathy
genes associated, but
uncertain whether
genetic cause or
developmental defect
during organogenesis
Continued

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

SYSTEMIC CONDITIONS,
CLINICAL FEATURES, RISK
FACTORS

2877

PHENOTYPE

GENOME
SYSTEMIC CONDITIONS,
CLINICAL FEATURES, RISK
FACTORS

NONSYNDROMIC,
USUALLY SINGLE GENE

SYNDROMIC

See RCM earlier

See RCM earlier

Hypercholesterolemia, hypertension,
diabetes, cigarette smoking, family
history

Familial
hypercholesterolemia;
other heritable lipid
disorders

Familial
hypercholesterolemia

Viral (especially acute myocarditis);
protozoal (e.g., Chagas disease);
bacterial, direct infection (e.g.,
Lyme disease), or from acute
cellular toxicity as result of systemic
toxins (e.g., Streptococcus, gram-­
negative, others)

Genetic predisposition to
infection and/or variable
response to infective
agent

TYPE

MORPHOLOGY

PHYSIOLOGY

PATHOLOGY

Infiltrative

Usually thickened walls;
occasional dilation

Restrictive physiology;
systolic function
usually mildly
reduced

Specific to type,
diagnosis: amyloid,
iron, glycogen
storage disease,
others

Inflammatory

Normal or dilated
without hypertrophy

Reduced systolic
function

Inflammatory
infiltrates

Hypereosinophilic syndrome, acute
myocarditis

Ischemic

Normal or dilated
without hypertrophy

Reduced systolic
function

Areas of infarcted
myocardium

Infectious

Normal or dilated
without hypertrophy

Reduced systolic
function

Specific to infection

LV, Left ventricle; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike symptoms; MERRF, myoclonic epilepsy associated with ragged-­red fibers; RV, right ventricle; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
From Falk RH, Hershberger RE. The dilated, restrictive, and infiltrative cardiomyopathies. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Table 77.1.

2878 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 488.1  Classification of the Cardiomyopathies by Phenome and Genome—cont’d

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

2879

Table 488.2  Etiology of Pediatric Myocardial Disease
CARDIOMYOPATHY
Dilated Cardiomyopathy (DCM)
Neuromuscular diseases

Muscular dystrophies (e.g., Duchenne, Becker, limb-­girdle, Emery-­Dreifuss, congenital muscular
dystrophy), myotonic dystrophy, myofibrillar myopathy

Inborn errors of metabolism

Fatty acid oxidation disorders (trifunctional protein, VLCAD, LCHAD), carnitine abnormalities (carnitine
transport, CPTI, CPTII), mitochondrial disorders (including Kearns-­Sayre syndrome), organic acidemias
(propionic acidemia), Danon disease (DCM more common in females)

Genetic variants in cardiomyocyte
structural apparatus

Familial or sporadic DCM

Genetic syndromes

Alström syndrome, Barth syndrome (phospholipid disorders)

Ischemic

Most common in adults

Chronic tachyarrhythmias

Atrial tachycardias (intractable reentrant supraventricular tachycardia [AVRT, AVNRT], multifocal atrial
tachycardia, permanent junctional reciprocating tachycardia), ventricular tachycardia

Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM)
Inborn errors of metabolism

Mitochondrial disorders (including Friedreich ataxia, variants in nuclear or mitochondrial genome),
storage disorders (glycogen storage disorders, especially Pompe; mucopolysaccharidoses; Fabry
disease; sphingolipidoses; hemochromatosis; Danon disease); fatty acid oxidation disorders

Genetic variants in cardiomyocyte
structural apparatus

Familial or sporadic HCM

Genetic syndromes

Noonan, Costello, cardiofaciocutaneous, and Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndromes

Infant of a diabetic mother
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy (RCM)
Neuromuscular disease

Transient hypertrophy

Metabolic

Storage disorders

Genetic variants in cardiomyocyte
structural apparatus

Familial or sporadic RCM

Myofibrillar myopathies

Secondary
Rare in children; radiation therapy of thorax, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis, β-­thalassemia
Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC)
Genetic variants in cardiomyocyte
Familial or sporadic ARVC
structural apparatus
Left Ventricular Noncompaction
Genetic variants in cardiomyocyte
structural apparatus

LVNC phenotype associated with HCM or DCM

Other

X-­linked (Barth syndrome), autosomal recessive, mitochondrial inheritance, 1p36 deletion syndrome,
and other chromosome abnormalities or genomic disorders; associated with congenital heart defects
SECONDARY OR ACQUIRED MYOCARDIAL DISEASE
Myocarditis (see also Table 488.7)
Viral: parvovirus B19, adenovirus, coxsackievirus A and B, echovirus, rubella, varicella, influenza, mumps,
Epstein-­Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, measles, poliomyelitis, smallpox vaccine, hepatitis C virus, human
herpesvirus 6, HIV, SARS-­CoV-­2 (COVID-­19), opportunistic infections
Rickettsial: psittacosis, Coxiella, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, typhus
Bacterial: diphtheria, mycoplasma, meningococcus, leptospirosis, Lyme disease, typhoid fever,
tuberculosis, streptococcus, listeriosis
Parasitic: Chagas disease, toxoplasmosis, Loa loa, Toxocara canis, schistosomiasis, cysticercosis,
echinococcus, trichinosis
Fungal: histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, actinomycosis
Systemic inflammatory disease

SLE, infant of mother with SLE, scleroderma, Churg-­Strauss vasculitis, rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatic
fever, sarcoidosis, dermatomyositis, periarteritis nodosa, hypereosinophilic syndrome (Löffler
syndrome), acute eosinophilic necrotizing myocarditis, giant cell myocarditis, Kawasaki disease,
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (COVID-­19)

Nutritional deficiency

Beriberi (thiamine deficiency), kwashiorkor, Keshan disease (selenium deficiency)

Drugs, toxins

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), cyclophosphamide, chloroquine, ipecac (emetine), sulfonamides, mesalazine,
chloramphenicol, alcohol, hypersensitivity reaction, envenomations, irradiation, herbal remedy (blue
cohosh), immune checkpoint inhibitors

Coronary artery disease

Kawasaki disease, medial necrosis, anomalous left coronary artery from pulmonary artery, other
congenital coronary anomalies (anomalous right coronary artery, coronary ostial stenosis), familial
hypercholesterolemia

Hematology-­oncology

Anemia, sickle cell disease, leukemia

Endocrine-­neuroendocrine

Hyperthyroidism, carcinoid tumor, pheochromocytoma, adrenal crisis

Stress (takotsubo) cardiomyopathy

Endocrine (see earlier)
Neurologic (stroke, bleed)
Induction of anesthesia
Fright
Medications/drugs (sympathomimetic agents, venlafaxine)

CPTI/CPTII, Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1/2; LCHAD, long-­chain 3-­hydroxyacyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction; SLE, systemic lupus
erythematosus; VLCAD, very-­long-­chain acyl-­coenzyme A dehydrogenase.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2880 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
RV enlargement and depressed function are occasionally noted. Echo
Doppler studies can reveal evidence of pulmonary hypertension, mitral
regurgitation, or other structural cardiac or coronary abnormalities.
Cardiac MRI is useful for patients with suboptimal imaging echocardiographic windows or in patients with concern of acute myocarditis

where, in contrast to echocardiography, recognition of inflammation of
the myocardium is possible.
Additional testing may include complete blood count, renal and
liver function tests, creatine phosphokinase (CPK), cardiac troponin I, lactate, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and pro-­BNP, plasma
amino acids, urine organic acids, and an acylcarnitine profile. Additional genetic testing is typically indicated, and enzymatic testing may
be useful (see Table 488.3). Cardiac catheterization and endomyocardial biopsy are not routine but may be useful in patients with acute
DCM. Biopsy samples can be examined histologically for the presence
of mononuclear cell infiltrates, myocardial damage, storage abnormalities, and evidence of infection. It is considered standard of care to
screen first-­degree family members using echocardiography and electrocardiogram (ECG) in idiopathic and familial cases of DCM.

RV
Ao
LV

PROGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT

LA

The 1-­and 5-­year freedom from death or transplantation in patients
diagnosed with DCM is 60–70% and 50–60%, respectively. Independent risk factors at DCM diagnosis for subsequent death or transplantation include older age, heart failure, lower LV fractional shortening
z score, and underlying etiology. DCM is the most common cause for
cardiac transplantation in pediatric and adult studies.
The therapeutic approach to patients with DCM includes a careful
assessment to uncover possible treatable etiologies, screening of family
members, and rigorous pharmacologic therapy. Medications aimed at
reverse remodeling (improving ventricular size and function) include
angiotensin-­converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) plus β-­adrenergic blockade with carvedilol or
metoprolol. The combination medication valsartan/sacubitril, which
is an ARB/neprilysin inhibitor, respectively, that is FDA approved
for patients 1 year of age and older, has been readily used in this setting in pediatrics in lieu of either an ACE or ARBs alone (see Chapter 491). Each of these medications have proved independently and in
combination to improve survival and symptoms and reduce hospital
admissions in adults with DCM. Additionally, furosemide may be used
to reduce symptoms of pulmonary or systemic venous congestion.
Digoxin therapy can also be considered in some patients. Implantable cardiac defibrillators may be considered for certain select patients
with a high risk of sudden cardiac arrest. Pacemakers, including dual-­
chamber and biventricular pacing therapy, can improve patients with

A

LA

RV

LV

B
Fig. 488.1 Echocardiogram of a patient with dilated cardiomyopathy.

A, Parasternal long-­axis view showing the enlarged left ventricle. B, Apical four-­chamber view showing the large left ventricle compressing the
right ventricle. Ao, Ascending aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle;
RV, right ventricle.

Table 488.3  Cardiomyopathies
DCM

HCM

RCM

LVNC

ARVC

Prevalence

50/100,000

1/500

Unknown

Unknown

1/2,000

Causes

Sarcomeric/
cytoskeletal/
desmosomal gene
variant, neuromuscular
disease, inborn
error of metabolism,
mitochondrial disease,
genetic syndrome,
infection

Sarcomeric/
cytoskeletal/
desmosomal gene
variant, genetic
syndrome, inborn
error of metabolism/
mitochondrial disease

Sarcomeric
gene variant,
neuromuscular
disease, genetic
syndrome, storage
or infiltrative
disease

Sarcomeric-­cytoskeletal-­
desmosomal
gene mutation,
neuromuscular
disease, inborn
error of metabolism,
mitochondrial disease,
genetic syndrome

Desmosomal gene
variants

Inheritance

30–50% AD, AR, X-­L, Mt

50% AD, Mt

AD, up to 50%

AD, X-­L, Mt, % unknown

30–50% AD, rare AR
(Naxos disease;
Carvajal syndrome)

Sudden death

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Arrhythmias

Atrial, ventricular,
and conduction
disturbances

Atrial and ventricular

Atrial fibrillation

Atrial, ventricular,
and conduction
disturbances

Ventricular and
conduction
disturbances

Ventricular
function

Systolic and diastolic
dysfunction

Diastolic dysfunction
Dynamic systolic
outflow obstruction

Diastolic dysfunction
Normal systolic
function

Systolic or diastolic
dysfunction

Normal-­reduced
systolic and diastolic
function

ACE, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme; AD, autosomal dominant inheritance; AR, autosomal recessive inheritance; ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; DCM,
dilated cardiomyopathy; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; ICD, implantable cardioverter-­defibrillator; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction; Mt, mitochondrial inheritance;
RCM, restrictive cardiomyopathy; X-­L, X-­linked inheritance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

2881

Fig. 488.2 Locations of genes within the cardiac sarcomere known to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Prevalence of every gene (derived from
data of unrelated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy probands with positive genotyping) is shown in parentheses. (From Maron BJ, Maron MS. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Lancet 2013;381:242–252, Fig 1.)

SEPT

LV

LVPW

A

RA

RV

SEPT

LA

LV

RV

LV

B
Fig. 488.3 Echocardiograms demonstrating hypertrophic cardiomyo-

pathy. A, Parasternal long-­axis view of a patient with severe concentric left ventricular hypertrophy. B, Four-­chamber view of a patient with
asymmetric septal hypertrophy. LV, Left ventricle; LVPW, left ventricular
posterior wall; RV, right ventricle; SEPT, septum.

Fig. 488.4 Echocardiogram of a patient with restrictive cardiomyopa-

thy. Apical four-­chamber view shows the greatly enlarged right and left
atria compared to the normal-­size left and right ventricular chambers.
LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2882 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 488.4  Nuclear DNA Abnormalities Associated with Cardiomyopathy and Arrhythmias or Conduction Defects*
CONDITION

GENETIC DEFECT

ISOLATED COMPLEX DEFICIENCIES
Complex I deficiency
Multiple complex I subunit
genes, ACAD9, FOXRED1

HEART FINDINGS

OTHER CLINICAL FEATURES

HCM, DCM, LVNC,
WPW

Leigh syndrome, FILA, MELAS, leukoencephalopathy,
seizures, hypotonia, pigmentary retinopathy, optic
atrophy, hearing loss, liver dysfunction

Complex II deficiency

SDHA, SDHD

HCM, DCM, LVNC,
AF, heart block

Leukoencephalopathy, cerebellar atrophy, seizures,
spasticity, myopathy, liver dysfunction, kidney dysfunction

Complex III deficiency

BCS1L

HCM

Developmental delay, psychosis, hearing loss

SCO2, SURF1, C2orf64,
Cl2orf62, COX6B1
MITOCHONDRIAL TRANSLATION DEFECTS
GTP-­binding protein-­3
GTPBP3
deficiency

HCM, DCM

Leigh syndrome, encephalopathy, ataxia, liver dysfunction,
kidney dysfunction

HCM, DCM, heart
block, WPW

Leigh syndrome, encephalopathy

Mitochondrial translational
activator protein deficiency

MTOI

HCM, heart block

Encephalopathy, hypotonia

Alanyl-­tRNA synthetase
deficiency

AARS2

HCM

Leukoencephalopathy, myopathy

Tyrosyl-­tRNA synthetase
deficiency

YARS2

HCM

MLASA syndrome

tRNA methyltransferase-­5
deficiency

TRMTS

HCM

Developmental delay, hypotonia, peripheral neuropathy,
renal tubulopathy

RNA processing defect

ELAC2

Complex IV deficiency

HCM, PSVE

Microcephaly, growth deficiency, hearing loss

Mitochondrial ribosomal
MRPS22, MRPl3, MRPL44
subunit deficiencies
mtDNA DEPLETION SYNDROMES
MNGIE
TYMP

HCM, WPW

Leukoencephalopathy, seizures, liver dysfunction, renal
tubulopathy

Mild or
asymptomatic
HCM

Leukoencephalopathy, severe gastrointestinal dysmotility,
ophthalmoplegia, hearing loss, peripheral neuropathy

F-­box protein deficiency

FBXL4

Cardiomyopathy,
unspecified

Encephalopathy, brain atrophy

Coenzyme Q10 biosynthesis
defects

COQ2, COQ4, COQ9

HCM

Leigh syndrome, encephalomyopathy, retinitis
pigmentosa, hearing loss, liver dysfunction, renal
tubulopathy

HCM, DCM, LVNC,
EFE, VT, LQTS

Myopathy, short stature, neutropenia

3-­METHYLGLUTACONIC ACIDURIAS
Barth syndrome
TAZ
Dilated cardiomyopathy and
ataxia syndrome

DNAJC19

DCM, LVNC

Ataxia, optic ataxia, short stature, testicular abnormalities,
liver disease

Complex V deficiency

TMEM70

HCM

Cataracts, leukodystrophy, ataxia, myopathy, short stature

Sengers syndrome

AGK

HCM

Cataracts, myopathy, exercise intolerance, short stature

*Examples of conditions that are associated with heart disease and feature abnormal nDNA are shown, along with the causative molecular defects and clinical findings. The genetic
defects noted here are provided as major contributors to the various mitochondrial conditions but are not a comprehensive compilation.
AF, Atrial fibrillation; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; EFE, endocardial fibroelastosis; FILA, fatal infantile lactic acidosis; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; HCM, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy; LQTS, long QT syndrome; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; MLASA, myopathy, lactic acidosis, sideroblastic
anemia; MNGIE, mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy; nDNA, nuclear DNA; PSVE, paroxysmal supraventricular extrasystoles; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction;
VT, ventricular tachycardia; WPW, Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome.
From Enns GM. Pediatric mitochondrial diseases and the heart. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2017;29:541–551, Table 2.

certain underlying electrical derangements. In patients presenting
with extreme degrees of heart failure or circulatory collapse, intensive
care measures are often required, including intravenous inotropes and
diuretics, mechanic ventilatory support, and on occasion, mechanical circulatory support, which may include a ventricular assist device
(VAD), total artificial heart, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation

(ECMO), and ultimately cardiac transplantation. In patients with
DCM and atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, specific antiarrhythmic
therapy should be instituted.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

2883

Table 488.5  Mitochondrial DNA Abnormalities Associated with Cardiomyopathy and Arrhythmias or Conduction Defects*
CONDITION

GENETIC DEFECT

HEART FINDINGS

OTHER CLINICAL FEATURES

Kearns-­Sayre syndrome

mtDNA deletion

HCM, DCM, heart block,
PMVT

Progressive external ophthalmoplegia, pigmentary
retinopathy, cerebellar ataxia, hearing loss, increased CSF
protein, diabetes mellitus, renal tubulopathy

MELAS

tRNALou point variant

HCM, DCM, LVNC, RCM,
heart block, WPW

Encephalopathy, seizures, strokelike episodes, headaches,
hearing loss, myopathy

MERRF

tRNALys point variant

HCM, DCM, HiCM, WPW

Myoclonus, seizures, ataxia, optic atrophy, hearing loss,
short stature

Complex I deficiency

Multiple complex I subunit
genes

HCM, DCM

Leigh syndrome, leukoencephalopathy, seizures, optic
atrophy

Complex III deficiency

MTCYB

HCM, DCM, HiCM

Exercise intolerance, myopathy, seizures, optic atrophy,
short stature

Complex IV deficiency

MT-­CO1, MT-­CO2, MT-­CO3

HCM, DCM, HiCM

Encephalopathy, seizures, pigmentary retinopathy, hearing
loss, myopathy, liver dysfunction

Complex V deficiency

MT-­ATP6, MT-­ATP8

HCM

Ataxia, peripheral neuropathy

*Relatively common conditions that are associated with heart disease and feature abnormal mtDNA are shown, along with the most common molecular defects and clinical findings.
Although the most common molecular defects are indicated in the table, in most cases, multiple genetic abnormalities can cause similar clinical presentations.
CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HiCM, histiocytoid cardiomyopathy; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction; MELAS,
mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; MERRF, myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; PMVT, polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia; RCM, restrictive cardiomyopathy; WPW, Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome.
From Enns GM. Pediatric mitochondrial diseases and the heart. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2017;29:541–551. Table 3.

Table 488.6  Gene Variants and Cardiac Manifestations of Neuromuscular Disorders
DISORDER

GENE VARIANT

CARDIOMYOPATHY

ECG

ARRHYTHMIA

Duchenne muscular
dystrophy (DMD)

Dystrophin

Dilated

Short PR interval, prolonged
QT interval, increased
QT:PT ratio, right ventricular
hypertrophy, deep Q waves
II, III, aVF, V5, V6

Increased baseline HR, decreased
rate variability, premature
ventricular beats (58% of
patients by 24 yr of age)

DMD—female carrier

Dystrophin

Dilated

None

Uncommon

Becker muscular dystrophy

Dystrophin

Dilated

Conduction system disease

Similar to DMD

Emery-­Dreifuss autosomal
dominant or proximal
dominant limb-­girdle
muscular dystrophy IB

Lamin A/C

Dilated

Conduction abnormalities:
prolonged PR interval, sinus
bradycardia

Atrial fibrillation or flutter and
atrial standstill; ventricular
dysrhythmias

Limb-­girdle muscular
dystrophy

α, β, γ, δ sarcoglycans

Dilated

Incomplete right bundle
branch block, tall R waves
in VI and V2, left anterior
hemiblock

Uncommon

Congenital muscular
dystrophy

Laminin α2

Dilated

None

None

Limb-­girdle muscular
dystrophy 21

Fukutin

Dilated

AV node and bundle branch
block; age at onset: late
teens and early 20s

Atrial arrhythmias and/or
ventricular arrhythmias

Emery-­Dreifuss X-­linked

Emerin

Rare

Conduction abnormalities:
prolonged PR interval, sinus
bradycardia

Atrial fibrillation or flutter and
atrial standstill

Friedreich ataxia

Frataxin

Hypertrophic

T-­wave inversion, left axis
deviation, repolarization
abnormalities

Ventricular arrhythmias

Myotonic dystrophy type 1,
infantile

Myotonic dystrophy
protein kinase
gene

Hypertrophic

Conduction disease,
prolonged PR interval,
widening of QRS complex

Atrial fibrillation and flutter,
complete heart block

Myotonic dystrophy type 1

Myotonic dystrophy
protein kinase
gene

LVNC

Conduction disease,
prolonged PR interval,
widening of QRS complex

Atrial fibrillation and flutter,
complete heart block

AV, Atrioventricular; HR, heart rate; LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction.
From Hsu DT. Cardiac manifestations of neuromuscular disorders in children. Pediatr Respir Rev. 2010;11:35–38, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2884 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

488.2 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a heterogeneous, relatively
common, and potentially life-­threatening form of cardiomyopathy.
The causes of HCM include inborn errors of metabolism, neuromuscular disorders, syndromic conditions, and genetic abnormalities of
the structural components of the cardiomyocyte (see Tables 488.1 and
488.2). Both the age of onset and the associated features are helpful in
identifying the underlying etiology.
HCM is a genetic disorder and frequently occurs because of pathogenic
variants in sarcomere or cytoskeletal components of the cardiomyocyte
(see Fig. 488.2). Pathogenic variants of the genes encoding cardiac β-­
myosin heavy-­chain (MYH7) and myosin-­binding protein C (MYBPC3)
are the most common (see Table 488.3). Pathogenic variants are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern with a high penetrance but
variable expressivity. Additional genetic causes for HCM include nonsarcomeric protein pathogenic variants, such as the γ2-­regulatory subunit of
adenosine monophosphate–activated protein kinase (PRKAG2) and the
lysosome-­associated membrane protein 2α-­galactosidase (Danon disease, a form of glycogen storage disease). Syndromic conditions, such as
Noonan syndrome, may present with HCM at birth, and recognition of
extracardiac manifestations is important in making the diagnosis. Medical therapy directed at the Ras signaling pathway is in the initial phases of
use in patients with Noonan syndrome and related RASopathies.
Glycogen storage disorders such as Pompe disease often present
in infancy with a heart murmur, abnormal ECG, systemic signs and
symptoms, and occasionally heart failure. Many states have Pompe
testing on the newborn screening, facilitating early diagnosis and
therapy, which has improved the prognosis. The characteristic ECG in
Pompe disease demonstrates prominent P waves, a short P-­R interval,
and massive QRS voltages. The echocardiogram confirms severe, often
concentric, LV hypertrophy.

PATHOGENESIS

HCM is characterized by the presence of increased LV wall thickness
in the absence of structural heart disease or hypertension. Often the
interventricular septum is disproportionately involved, leading to the
previous designation of idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis or
the current term of asymmetric septal hypertrophy. In the presence
of a resting or provocable outflow tract gradient, the term hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy is used. Although the left ventricle
is predominantly affected, the right ventricle may be involved, particularly in infancy. The mitral valve can demonstrate systolic anterior
motion and mitral insufficiency. Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT)
obstruction occurs in 25% of patients, is dynamic in nature, and may
in part be secondary to the abnormal position of the mitral valve as
well as the obstructing subaortic hypertrophic cardiac muscle. The
cardiac myofibrils and myofilaments demonstrate disarray and myocardial fibrosis.
Typically, systolic function is preserved or even hyperdynamic,
although systolic dysfunction may occur late and is a predictor for
death or need for cardiac transplant. LVOT obstruction with or without mitral insufficiency may be provoked by physiologic manipulations such as the Valsalva maneuver, positional changes, and physical
activity. Frequently, the hypertrophic and fibrotic cardiac muscle demonstrates relaxation abnormalities (diminished compliance), and LV
filling may be impaired (diastolic dysfunction).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Many patients are asymptomatic; 50% of cases present with a heart
murmur or during screening when another family member has been
diagnosed with HCM. Symptoms of HCM may include palpitations,

chest pain, easy fatigability, dyspnea, dizziness, and syncope. Sudden
death is a well-­recognized but uncommon manifestation that occurs
during physical exertion but may also occur at rest or during sleep.
Characteristic physical examination findings include an overactive
precordial impulse with a lift or heave, a systolic ejection murmur in
the aortic region not associated with an ejection click, and an apical
blowing murmur of mitral insufficiency.

DIAGNOSIS

The ECG typically demonstrates LV hypertrophy with ST segment and
T-­wave abnormalities (particularly T-­wave inversion in the left precordial leads). Intraventricular conduction delays and signs of ventricular
preexcitation (Wolff-­Parkinson-­White syndrome) may be present and
should raise the possibility of PRKAG2-­related HCM, Danon disease,
or Pompe disease. Chest radiography demonstrates normal or mildly
increased heart size with a prominence of the left ventricle. Echocardiography is diagnostic in identifying, localizing, and quantifying the
degree of myocardial hypertrophy (see Fig. 488.3). Doppler interrogation defines, localizes, and quantifies the degree of LVOT obstruction
and demonstrates and quantifies the degree of mitral insufficiency and
diastolic dysfunction.
Cardiac catheterization is rarely used in the diagnosis of HCM but
may be helpful if there is concern for a myocardial bridge (when a
coronary artery runs through vs on top of the myocardium) that
may be causing intermittent coronary insufficiency during dynamic
obstruction. Myocardial bridges can be seen on coronary angiography.
Additionally, cardiac catheterization may occasionally be used to better
define hemodynamics in patients.
Additional diagnostic studies include metabolic testing, genetic testing for specific syndromes, or genetic testing for pathogenic variants in
genes known to cause isolated HCM (see Table 488.3). Clinical genetic
testing panels continue to expand. Genetic diagnosis is also useful in
identifying at-­risk family members who require ongoing surveillance
(Figs. 488.5 and 488.6).

PROGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT

Children <1 year of age or with inborn errors of metabolism or malformation syndromes or those with a mixed HCM/DCM have a significantly
poorer prognosis. The risk of sudden death in older patients is greater
in those with a personal or family history of cardiac arrest, ventricular
tachycardia, exercise hypotension, syncope, or excessive (>3 cm) ventricular wall thickness. Although intrafamilial variability in symptoms
occurs, a family history of sudden death is a highly significant predictor
of risk. Restriction from competitive sports and strenuous physical activity is highly recommended, and additional recreational exercise activities should be tailored to each individual based on their overall clinical
status. β-­Adrenergic blocking agents (propranolol, atenolol, metoprolol)
or calcium channel blockers (verapamil) may be useful in diminishing
LVOT obstruction, modifying LV hypertrophy, and improving ventricular filling. They also confer an antiarrhythmic benefit and may reduce
symptoms. In patients with atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, specific
antiarrhythmic therapy should be used. Patients with documented, previously aborted sudden cardiac arrest, strong family histories of sudden
death, ventricular wall end-­diastolic dimensions of ≥3 cm, unexplained
syncope, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, apical aneurysm, ejection fraction ≤50%, or blunted or hypotensive blood pressure response
to exercise should be considered for treatment with an implantable
cardioverter-­defibrillator (ICD). Early identification of HCM, family
screening/surveillance, appropriate activity restriction, and use of ICDs
have greatly reduced the mortality of HCM to approximately 0.5% per
year in the modern era.
Innovative interventional procedures have been used to reduce
the degree of LVOT obstruction anatomically or physiologically.
Dual-­
chamber pacing, alcohol septal ablation, surgical septal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

2885

HCM Suspected or Family History of HCM

Diagnostic Testing
(ECG, Imaging, Genetics)
(See Fig. 488.6 for details
on genetic testing)

1

Phenotype Positive

Phenotype Negative

Complete Baseline Evaluation
SCD risk assessment
Stress testing if symptomatic,
if LVOTO is suspected but
unconfirmed, or to determine
baseline functional capacity

2
Family with
known P/LP
variant?
(See Fig. 488.6 for
more detail)

YES
Patient
has family
variant?

Every 1–2 years or with change in
symptoms*
Serial evaluation for clinical status,
SCD risk (if no ICD present), or
sooner with change in symptoms:
Clinical assessment
Echo
Holter

NO

YES, or Unknown

Every 3–5 y (2b)
CMR for SCD risk assessment (if no
ICD present), or to evaluate for any
suspected morphologic changes

NO

3
Further clinical or genetic
testing is not recommended
Asymptomatic

4
Reassess variant
classification

Variant = P/LP

5
Screening ECG and Echo
(CMR if echo is inconclusive)
at the intervals in the table
below

Symptomatic

Every 2–3 y (2b)
Treadmill exercise or
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing
for assessment of functional status

Treadmill or Bike Exercise Testing
Special consideration:

Variant downgraded to VUS

Stress echo if gradient <50 mm Hg
CPET if considering advanced HF
therapies

Screening Asymptomatic First-Degree Relatives of Patients With HCM

Age of First-Degree Relative

Children and adolescents from
genotype-positive family and/or family
with early onset HCM
All other children and adolescents
Adults

Initiation of Screening

Surveillance Interval

At the time of diagnosis in another family member Every 1–2 y

Every 2–3 y
At any time after the diagnosis in the family, but
no later than puberty
At the time of diagnosis in another family member Every 3–5 y

Fig. 488.5 Algorithm for recommended evaluation and testing modified for HCM. *The interval may be extended, particularly in adult patients
who remain stable after multiple evaluations. CMR, Cardiovascular magnetic resonance; CPET, cardiopulmonary exercise test; ECG, electrocardiography/electrocardiogram; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HF, heart failure; ICD, implantable cardioverter-­defibrillator; LVOTO, left ventricular
outflow tract obstruction; P/LP, pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant; SCD, sudden cardiac death; VUS, variant of unknown significance. (Modified
from Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/ACC guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:
executive summary. J Amer Coll Cardiol. 2020;142:e533–e557, Fig. 1.)

myomectomy, and mitral valve replacement have all met with some
success but are typically reserved for patients with significant symptoms despite medical therapy (Fig. 488.7). Mavacamten, a selective
myosin inhibitor, has been an effective therapy in adults. Enzyme
replacement therapy for Pompe disease is an effective therapy after
birth (see Chapter 107.1). Preliminary trials of in utero enzyme
replacement therapy for Pompe disease have also demonstrated
efficacy.
First-­degree relatives of patients identified as having HCM should
be screened with ECG and echocardiogram. Genetic testing is available clinically and is of high utility. It is important first to test the
affected individual in the family rather than “at-­risk” individuals,

because 20–50% of cases of HCM will not demonstrate pathogenic
variants in currently available panels of genes. If a causative genetic
variant is identified, at-­risk members of the family can be effectively
tested. In families with HCM without demonstrable pathogenic
variants, repeat noninvasive cardiac screening with ECG and echocardiogram should be undertaken in at-­risk individuals yearly until
young adulthood (age 21 years) and then every 3 years if no prior
evidence of HCM is present. Gene-­positive but phenotype-­negative
pediatric patients may remain asymptomatic during childhood but
require careful and frequent follow-­up.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2886 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
HCM Index Case
Targeted Gene Testing

Regular reevaluation
for variant
reclassification
(See Fig. 488.5,
Box 4)

Disease-causing
LP/P variant

Reclassified as
LP/P

VUS, LB/B or
no variant identified

Cascade genetic testing
in family

Variant positive

Variant negative

Regular follow-up
(See Fig. 488.5,
Box 2)

Further clinical or
genetic testing not
recommended
(See Fig. 488.5,
Box 3)

Consider second tier
testing in proband if no
variant is identified

Reclassified as
VUS or LB/B

Clinical surveillance
in family

HCM diagnosed

Regular follow-up
(See Fig. 488.5,
Box 2)

No evidence of
HCM

Regular clinical
surveillance
(See Fig. 488.5,
Box 5)

Fig. 488.6 Algorithm for genetic testing processes in HCM. HCM, Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; LB/B, likely benign/benign; LP/P, likely pathogenic or pathogenic; VUS, variant of unknown significance. (Modified from Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/ACC guideline for the
diagnosis and treatment of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: executive summary. J Amer Coll Cardiol. 2020;142:e533–e557, Fig. 2.)

488.3 Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) accounts for <5% of cardiomyopathy cases. Incidence increases with age and is more common in females.
In equatorial Africa, RCM accounts for a large number of deaths. Infiltrative myocardial causes and storage disorders frequently result in
associated LV hypertrophy and may represent HCM with restrictive
physiology. Noninfiltrative causes include pathogenic variants in genes
encoding sarcomeric or cytoskeletal proteins. Although there has been
significant success in discovering pathogenic gene variants causing
RCM, the majority of cases are considered idiopathic. Potential etiologies include sarcoidosis and Gaucher, Hurler, or Fabry diseases.

PATHOGENESIS

RCM is characterized by normal ventricular chamber dimensions,
normal myocardial wall thickness, and preserved systolic function.
Dramatic atrial dilation can result from the abnormal ventricular myocardial compliance and high ventricular diastolic pressure. Autosomal
dominant inheritance has been demonstrated for families with pathogenic gene variants in sarcomeric and cytoskeletal genes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Abnormal ventricular filling, sometimes referred to as diastolic heart
failure, is manifest in the systemic venous circulation with edema,

hepatomegaly, or ascites. Elevation of left-­sided filling pressures results
in cough, dyspnea, or pulmonary edema. With activity, patients may
experience chest pain, shortness of breath, syncope/near-­syncope, or
even sudden death. Pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary vascular
disease develop and may progress rapidly. Heart murmurs are typically
absent, but a gallop rhythm may be prominent. In the presence of pulmonary hypertension, an overactive RV impulse and pronounced pulmonary component of the second heart sound (S2) are present in RCM.

DIAGNOSIS
The characteristic electrocardiographic finding of prominent P waves
(reflective of atrial enlargement) is usually associated with normal QRS
voltages and nonspecific ST and T-­wave changes. RV hypertrophy
occurs in patients with pulmonary hypertension. The chest radiograph
may be normal or may demonstrate a prominent atrial shadow and
pulmonary vascular redistribution. The echocardiogram is often diagnostic, demonstrating normal-­sized ventricles with preserved systolic
function and dramatic enlargement of the atria (see Fig. 488.4). Flow
and tissue Doppler interrogation reveal abnormal filling parameters. It
is critical to differentiate RCM from constrictive pericarditis, which
can be treated surgically (see Chapter 489.2). MRI may be necessary
to demonstrate the thickened or calcified pericardium often present in
constrictive pericardial disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 488 u Diseases of the Myocardium

A

B

C

D

E

F

2887

Fig. 488.7 Scheme of septal reduction therapy. A, Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction (arrow) created by hypertrophied basal septum and systolic anterior motion. B, Transthoracic echocardiography with systolic anterior motion (arrow). C, Continuous-­wave Doppler imaging of
dynamic LVOT obstruction. D, Schematic finding after septal reduction. E, Transthoracic echocardiography after septal reduction procedure. F, Absence of LVOT obstruction in continuous-­wave Doppler imaging after septal reduction therapy. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral valve; RV,
right ventricle. (From Veselka J, Anavekar NS, Charron P. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. Lancet. 2017;389:1253–1264, Fig. 5, p. 1259.)

PROGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT

Pharmacologic modalities are of limited use, and the prognosis of
patients with RCM is generally poor, with often progressive clinical
deterioration. Sudden death is a significant risk, with a 2-­year survival
of 50%. When signs of heart failure exist, judicious use of diuretics
can result in clinical improvement. As a result of the dramatic atrial
enlargement and ventricular scarring, these patients are predisposed to
the development of atrial tachyarrhythmias, complete heart block, and
thromboemboli. Antiarrhythmic agents may be necessary, and anticoagulation with platelet inhibitors or warfarin (Coumadin) is indicated.
Cardiac transplantation is the treatment of choice in many centers for
patients with RCM, and the results are excellent in patients without pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary vascular disease, or severe congestive
heart failure. Some patients may need bridging to transplant with a VAD
if they have elevated pulmonary pressures or significant heart failure.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

488.4 Left Ventricular Noncompaction,
Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular
Cardiomyopathy, Endocardial
Fibroelastosis, and Takotsubo
Cardiomyopathy
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) is characterized by a distinctive trabeculated or spongy-­appearing left ventricle commonly associated
with LV dysfunction and/or dilation and at times hypertrophy, diastolic
dysfunction, and arrhythmias (Fig. 488.8). LVNC may be isolated or associated with structural congenital cardiac defects. Patients may present with
signs of heart failure, arrhythmias, syncope, sudden death, or as an asymptomatic finding during screening of family members.

Imaging studies using ultrasound or MRI can demonstrate the characteristic pattern of deeply trabeculated LV myocardium, most characteristically within the apex. ECG findings are nonspecific and include
chamber hypertrophy, ST and T-­wave changes, or arrhythmias. In some
patients, preexcitation is notable, and giant QRS voltages occur in approximately 30% of younger children. Metabolic screening should be considered, especially in young children. Elevated serum lactate and urine
3-­methylglutaconic acid may be seen in Barth syndrome, an X-­linked
disorder of phospholipid metabolism caused by a pathogenic variant in
the TAZ gene. Clinical testing for TAZ variants is available and should be
considered, especially in males. Patients with mitochondrial disorders frequently demonstrate signs of LVNC. These children are at risk for atrial or
ventricular arrhythmias and thromboembolic complications. Treatment
includes anticoagulation, antiarrhythmic therapy if needed, and treatment
of heart failure if present. In patients refractory to medical therapy, cardiac
transplantation has been used successfully.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is relatively uncommon in North America compared with the high prevalence in
Europe, especially Italy (see Chapter 484.4). Autosomal dominant inheritance is common. In addition, recessive forms associated with severe ARVC
and skin manifestations are known. Comprehensive genetic screening has
been reported to identify a cause in up to 50% of cases. ARVC is typically
characterized by a dilated right ventricle with fibrofatty infiltration of the
RV wall; increasingly, LV involvement is being recognized. Global and
regional RV and LV dysfunction and ventricular tachyarrhythmias are the
major clinical findings. Syncope or aborted sudden death can occur and
should be treated with antiarrhythmic medications and placement of an
ICD. In patients with ventricular dysfunction, heart failure management
as indicated for patients with DCM may be of use.
Endocardial fibroelastosis (EFE), once an important cause of
heart failure in children, is uncommon. The decline in primary EFE
is likely related to the abolition of mumps virus infections by immunization practices. Rare familial cases exist, but the causative genes are
unknown. Secondary EFE can occur with severe left-­sided obstructive lesions such as aortic stenosis or atresia, hypoplastic left heart

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2888 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 488.7  Etiology of Myocarditis
LA

LV

Fig. 488.8 Echocardiogram of a patient with left ventricular noncom-

paction cardiomyopathy. Apical view showing abnormal trabeculations
of left ventricle at the apex (arrows). For comparison, see the smooth-­
walled LV in Figure 488.2. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle.

syndrome, or coarctation of the aorta. EFE is characterized by an
opaque, white, fibroelastic thickening on the endocardial surface of the
ventricle, which leads to systolic and/or diastolic dysfunction. Surgical removal of the endocardial fibrosis has been successfully done to
improve cardiac function. Standard heart failure management, including transplantation, has been used in the management of EFE.
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is a reversible stress-­
induced syndrome associated with transient systolic and diastolic dysfunction and
regional ventricular wall motion abnormalities characterized by ventricular apical ballooning. Physical or emotional stress and associated
etiologies (see Table 488.2) precipitate transient episodes of chest pain
or heart failure. Treatment includes that for heart failure (β blockers,
ACE inhibitors, diuretics) and addressing the precipitating event (thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma, drug ingestion).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

488.5 Myocarditis
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Acute or chronic inflammation of the myocardium is characterized by
inflammatory cell infiltrates, myocyte necrosis, or myocyte degeneration and may be caused by infectious, connective tissue, granulomatous, toxic, immune, or idiopathic processes. There may be associated
systemic manifestations of the disease, and occasionally the endocardium or pericardium is involved. Patients may be asymptomatic,
have nonspecific prodromal symptoms, or present with overt congestive heart failure, compromising arrhythmias, or sudden death. It is
assumed that viral infections are the most common etiology, although
myocardial toxins, drug exposures, hypersensitivity reactions, and
immune disorders may also lead to myocarditis (Table 488.7).

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Viral Infections

Coxsackievirus and other enteroviruses, adenovirus, parvovirus B19,
Epstein-­Barr virus, parechovirus, influenza virus, and cytomegalovirus
are the most common causative agents in children. COVID-­19 infections, particularly during multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) and, rarely, after mRNA COVID-­19 vaccinations, have
been associated with myocarditis. In Asia, hepatitis C virus appears to
be significant as well. The true incidence of viral myocarditis is unknown
because mild cases probably go undetected. The disease is typically
sporadic but may be epidemic. Manifestations are, to some degree, age
dependent: in neonates and young infants, viral myocarditis can be fulminant; in children, it often occurs as an acute, myopericarditis with
heart failure; and in older children and adolescents, it may present with
signs and symptoms of acute or chronic heart failure or chest pain.

INFECTIOUS CAUSES
Viral: adenoviruses, echoviruses, enteroviruses (e.g.,
coxsackieviruses), herpesviruses (human cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-­Barr virus, human herpesvirus 6), hepatitis C virus, human
immunodeficiency virus, influenza virus, parvovirus B19, SARS-­
CoV-­2 (COVID-­19) disease and vaccine, smallpox vaccine
Bacterial: Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Chlamydia,
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Legionella, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, Mycoplasma, Staphylococcus, streptococcus A,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Whipple disease
Fungal: Actinomyces, Aspergillus, Candida, Cryptococcus
Helminthic: Echinococcus granulosus, Trichinella spiralis
Protozoal: Toxoplasma gondii, Trypanosoma cruzi
Rickettsial: Coxiella burnetii, Rickettsia typhi
Spirochetal: Borrelia burgdorferi, Leptospira, Treponema pallidum
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES
Rheumatic fever, celiac disease, Churg-­Strauss syndrome, Crohn disease,
dermatomyositis, giant cell myocarditis, hypereosinophilic syndrome,
Kawasaki disease, lupus erythematosus, lymphofollicular myocarditis,
rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, scleroderma, ulcerative colitis
HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS
Penicillin, ampicillin, cephalosporins, tetracyclines, sulfonamides,
antiphlogistics, benzodiazepines, clozapine, loop and thiazide diuretics,
methyldopa, smallpox vaccine, tetanus toxoid, tricyclic antidepressants
TOXIC REACTIONS TO DRUGS
Amphetamines, anthracyclines, catecholamines, cocaine,
cyclophosphamide, 5-­fluorouracil, phenytoin, trastuzumab,
immune checkpoint inhibitors
TOXIC
Ethanol, snakebite, scorpion bite, electric shock, spider bite
OTHER CAUSES
Arsenic, copper, iron, radiotherapy, thyrotoxicosis, immune modulation
Adapted from Canter CE, Simpson KE. Diagnosis and treatment of myocarditis in
children in the current era. Circulation. 2014;129:115–128, Table 1.

Bacterial Infections

Bacterial myocarditis has become much less common with the advent of
advanced public health measures, which have minimized infectious causes
such as diphtheria. Diphtheritic myocarditis is unique because bacterial
toxin may produce circulatory collapse and toxic myocarditis characterized by atrioventricular block, bundle branch block, or ventricular ectopy
(see Chapter 233). Lyme disease may present as myocarditis; rheumatic
fever (poststreptococcal) may also manifest with valve, myocardium, and
pericardium involvement. Any overwhelming systemic bacterial infection
can manifest with circulatory collapse and shock with evidence of myocardial dysfunction, characterized by tachycardia, gallop rhythm, and low cardiac output. Additional nonviral infectious causes of myocarditis include
rickettsiae, protozoa, parasitic infections, and fungal disease.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Myocarditis is characterized by myocardial inflammation, injury or
necrosis, and ultimately fibrosis. Cardiac enlargement and diminished
systolic function are a direct result of the myocardial damage. Typical
signs of congestive heart failure occur and may progress rapidly to shock,
atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, and sudden death. Viral myocarditis
may also become a chronic process, with persistence of viral nucleic
acid in the myocardium and the perpetuation of chronic inflammation
secondary to altered host immune response, including activated T lymphocytes (cytotoxic and natural killer cells) and antibody-­dependent
cell-­mediated damage. Additionally, persistent viral infection may alter
the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens
with resultant exposure of neoantigens to the immune system. Some
viral proteins share antigenic epitopes with host cells, resulting in autoimmune damage to the antigenically related myocyte. Cytokines such
as tumor necrosis factor-­α and interleukin-­1 are inhibitors of myocyte
response to adrenergic stimuli and result in diminished cardiac function. The final result of viral-­associated inflammation can be DCM.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 489 u Diseases of the Pericardium

2889

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Manifestations of myocarditis range from asymptomatic or nonspecific
generalized illness to acute cardiogenic shock and sudden death. Infants
and young children more often have a fulminant presentation with
fever, respiratory distress, tachycardia, hypotension, gallop rhythm, and
cardiac murmur. Associated findings may include a rash or evidence of
end-­organ involvement such as hepatitis or aseptic meningitis.
Patients with acute or chronic myocarditis may present with chest discomfort, fever, palpitations, easy fatigability, or syncope/near-­syncope.
Cardiac findings include overactive precordial impulse, gallop rhythm,
and apical systolic murmur of mitral insufficiency. In patients with associated pericardial disease, a rub may be noted. Hepatic enlargement,
peripheral edema, and pulmonary findings such as wheezes or rales may
be present in patients with decompensated heart failure.

A

B

C

D

DIAGNOSIS

Electrocardiographic changes are nonspecific and may include sinus
tachycardia, atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, heart block, diminished
QRS voltages, and nonspecific ST and T-­wave changes, often suggestive of acute ischemia. Chest radiographs in severe, symptomatic cases
reveal cardiomegaly, pulmonary vascular prominence, overt pulmonary
edema, or pleural effusions. Echocardiography often shows diminished
ventricular systolic function, cardiac chamber enlargement, mitral insufficiency, and occasionally, evidence of pericardial infusion.
Cardiac MRI is a standard imaging modality for the diagnosis
of myocarditis; information on the presence and extent of edema,
gadolinium-­enhanced hyperemic capillary leak, myocyte necrosis, LV
dysfunction, and evidence of an associated pericardial effusion assist in
the cardiac MRI diagnosis of myocarditis (Table 488.8 and Fig. 488.9).
Endomyocardial biopsy may be useful in identifying inflammatory cell
infiltrates or myocyte damage and performing molecular viral analysis
using polymerase chain reaction techniques. Catheterization and biopsy,
although not without risk (perforation and arrhythmias), should be performed by experienced personnel in patients suspected to have myocarditis or if unusual forms of cardiomyopathy are strongly suspected, such as
storage diseases or mitochondrial defects. Nonspecific tests include erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CPK isoenzymes, cardiac troponin I, and BNP
levels. A novel microRNA derived from type 17 helper (Th17) cells may be
another useful specific test for viral myocarditis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The predominant diseases mimicking acute myocarditis include carnitine deficiency, other metabolic disorders of energy generation, hereditary mitochondrial defects, idiopathic DCM, pericarditis, EFE, and
anomalies of the coronary arteries (see Table 488.2).

TREATMENT

Primary therapy for acute myocarditis is supportive. Acutely, the use of inotropic agents, preferably milrinone, should be considered but used with caution because of their proarrhythmic potential. Diuretics are often required
as well. If in extremis, mechanical ventilatory support and mechanical
circulatory support with VAD implantation or ECMO may be needed to
stabilize the patient’s hemodynamic status and serve as a bridge to recovery
or cardiac transplantation. Diuretics, β blockers, ACE inhibitors, and ARBs
are of use in patients with compensated congestive heart failure in the outpatient setting but may be contraindicated in those presenting with fulminant heart failure and cardiovascular collapse. In patients manifesting with
significant atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, specific antiarrhythmic agents
(e.g., amiodarone) should be administered and ICD placement considered
if persistent after a period of recovery is observed.
Table 488.8  MRI Findings Suggestive of Myocarditis
• T2-­weighted edema (global or regional)
• Regional hyperemia/capillary leak by early gadolinium
enhancement ratio (EGEr)
• Myocardial fibrosis or necrosis on late gadolinium enhancement (LGE)
• Features often present in a midmyocardial, subepicardial, and
nonvascular distribution
• Repeat MRI if no early MRI evidence present but clinical
manifestation suggests myocarditis

Fig. 488.9 MRI findings in patients with myocarditis. Cardiac MR images

of a young patient presenting with acute chest pain syndrome caused by
acute myocarditis. (A) Long-­axis and (B) short-­axis T2-­weighted images
demonstrating focal myocardial edema in subepicardium of left midventricular lateral wall (red arrows). Corresponding (C) long-­axis and (D) short-­
axis T1-­weighted images demonstrate the presence of typical late gadolinium enhancement in subepicardium of left midventricular lateral wall and
basal septum (red arrows). (From Kindermann I, Barth C, Mahfoud F, et al.
Update on myocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:779–792, Fig. 3, p. 783.)

Immunomodulation of patients with myocarditis is controversial.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) may have a role in the treatment of acute or fulminant myocarditis, and corticosteroids have been
reported to improve cardiac function, but this remains controversial
in children. Relapse has been noted in patients receiving immunosuppression who were weaned from therapy. There are no studies to recommend specific antiviral therapies for myocarditis.
If there is an identifiable and treatable condition, its specific therapy
should be employed. If a medication is the etiology, it should be withdrawn and an alternative drug added if needed.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of symptomatic acute enteroviral myocarditis in newborns
is poor, with a 75% mortality. The prognosis is better for children and adolescents, although patients who have persistent evidence of DCM often
progress to the need for cardiac transplantation; recovery of ventricular
function, however, has been reported in 10–50% of patients.
The prognosis for COVID-­19 immunization–associated myocarditis
is excellent with full recovery noted by 90 days. Patients with COVID-­19
requiring intensive care unit (ICU) admission and those with MIS-­C must
be followed by a pediatric cardiologist (including follow-­up echocardiography) and refrain from exercise for 3-­6 months. Return to full activity
requires clearance from a cardiologist.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 489

Diseases of the Pericardium
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
The heart is enveloped in a bilayer membrane, the pericardium, which normally contains a small amount of serous fluid. The pericardium is not vital
to normal function of the heart, and primary diseases of the pericardium
are uncommon. However, the pericardium may be affected by a variety of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 489 u Diseases of the Pericardium

2889

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Manifestations of myocarditis range from asymptomatic or nonspecific
generalized illness to acute cardiogenic shock and sudden death. Infants
and young children more often have a fulminant presentation with
fever, respiratory distress, tachycardia, hypotension, gallop rhythm, and
cardiac murmur. Associated findings may include a rash or evidence of
end-­organ involvement such as hepatitis or aseptic meningitis.
Patients with acute or chronic myocarditis may present with chest discomfort, fever, palpitations, easy fatigability, or syncope/near-­syncope.
Cardiac findings include overactive precordial impulse, gallop rhythm,
and apical systolic murmur of mitral insufficiency. In patients with associated pericardial disease, a rub may be noted. Hepatic enlargement,
peripheral edema, and pulmonary findings such as wheezes or rales may
be present in patients with decompensated heart failure.

A

B

C

D

DIAGNOSIS

Electrocardiographic changes are nonspecific and may include sinus
tachycardia, atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, heart block, diminished
QRS voltages, and nonspecific ST and T-­wave changes, often suggestive of acute ischemia. Chest radiographs in severe, symptomatic cases
reveal cardiomegaly, pulmonary vascular prominence, overt pulmonary
edema, or pleural effusions. Echocardiography often shows diminished
ventricular systolic function, cardiac chamber enlargement, mitral insufficiency, and occasionally, evidence of pericardial infusion.
Cardiac MRI is a standard imaging modality for the diagnosis
of myocarditis; information on the presence and extent of edema,
gadolinium-­enhanced hyperemic capillary leak, myocyte necrosis, LV
dysfunction, and evidence of an associated pericardial effusion assist in
the cardiac MRI diagnosis of myocarditis (Table 488.8 and Fig. 488.9).
Endomyocardial biopsy may be useful in identifying inflammatory cell
infiltrates or myocyte damage and performing molecular viral analysis
using polymerase chain reaction techniques. Catheterization and biopsy,
although not without risk (perforation and arrhythmias), should be performed by experienced personnel in patients suspected to have myocarditis or if unusual forms of cardiomyopathy are strongly suspected, such as
storage diseases or mitochondrial defects. Nonspecific tests include erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CPK isoenzymes, cardiac troponin I, and BNP
levels. A novel microRNA derived from type 17 helper (Th17) cells may be
another useful specific test for viral myocarditis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The predominant diseases mimicking acute myocarditis include carnitine deficiency, other metabolic disorders of energy generation, hereditary mitochondrial defects, idiopathic DCM, pericarditis, EFE, and
anomalies of the coronary arteries (see Table 488.2).

TREATMENT

Primary therapy for acute myocarditis is supportive. Acutely, the use of inotropic agents, preferably milrinone, should be considered but used with caution because of their proarrhythmic potential. Diuretics are often required
as well. If in extremis, mechanical ventilatory support and mechanical
circulatory support with VAD implantation or ECMO may be needed to
stabilize the patient’s hemodynamic status and serve as a bridge to recovery
or cardiac transplantation. Diuretics, β blockers, ACE inhibitors, and ARBs
are of use in patients with compensated congestive heart failure in the outpatient setting but may be contraindicated in those presenting with fulminant heart failure and cardiovascular collapse. In patients manifesting with
significant atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, specific antiarrhythmic agents
(e.g., amiodarone) should be administered and ICD placement considered
if persistent after a period of recovery is observed.
Table 488.8  MRI Findings Suggestive of Myocarditis
• T2-­weighted edema (global or regional)
• Regional hyperemia/capillary leak by early gadolinium
enhancement ratio (EGEr)
• Myocardial fibrosis or necrosis on late gadolinium enhancement (LGE)
• Features often present in a midmyocardial, subepicardial, and
nonvascular distribution
• Repeat MRI if no early MRI evidence present but clinical
manifestation suggests myocarditis

Fig. 488.9 MRI findings in patients with myocarditis. Cardiac MR images

of a young patient presenting with acute chest pain syndrome caused by
acute myocarditis. (A) Long-­axis and (B) short-­axis T2-­weighted images
demonstrating focal myocardial edema in subepicardium of left midventricular lateral wall (red arrows). Corresponding (C) long-­axis and (D) short-­
axis T1-­weighted images demonstrate the presence of typical late gadolinium enhancement in subepicardium of left midventricular lateral wall and
basal septum (red arrows). (From Kindermann I, Barth C, Mahfoud F, et al.
Update on myocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:779–792, Fig. 3, p. 783.)

Immunomodulation of patients with myocarditis is controversial.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) may have a role in the treatment of acute or fulminant myocarditis, and corticosteroids have been
reported to improve cardiac function, but this remains controversial
in children. Relapse has been noted in patients receiving immunosuppression who were weaned from therapy. There are no studies to recommend specific antiviral therapies for myocarditis.
If there is an identifiable and treatable condition, its specific therapy
should be employed. If a medication is the etiology, it should be withdrawn and an alternative drug added if needed.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of symptomatic acute enteroviral myocarditis in newborns
is poor, with a 75% mortality. The prognosis is better for children and adolescents, although patients who have persistent evidence of DCM often
progress to the need for cardiac transplantation; recovery of ventricular
function, however, has been reported in 10–50% of patients.
The prognosis for COVID-­19 immunization–associated myocarditis
is excellent with full recovery noted by 90 days. Patients with COVID-­19
requiring intensive care unit (ICU) admission and those with MIS-­C must
be followed by a pediatric cardiologist (including follow-­up echocardiography) and refrain from exercise for 3-­6 months. Return to full activity
requires clearance from a cardiologist.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 489

Diseases of the Pericardium
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
The heart is enveloped in a bilayer membrane, the pericardium, which normally contains a small amount of serous fluid. The pericardium is not vital
to normal function of the heart, and primary diseases of the pericardium
are uncommon. However, the pericardium may be affected by a variety of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2890 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
conditions, often as a manifestation of a systemic illness, and can result in
serious, even life-­threatening, cardiac compromise (Table 489.1).

489.1 Acute Pericarditis
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Inflammation of the pericardium may have only minor pathophysiologic
consequences in the absence of significant fluid accumulation in the pericardial space. When the amount of fluid in the nondistensible pericardial
space becomes excessive, pressure within the pericardium increases and
is transmitted to the heart, resulting in impaired filling by compressing
the chambers (atria or ventricles). Although small to moderate amounts
of pericardial effusion can be well tolerated and clinically silent, once the
noncompliant pericardium has been distended maximally, any further fluid
accumulation causes abrupt impairment of cardiac filling, and this can
impair cardiac output and is termed cardiac tamponade. When untreated,
tamponade can lead to shock and death. Pericardial effusions may be serous/
transudative, exudative/purulent, fibrinous, or hemorrhagic.
Pericarditis may present without an obvious pericardial effusion
on echocardiography. In addition, pericarditis may be associated with
myocarditis (myopericarditis), in which case either pericarditis or
myocarditis may be the dominant finding.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The most common symptom of acute pericarditis is chest pain, typically
described as sharp/stabbing, positional, radiating, worse with inspiration,
and relieved by sitting upright, leaning forward, or prone. Cough, fever,
dyspnea, abdominal pain, and vomiting are nonspecific symptoms associated with pericarditis. Additionally, signs and symptoms of organ system
involvement may occur in the presence of generalized systemic disease.
Muffled or distant heart sounds, tachycardia, narrow pulse pressure,
jugular venous distention, and a pericardial friction rub provide clues to
the diagnosis of acute pericarditis. Cardiac tamponade is recognized by
the excessive fall of systolic blood pressure (>10 mm Hg) with inspiration. This pulsus paradoxus can be assessed by careful auscultatory blood
Table 489.1  Etiology of Pericardial Disease
CONGENITAL
Absence (partial, complete)
Cysts
Mulibrey nanism (TRIM 37 gene variant)
Camptodactyly-­arthropathy–coxa vara–pericarditis syndrome (PRG4
gene variant)
Myhre syndrome (SMAD4 gene variant)

pressure determination (automated blood pressure cuffs are inadequate),
arterial pressure line waveform, or pulse oximeter tracing inspection.
Doppler assessment during echocardiography can also indirectly suggest
pulsus paradoxus is present. Conditions other than cardiac tamponade
that may result in pulsus paradoxus include severe dyspnea, obesity, and
positive pressure ventilator support.

DIAGNOSIS

The electrocardiogram is often abnormal in acute pericarditis,
although the findings are nonspecific. Low-­voltage QRS amplitude
may be seen as a result of pericardial fluid accumulation. Tachycardia
and abnormalities of the ST segments (diffuse ST segment elevation),
PR segments, and T waves (inversion or flattening) may be present
as well. Elevated troponin levels may be present in myopericarditis.
Although the chest x-­ray findings in a patient with pericarditis without effusion are usually normal in the presence of a significant effusion, cardiac enlargement will be seen and the cardiac contour may
be unusual (Erlenmeyer flask or water bottle appearance) (Fig. 489.1).
Echocardiography is the most sensitive technique for identifying the
size and location of a pericardial effusion. Compression and collapse
of the right atrium and/or right ventricle are present with cardiac tamponade (Fig. 489.2). Abnormal diastolic filling parameters have also
been described in cases of tamponade. Advanced imaging modalities
like computed tomography or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging are
useful for diagnosis in unclear cases (Fig. 489.3).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Chest pain similar to that present in pericarditis can occur with lung
diseases, especially pleuritis, and with gastroesophageal reflux or costochondritis, with the latter being reproducible on palpation. Pain related
to myocardial ischemia is usually more severe and prolonged and occurs
with exercise, allowing distinction from pericarditis-­induced pain. The
presence of pericardial effusion on echocardiography is highly suggestive
of pericarditis but does not determine the etiology.

Infectious Pericarditis

A number of viral agents are known to cause pericarditis, and the clinical course of the majority of these infections is mild and spontaneously
resolving. The term acute benign pericarditis is synonymous for viral
pericarditis. Agents identified as causing pericarditis include the enteroviruses, influenza, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, and parvovirus. Because the course of this illness is usually benign, symptomatic
treatment with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is often
sufficient. Persistent or early recurrence episodes may need courses of
colchicine or, rarely, corticosteroids. Anakinra and the interleukin-­1

INFECTIOUS
Viral: coxsackievirus B, Epstein-­Barr virus, influenza, adenovirus,
parvovirus, HIV, mumps, COVID-­19, and mRNA COVID-­19 and
HPV vaccines
Bacterial: Haemophilus influenzae, streptococcus, pneumococcus,
staphylococcus, meningococcus, mycoplasma, tularemia, Listeria,
leptospirosis, tuberculosis, Q fever, salmonella
Immune complex mediated: meningococcus, H. influenzae
Fungal: actinomycosis, histoplasmosis
Parasitic: toxoplasmosis, echinococcosis
NONINFECTIOUS
Idiopathic
Systemic inflammatory diseases: acute rheumatic fever, juvenile
idiopathic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, mixed
connective tissue disorders, systemic sclerosis, Kawasaki disease,
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Behçet syndrome,
sarcoidosis, familial Mediterranean fever and other recurrent fever
syndromes, pancreatitis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Metabolic: uremia, hypothyroidism, Gaucher disease, very-­long-­
chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Traumatic: surgical, catheter perforation, blunt trauma
Postpericardiotomy syndrome
Oncologic: lymphomas, leukemia, radiation therapy, primary
pericardial tumors

Fig. 489.1 “Water bottle” silhouette. This chest radiograph shows
marked cardiomegaly, also known as a water bottle silhouette, which
is seen in the presence of large pericardial effusions. Also note the associated pulmonary edema from associated high left atrial and left ventricular filling pressures. (Courtesy Dr. Steven M. Selbst, Wilmington,
DE; from Durani Y, Giordani K, Goudie BW. Myocarditis and pericarditis
in children. Pediatr Clin North Am 2010;57:1281–1303, Fig. 7.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 489 u Diseases of the Pericardium

2891

Noninfectious Pericarditis
PE
PE
IVS
LV

LV

PE

B

RV

C
LA

IVC

C

A

Fig. 489.2 Echocardiographic images of large pericardial effusion with
features of tamponade. A, Apical four-­chamber view of LV, LA, and RV
that shows large PE with diastolic right atrial collapse (arrow). B, M-­mode
image with cursor placed through RV, IVS, and LV in parasternal long axis.
The view shows circumferential PE with diastolic collapse of RV free wall
(arrow) during expiration. C, M-­mode image from subcostal window in
the same patient that shows IVC plethora without inspiratory collapse.
IVC, Inferior vena cava; IVS, interventricular septum; LA, left atrium; LV,
left ventricle; PE, pericardial effusion; RV, right ventricle. (From Troughton
RW, Asher CR, Klein AL. Pericarditis. Lancet. 2004;363:717–727.)

A

B

Fig. 489.3 Cardiac magnetic resonance T2 STIR (A) and delayed gado-

linium (B) sequences showing enhancement of the pericardium signifying
acute or active inflammation (arrow). (Modified from Chetrit M, Xu B, Kwon
DH, et al: Imaging-guided therapies for pericardial diseases. JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging. 2019;13(6):1422–1437; Fig. 1E and 1F, p. 1424.)

cytokine trap agent rilonacept have been effective in colchicine-­
nonresponsive acute or recurrent pericarditis. Patients with large effusions and tamponade may require pericardiocentesis. Presumed viral but
often idiopathic pericarditis may have an autoimmune component. Up
to 30% of patients may have recurrences of pericarditis. Treatment and
prevention of recurrences with colchicine improve symptoms and avoid
recurrences in most of these patients. If the condition becomes chronic
or relapsing, surgical pericardiectomy or creation of a pericardial window may be necessary.
Echocardiography is useful in differentiating pericarditis from
myocarditis, which will show evidence of diminished myocardial
contractility or valvular dysfunction (see Chapter 488.5). Pericarditis
and myocarditis may occur together in some cases of viral infection.
Purulent pericarditis, often caused by bacterial infections, has become
much less common with the advent of new immunizations for Haemophilus influenzae and pneumococcal disease. Historically, purulent pericarditis was seen in association with severe pneumonias, epiglottitis, meningitis,
or osteomyelitis. Patients with purulent pericarditis are acutely ill. Unless
the infection is recognized and treated expeditiously, the course can be
fulminant, leading to tamponade and death. Tuberculous pericarditis is
rare in developed countries but can be a relatively common complication
of HIV infection in regions where tuberculosis is endemic and access to
antiretroviral therapy is limited. Immune complex–mediated pericarditis is a rare complication that may result in a nonpurulent (sterile) effusion
after systemic bacterial infections such as meningococcus or Haemophilus.

Systemic inflammatory diseases such as autoimmune, rheumatologic,
and connective tissue disorders may involve the pericardium and result
in serous pericardial effusions. Pericardial inflammation may be a
component of the type II hypersensitivity reaction seen in patients with
acute rheumatic fever. It is often associated with rheumatic valvulitis
and responds quickly to antiinflammatory agents, including corticosteroids. Tamponade is quite uncommon (see Chapters 229.1 and 487).
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis, usually systemic-­
onset disease, can
manifest with pericarditis. Differentiating rheumatoid pericardial
inflammation from that seen with systemic lupus erythematosus is
difficult and requires careful rheumatologic evaluation. Aspirin and
corticosteroids can result in rapid resolution of a pericardial effusion
but may be needed on a chronic basis to prevent relapse. Many of the
autoinflammatory recurrent fever syndromes present with pericarditis,
usually with other manifestations of those disorders (see Chapter 204).
Patients with chronic renal failure or hypothyroidism may have
pericardial effusions. Clinical suspicion warrants careful screening
with physical examination and, if indicated, imaging studies during the
course of their illness.
Especially common in referral centers with hematology/oncology units is
the presence of pericardial effusion related to neoplastic disease. Conditions
resulting in effusion include Hodgkin disease, lymphomas, and leukemia.
Radiation therapy directed to the mediastinum of patients with malignancy
can result in pericarditis and, later, constrictive pericardial disease.
The postpericardiotomy syndrome occurs in patients who have undergone cardiac surgery and is characterized by fever, lethargy, anorexia,
irritability, and chest/abdominal discomfort beginning 1-­4 weeks postoperatively (see Table 483.2 in Chapter 483). There can be associated pleural
effusions. Postpericardiotomy syndrome is effectively treated with aspirin,
NSAIDs, colchicine, and in severe cases, corticosteroids. Pericardial drainage is necessary in those patients with cardiac tamponade.
In many patients the etiology of pericarditis is not known. Approximately
30% of these patients have multiple occurrences and are treated with colchicine to reduce the risk of recurrent pericarditis. Other less frequently used
treatments have included NSAIDs and corticosteroids. Refractory idiopathic
recurrent pericarditis may require pericardiectomy; anakinra and rilonacept
have demonstrated promise for difficult-­to-­treat patients.

489.2 Constrictive Pericarditis
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Rarely, chronic pericardial inflammation can result in fibrosis, calcification, and thickening of the pericardium. Pericardial scarring may lead to
impaired cardiac distensibility and filling and is termed constrictive pericarditis. Constrictive pericarditis can result from recurrent or chronic
pericarditis, cardiac surgery, or radiation to the mediastinum as a treatment for malignancies, most often Hodgkin disease or lymphoma.
Clinical manifestations of systemic venous hypertension predominate
in cases of restrictive pericarditis. Jugular venous distention, peripheral
edema, hepatomegaly, and ascites may precede signs of more significant cardiac compromise, such as tachycardia, hypotension, and pulsus
paradoxus. A pericardial knock, rub, and distant heart sounds might be
present on auscultation. Abnormalities of liver function tests, hypoalbuminemia, hypoproteinemia, and lymphopenia may be present. On occasion, chest radiographs demonstrate calcifications of the pericardium.
Constrictive pericarditis may be difficult to distinguish clinically from
restrictive cardiomyopathy because both conditions result in impaired myocardial filling (see Chapter 488.3). Echocardiography may be helpful in distinguishing constrictive pericardial disease from restrictive cardiomyopathy,
but cardiac MRI and CT are more sensitive in detecting abnormalities of the
pericardium. In rare cases, exploratory thoracotomy with direct examination of the pericardium may be required to confirm the diagnosis.
Although acute pericardial constriction is reported to respond to
antiinflammatory agents, the more typical chronic constrictive pericarditis will respond only to pericardiectomy with extensive resection
of the pericardium.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2892 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Chapter 490

Tumors of the Heart
John J. Parent and Stephanie M. Ware
Although cardiac tumors occur rarely in pediatric patients, they may
result in serious hemodynamic or electrophysiologic abnormalities
depending on tumor type and location.
The vast majority of tumors originating from the heart are benign.
Rhabdomyomas are the most common pediatric cardiac tumors and
are associated with tuberous sclerosis in 70–95% of cases (see Chapter
636.2). Rhabdomyomas may occur at any age, from fetal life through
late adolescence. They are often multiple, can occur in any cardiac
chamber, and originate within the myocardium, often extending into
the atrial or ventricular cavities (Fig. 490.1). Depending on their location and size, rhabdomyomas can result in inflow or outflow obstruction, leading to cyanosis or cardiac failure; many are asymptomatic.
Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias have been reported with rhabdomyomas, and on occasion, ventricular preexcitation (Wolff-­Parkinson-­
White syndrome) is present on electrocardiogram (ECG).
Fibromas are the second most common pediatric cardiac tumor and,
in contrast to rhabdomyomas, are usually solitary and intramyocardial.
The size and location of fibromas can lead to heart failure, cyanosis, or
rhythm disturbances. Loss of the tumor suppressor PTCH1 is associated

with the development of cardiac fibromas in sporadic cases. There is an
increased incidence in patients with Gorlin syndrome (3%).
Myxomas, the most common cardiac tumor seen in adults, occur
infrequently in the pediatric population. Myxomas are predominantly
intraatrial, appear pedunculated, and are rather mobile (Fig. 490.2); however, they may also be ventricular (Fig. 490.3). They may cause obstruction
to inflow or outflow and may present with a murmur, heart failure, or syncope. On occasion, atrial myxomas are associated with systemic symptoms
of fever, malaise, and arthralgia. Carney complex is a familial autosomal
dominant multiple neoplasia (often endocrine: pituitary adenoma, thyroid, testis, ovarian) and lentiginosis syndrome in which cardiac myxomas
can occur at a young age in any or all cardiac chambers. Pathogenic variants in the PRKAR1A gene are causative in some families.
Myxoma

RA
AMVL
LV

RV

LA
RA

Fig. 490.2 A large left atrial myxoma prolapsing across the mitral

valve, resulting in heart failure symptoms. AMVL, anterior mitral valve
leaflet; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. (From Zipes
DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al., eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 11th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019, Fig. 95.8, p. 1871.)

LV

RV

A
RA
LA

RV

Ventricular mass

X

PA
Ao
LV

B
Fig. 490.1 Echocardiograms demonstrating rhabdomyomas. A, Api-

cal four-­chamber view showing multiple rhabdomyomas (arrows) within
the septum and left ventricular myocardium. B, Short-­axis view showing a large rhabdomyoma (arrow) extending into the right ventricular
outflow tract. Ao, Ascending aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA,
pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.

Fig. 490.3 Left ventricular myxoma. TTE apical four-­chamber view of

mass within the left ventricle. RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; LA,
left atrium; LV, left ventricle. (From Schroeder L, Zyblewski S, Forbus G,
et al. Left ventricular myxoma. J Pediatr. 2016;168:249–249.e2, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 491 u Heart Failure
Other benign tumors include hemangiomas, Purkinje cell tumors,
papillomas, lipomas, and mesotheliomas. Depending on their location,
these benign tumors can result in valvular function abnormalities,
myocardial dysfunction, or heart block and other arrhythmias.
Malignant pediatric cardiac tumors are much less common than
benign tumors; the majority of such malignancies are sarcomas,
including angiosarcomas, rhabdosarcomas, or fibrosarcomas. Lymphomas and pheochromocytomas are reported but rare. Tumors originating from noncardiac sources that invade, extend, or metastasize to
the heart are more frequently seen than primary malignant cardiac
tumors. In pediatric patients, Wilms tumor and lymphoma/leukemia
are the most common causes of such secondary tumors.
Although the manifestations of cardiac tumors in pediatric patients are
protean, when a tumor is suspected, noninvasive imaging with echocardiography and/or MRI may be diagnostic and can determine tumor type,
location, extent, and hemodynamic impact. ECG and Holter studies are
valuable adjuncts when rhythm abnormalities are suspected. Cardiac
catheterization is rarely indicated but may be used to confirm tumor location, assess intracardiac hemodynamics, and perform biopsy for histologic
assessment. Such risks as blood loss, perforation, arrhythmia, and vessel
injury should be considered when discussing catheterization and biopsy.
Because the natural history of rhabdomyomas is one of spontaneous
diminution or complete resolution, treatment of the majority of cardiac tumors in pediatric patients is usually unnecessary. Everolimus, an
inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), may enhance
resolution in symptomatic patients with cardiac rhabdomyomas. Careful
clinical follow-­up and imaging are important. Antiarrhythmic medications may be prescribed to control rhythm disorders. Surgical removal of
a cardiac tumor may be indicated to relieve obstruction, improve myocardial or valve function, or control arrhythmias. Heart transplantation
has been performed in cases of unresectable tumors with significant
hemodynamic compromise. Wilms tumors extending from the inferior
vena cava into the atrium may require cardiopulmonary bypass support
during the course of primary resection of the renal tumor. Radiation or
chemotherapy can improve cardiac function in rare cases of lymphoma
or leukemia compressing the heart with hemodynamic compromise.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 7

Cardiac Therapeutics

2893

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The heart can be viewed as a pump with an output proportional to
its filling volume and inversely proportional to the resistance against
which it pumps. As ventricular end-­
diastolic volume increases, a
healthy heart increases cardiac output until a maximum is reached
and cardiac output can no longer be augmented (the Frank-­Starling
principle; Fig. 491.1). The increased stroke volume obtained in this
manner is a result of stretching of myocardial fibers, but it also results
in increased wall tension, which elevates myocardial oxygen consumption. Hearts working under various types of stress function along different Frank-­Starling curves. Cardiac muscle with compromised intrinsic
contractility requires a greater degree of dilation to produce increased
stroke volume and does not achieve the same maximal cardiac output
as normal myocardium does. If a cardiac chamber is already dilated
because of a lesion causing increased preload (e.g., a left-­to-­right shunt
or valvular insufficiency), there is little room for further dilation as a
means of augmenting cardiac output. The presence of lesions that result
in increased afterload to the ventricle (e.g., aortic or pulmonic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta) decreases cardiac performance, thereby
resulting in a depressed Frank-­Starling relationship.
Systemic oxygen transport is calculated as the product of cardiac
output and oxygen content of systemic blood. Cardiac output can be
calculated as the product of heart rate and stroke volume. The primary
determinants of stroke volume are the afterload (pressure work), preload (volume work), and contractility (intrinsic myocardial function).
Abnormalities in heart rate can also compromise cardiac output; for
example, tachyarrhythmias shorten the diastolic time interval for ventricular filling. Alterations in the oxygen-­carrying capacity of blood
(e.g., anemia or hypoxemia) also lead to a decrease in systemic oxygen
transport and, if compensatory mechanisms are inadequate, can result
in decreased delivery of substrate to tissues.
In some cases of heart failure, cardiac output is normal or increased,
yet because of decreased systemic oxygen content (e.g., secondary to
anemia) or increased oxygen demands (e.g., secondary to hyperventilation, hyperthyroidism, or hypermetabolism), an inadequate amount
of oxygen is delivered to meet the body’s needs. This condition, high-­
output failure, results in the development of signs and symptoms of
heart failure when there is no basic abnormality in myocardial function
and cardiac output is greater than normal. It is also seen with large systemic arteriovenous fistulas (e.g., vein of Galen malformation). These
conditions reduce peripheral vascular resistance and cardiac afterload
and increase myocardial contractility. Heart failure results when the
demand for cardiac output exceeds the ability of the heart to respond.

Chapter 491

Heart Failure
Danielle S. Burstein and
Joseph W. Rossano
The International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT)
defines heart failure as follows:
A clinical and pathological syndrome that results from ventricular dysfunction, volume, or pressure overload, alone or in combination. It leads
to characteristic signs and symptoms, such as poor growth, feeding difficulties, respiratory distress, exercise intolerance, and fatigue, and is associated with circulatory, neurohormonal, and molecular abnormalities.
Heart failure has numerous etiologies that are a consequence of cardiac
and noncardiac disorders, either congenital or acquired.

Cardiac index (L/min/m2)

Frank-Starling Curve

III—Normal
10
8
6
4
2

II—Congestive
heart failure
(treated)
I—Congestive
heart failure

0
5
10 15 20 25 30
Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (mm Hg)

Fig. 491.1 The Frank-­Starling relationship. As left ventricular end-­
diastolic (LVED) pressure increases, the cardiac index increases, even
in the presence of congestive heart failure, until a critical level of LVED
pressure is reached. Adding an inotropic agent (digoxin) shifts the curve
from I to II. (From Gersony WM, Steep CN. In: Dickerman JD, Lucey
JF, eds. Smith’s The Critically Ill Child: Diagnosis and Medical Management, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1984.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2894 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Chronic severe high-­output failure may eventually result in a decrease
in myocardial performance as the metabolic requirements of the myocardium are not met.
Multiple systemic compensatory mechanisms are used by the body
to adapt to chronic heart failure. Some are mediated at the molecular/cellular level, such as upregulation or downregulation of various metabolic pathway components leading to changes in efficiency
of oxygen and other substrate utilizations. Others are mediated by
neurohormones such as the renin-­angiotensin system and the sympathoadrenal axis. One of the principal mechanisms for increasing cardiac output is an increase in sympathetic tone secondary to
increased secretion of circulating epinephrine by the adrenals and
increased release of norepinephrine at the neuromuscular junction.
The initial beneficial effects of sympathetic stimulation include an
increase in heart rate and myocardial contractility, mediated by these
hormones’ action on cardiac β-­adrenergic receptors, increasing cardiac output. These hormones also cause vasoconstriction, mediated
by their action on peripheral arterial α-­adrenergic receptors. Some
vascular beds may constrict more readily than others, so that blood
flow is redistributed from the cutaneous, visceral, and renal beds to
the heart and brain. Whereas these acute effects are beneficial, chronically increased sympathetic stimulation can have deleterious effects,
including hypermetabolism, increased afterload, arrhythmogenesis,
and increased myocardial oxygen requirements. Peripheral vasoconstriction can result in decreased renal, hepatic, and gastrointestinal
tract function. Chronic exposure to circulating catecholamines leads
to a decrease in the number of cardiac β-­adrenergic receptors (downregulation) and also causes direct myocardial cell damage. Therapeutic agents for heart failure are directed at restoring balance to these
neuroendocrine systems.
Based on these physiologic and clinical principles, heart failure has
been described by different classification and stage definitions (Tables
491.1-­491.3 and Fig. 491.2). These definitions help describe the degree
of cardiac impairment and help direct therapy.
Table 491.1  Classification of Heart Failure Based on LVEF
HF CLASS ACCORDING TO LVEF
(MUST HAVE SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS)

ACRONYM

LVEF, %

HF with reduced ejection fraction

HFrEF

≤40

HF with mildly reduced ejection fraction

HFmrEF

41–49

HF with preserved ejection fraction

HFpEF

≥50

HF with preserved ejection fraction,
improved

HFpEF,
improved

Prior <40,
now ≥40

LVEF, Left ventricular ejection fraction.
From Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy
2023. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 2, p. 117.

Table 491.2  New York Heart Association (NYHA)
Functional Classification (FC)
NYHA FC

FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY

I

No limitations. Can perform high level of activity
without symptoms (for example, running, cycling,
weightlifting).

II

Slight limitations. Tolerate lower or moderate level
activities well, may have limitations with higher-­level
activities (for example, regular walking causes no
symptoms, but a run may cause shortness of breath).

III

Significant limitations. Symptoms with low-­level
activities such as with daily activities such as
walking and household chores.

IV

Symptoms at rest, dyspnea with any physical activity.

From Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy
2023. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 3, p. 117.

ETIOLOGY OF HEART FAILURE

There are many causes of heart failure in the pediatric population, and
the etiologies of heart failure are age-­dependent (Table 491.4). Pediatric heart failure can occur because of ventricular systolic or diastolic
dysfunction caused by an underlying cardiomyopathy. This may be
the result of a primary cardiomyopathy from an underlying genetic
mutation in cardiac proteins or secondary due to conditions including metabolic and neuromuscular diseases. Ischemic cardiomyopathy
caused by congenital coronary anomalies or acquired disease, such
as Kawasaki disease, can also result in heart failure. Inflammatory or
infectious diseases of the myocardium (e.g., myocarditis) can present
with a range of heart failure severity from mild symptoms of chest pain
to severe disease with fulminant cardiogenic shock. Persistent atrial
and ventricular arrhythmias, particularly tachyarrhythmias, may also
result in ventricular dysfunction and heart failure. High-­output heart
failure can occur in the setting of severe anemia or large arteriovenous
malformations.
Heart failure in children can also occur in the setting of underlying congenital heart disease with outflow tract obstructive lesions,
shunt lesions with overcirculation of the pulmonary vascular system
(e.g., ventricular septal defect), or ventricular volume overload caused
by significant valve regurgitation. Heart failure in children can also
occur because of valvar heart disease resulting in significant valve
regurgitation that causes ventricular volume overload and ventricular dilation with eventual systolic dysfunction. Single ventricle heart
disease, including hypoplastic left heart syndrome, has increased the
risk of developing heart failure due to multiple mechanisms that influence appropriate blood flow through the single ventricle palliated
circulation.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of heart failure depend in part on the
degree of the child’s cardiac reserve. A critically ill infant or child who
has exhausted the compensatory mechanisms to the point that cardiac output is no longer sufficient to meet the basal metabolic needs
of the body may present in cardiogenic shock. Other patients may
be comfortable when quiet but are incapable of increasing cardiac
output in response to even mild activity without experiencing significant symptoms. Conversely, it may take rather vigorous exercise to
compromise cardiac function in children who have less severe heart
disease.
A thorough history is extremely important in making the diagnosis
of heart failure and in evaluating the possible causes. Parents or caregivers who observe their child on a daily basis may not recognize subtle
changes that have occurred over the course of days or weeks. Gradually worsening perfusion or increasing respiratory effort may not be
recognized as an abnormal finding, or may be misattributed to other
diagnoses such as asthma. Edema, which is generally absent in infants
and young children, may be passed off as normal weight gain, and exercise intolerance as lack of interest in an activity. The history of a young
infant should also focus on feeding. An infant with heart failure often
takes less volume per feeding, becomes dyspneic while sucking, and
may perspire profusely. Eliciting a history of fatigue in an older child
requires detailed questions about activity level and its course over several months.
In children and adolescents, the signs and symptoms of heart failure
may be similar to those in adults and include fatigue, exercise intolerance, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, dyspnea, edema, wheezing, and
cough. Many children, however, may have primarily abdominal symptoms (abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, anorexia) and a surprising
lack of respiratory complaints. Attention to the cardiovascular system
may come only after an abdominal radiograph unexpectedly catches
the lower end of an enlarged heart.
The physical examination for a child with suspected heart failure
includes evaluation of vital signs and physical exam. Abnormal vital
signs sometimes seen in pediatric heart failure include tachypnea,
tachycardia, and desaturation caused by pulmonary edema. The elevation in systemic venous pressure may be gauged by clinical assessment of jugular venous pressure and liver enlargement. Orthopnea and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 491 u Heart Failure

2895

Table 491. 3  Classification of HF According to the American Heart Association (AHA) and American College of Cardiology
(ACC)
HEART FAILURE STAGE

AHA/ACC DESCRIPTION

Stage A

At risk

Patients without identified structural or functional cardiac abnormality or ventricular function abnormality but at
high risk of developing HF because of the presence of a condition (hypertension) strongly associated with the
development of HF.
Examples: anthracycline exposure, known pathogenic sarcomeric gene variant including dystrophinopathies.

Stage B

Pre-­HF

Patients with structural heart disease or ventricular function abnormality that is strongly associated with the
development of HF but without HF signs or symptoms, past or present.
Examples: asymptomatic patient with CHD status postsurgical correction with residual lesion, isolated left
ventricle noncompaction, elevated BNP or troponin if exposed to cardiotoxins.

Stage C

HF

Patients with current or prior symptoms of HF associated with underlying structural heart disease or ventricular
function abnormality (elevated filling pressure, systolic dysfunction).
Examples: acute myocarditis, dilated cardiomyopathy, mitral or aortic regurgitation.

Stage D

Advanced HF

Patients with advanced structural heart disease and refractory symptoms of HF requiring specialized
interventions.
Example: Inotropic dependency patient in end stage of dilated cardiomyopathy: may require VAD or transplant.

BNP, B-type natriuretic protein; CHD, congenital heart defect; VAD, ventricular assist devices; HF, heart failure
Modified from Hunt SA, Baker DW, Chin MH, Cinquegrani MP, Feldman AM, Francis GS, et al. ACC/AHA guidelines for the evaluation and management of chronic heart failure in the
adult: executive summary. A report of the American college of cardiology/American heart association task force on practice guidelines (committee to revise the 1995 guidelines for
the evaluation and management of heart failure). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38:2101–13.

Is there congestion?

No

No

Yes

Warm and dry

Warm and wet

Is there low
perfusion?
Yes

Cold and dry

Cold and wet

Evidence for low perfusion:
• Narrow pulses pressure
• Cool extremities
• Sleepy, mental confusion
• Hypotension
• Worsening of kidney function

Evidence for congestion:
• Tachypnea, orthopnea
• Ascites, hepatomegaly
• ↑Jugular venous pressure
• Peripheral edema,
ascites, rales

Fig. 491.2 Clinical assessment in acute decompensated heart fail-

ure should answer the two questions suggested by this diagram: First,
does the patient present with significant congestion? Second, does the
patient present with significant underperfusion? Using this construct,
patients will segregate into one of four categories in accordance with
clinical findings. Typically, patients move in a clockwise fashion through
these categories, first becoming congested (warm and wet) and then
vasoconstricted to maintain blood pressure (cold and wet). Once vasoactive support and diuresis are achieved, movement is generally counterclockwise, from cold and wet, to warm and wet, and then warm and
dry. However, some patients will remain underperfused despite restoration of normovolemia, representing the cold and dry group, for whom
mechanical support may be needed. (Modified from Kantor PF, Mertens
LL. Clinical practice: heart failure in children. Part I: clinical evaluation,
diagnostic testing, and initial medical management. Eur J Pediatr.
2010;169[3]:269–279.)

basilar rales are variably present; edema is usually discernible in dependent portions of the body, or anasarca may be present. Cardiomegaly
is invariably noted based on a hyperactive precordium, ventricular
heave, or displaced apical impulse. A gallop rhythm is common; when
ventricular dilation is advanced, the holosystolic murmur of mitral
or tricuspid valve regurgitation may be heard. Pulsus alternans is an
ominous physical exam finding usually seeing in a state of low stroke
volume with variable cardiac output with each ventricular contraction.
Impaired systemic perfusion with poor capillary refill or decreased
pulses is a concerning sign for cardiogenic shock.

In infants, heart failure may be difficult to distinguish from other
causes of respiratory distress or gastrointestinal diseases. Prominent
manifestations of heart failure include tachypnea, feeding difficulties, vomiting, poor weight gain, excessive perspiration, irritability,
weak cry, and noisy, labored respirations with intercostal and subcostal retractions, as well as flaring of the alae nasi. The signs of cardiac-­
induced pulmonary congestion may be indistinguishable from those
of bronchiolitis; wheezing is often a more prominent finding in young
infants with heart failure than rales. Hepatomegaly usually occurs, and
cardiomegaly is invariably present. Despite pronounced tachycardia,
a gallop rhythm can frequently be recognized. The other auscultatory signs are those produced by the underlying cardiac lesion. Clinical assessment of jugular venous pressure in infants may be difficult
because of the shortness of the neck and the difficulty of observing a
relaxed state; palpation of an enlarged liver is a more reliable sign.

DIAGNOSIS

Chest radiograph (CXR) may be helpful in pediatric heart failure. It
can assess the cardiac silhouette for cardiac enlargement. Pulmonary
vascularity is variable and depends on the cause of the heart failure.
Infants and children with large left-­to-­right shunts have exaggeration
of the pulmonary arterial vessels to the periphery of the lung fields,
whereas patients with cardiomyopathy may have a relatively normal
pulmonary vascular bed early in the course of disease. Fluffy perihilar
pulmonary markings suggestive of venous congestion and acute pulmonary edema are seen only with more severe degrees of heart failure.
Pleural effusions may also be present. Cardiac enlargement as a marker
of heart failure may be noted on a chest radiography performed to
evaluate for a possible pulmonary infection, bronchiolitis, or asthma.
Electrocardiography (ECG) may be helpful in assessing the cause
of heart failure but does not establish the diagnosis. In cardiomyopathies, exaggerated left or right ventricular voltages may be suggestive of
underlying cardiomyopathy, and ischemic changes may correlate with
other noninvasive parameters of ventricular function. Low-­voltage
QRS morphologic characteristics with ST-­T–wave abnormalities may
also suggest myocardial inflammatory disease (myocarditis) but can
be seen with pericarditis as well. ECG is the best tool for evaluating rhythm disorders as a potential cause of heart failure, especially
tachyarrhythmias. Ambulatory ECG monitoring can evaluate for
occult arrhythmias that may be present in heart failure.
Echocardiography is the standard technique for assessing ventricular function (Fig. 491.3). Ventricular function can be quantitated
simply and reliably with commonly used parameters such as fractional
shortening (a single-­dimensional variable) and an ejection fraction.
The fractional shortening is determined as the difference between

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2896 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Assessment
• Clinical history
• Physical examination
• ECG, labs

Table 491.4  Etiology of Heart Failure
FETAL
Severe anemia (hemolysis, fetal-­maternal transfusion, parvovirus
B19–induced anemia, hypoplastic anemia)
Supraventricular tachycardia
Ventricular tachycardia
Complete heart block
Severe Ebstein anomaly or other severe right-­sided lesions
Myocarditis

Natriuretic peptide
• NT-proBNP >125 pg/mL
• BNP ≥35 pg/mL

PREMATURE NEONATE
Fluid overload
Patent ductus arteriosus
Ventricular septal defect
Cor pulmonale (bronchopulmonary dysplasia)
Hypertension
Myocarditis
Genetic/metabolic cardiomyopathy
FULL-­TERM NEONATE
Asphyxial cardiomyopathy
Arteriovenous malformation (vein of Galen, hepatic)
Left-­sided obstructive lesions (coarctation of aorta, hypoplastic left
heart syndrome)
Large mixing cardiac defects (single ventricle, truncus arteriosus)
Myocarditis
Genetic/metabolic cardiomyopathy
Pheochromocytoma
Stress cardiomyopathy (Takotsubo)
Substance misuse
INFANT/TODDLER
Left-­to-­right cardiac shunts (ventricular septal defect)
Hemangioma (arteriovenous malformation)
Anomalous left coronary artery
Genetic/metabolic cardiomyopathy
Acute hypertension (hemolytic-­uremic syndrome)
Supraventricular tachycardia
Kawasaki disease
Myocarditis
CHILD/ADOLESCENT
Congenital heart disease (various forms, including single ventricle
heart disease)
Rheumatic fever
Acute hypertension (glomerulonephritis)
Myocarditis
Thyrotoxicosis
Hemochromatosis-­hemosiderosis
Cancer therapy (radiation, doxorubicin)
Sickle cell anemia
Endocarditis
Cor pulmonale (cystic fibrosis)
Genetic/metabolic cardiomyopathy (hypertrophic, dilated)

end-­systolic and end-­diastolic diameter divided by end-­diastolic diameter. Normal fractional shortening is between approximately 28% and
42%. The ejection fraction uses two-­dimensional data to calculate a
three-­dimensional volume; the normal range is 55–65%. In children
with right ventricular enlargement or other cardiac pathology resulting
in flattening of the interventricular septum, ejection fraction is used
because fractional shortening measured in the standard echocardiographic short-­axis view will not be accurate. Doppler studies can also
be used to estimate cardiac output. Doppler assessment of transmitral
inflow and tissue characterization can also be used as a noninvasive
assessment of diastolic function.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) is also useful in quantifying left and right ventricular function, volume, and mass along with
coronary artery anatomy. If valvular regurgitation is present, CMR can
quantify the regurgitant fraction. CMR can also provide details about
tissue characterization such as fibrosis and inflammation, which is
helpful for assessing conditions such as myocarditis.

Transthoracic echocardiography
• Additional testing, if necessary

HF diagnosis confirmed
• Determine cause and classify

HFrEF
LVEF ≤40%

HFmrEF
LVEF 41%–49%

HFpEF
LVEF ≥50%

• Evaluate for precipitating
factors
• lnitiate treatment

Fig. 491.3 Diagnostic algorithm for HF-­and EF-­based classification

BNP, B-­type natriuretic peptide; ECG, electrocardiogram; EF, ejection
fraction; HF, heart failure; HFmrEF, heart failure with mildly reduced
ejection fraction; HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction;
HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; LVEF, left ventricular
ejection fraction; LV, left ventricular; NT-­proBNP, N-­terminal pro-­B type
natriuretic peptide. (From Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al.
2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management of heart failure. J
Amer Coll Cardiol. 2022;79[17]:1757–1780, Fig. 4.)

Cardiac catheterization is an invasive test that can be helpful for
assessing heart failure by evaluating intracardiac hemodynamics and
shunt lesions. Angiography can be performed to evaluate for structural
heart defects. Endomyocardial biopsy may sometimes be performed as
part of an evaluation of myocarditis.
Laboratory testing is important for evaluating end-­organ function and
systemic perfusion. This includes evaluating renal function, liver function,
lactate levels, and electrolytes. Heart failure may result in hyponatremia
caused by compensatory activation of the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone
pathway with renal water retention, which may be compounded by further salt wasting due to chronic diuretic treatment. When heart failure is
severe, respiratory acidosis or metabolic acidosis, or both, may be present.
The cardiac serum biomarker B-­type (brain) natriuretic peptide (BNP)
(or N-­terminal pro-­BNP) is a cardiac neurohormone released in response
to increased ventricular wall tension that is elevated in patients with heart
failure. In children with heart failure, BNP may be elevated as a result of
systolic dysfunction (e.g., cardiomyopathy) and in children with volume
overload (e.g., left-­to-­right shunts such as ventricular septal defect). Table
491.5 lists other causes of an elevated BNP.

TREATMENT

The underlying cause of cardiac failure must be removed or alleviated if
possible. If the cause is a congenital cardiac anomaly amenable to surgery, medical treatment of the heart failure is indicated to prepare the
patient for surgery. With the current excellent outcomes of primary
surgical repair of congenital heart defects, even in the neonatal period,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 491 u Heart Failure
Table 491.5  Causes of Elevated Concentrations of
Natriuretic Peptides
CARDIAC
Heart failure (HFpEF, HFrEF)
Acute coronary symptoms
Pulmonary embolism
Myocarditis
Left ventricular hypertrophy
Hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy
Valvular heart disease
Congenital heart disease
Atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmias
Heart contusion
Cardioversion ICD shock
Surgical procedures involving the heart
Pulmonary hypertension
Toxic injury (chemotherapy)
NONCARDIAC
Ischemic stroke
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Renal dysfunction
Liver dysfunction (mainly liver cirrhosis with ascites)
Paraneoplastic syndrome
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Severe infections (including pneumonia and sepsis)
Severe burns
Anemia
Severe metabolic and hormone abnormalities (e.g., thyrotoxicosis,
diabetic ketosis)
HFpEF, Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction; HFrEF, heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction; ICD, implantable cardioverter-­defibrillator.
Adapted from McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2021 ESC Guidelines for
the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure [published correction
appears in Eur Heart J. 2021 Oct 14]. Eur Heart J. 2021;42(36):3599–3726, Table 7.

few children require aggressive heart failure management to grow big
enough for surgery. In contrast, if the cause of heart failure is cardiomyopathy, medical management provides temporary relief from symptoms
and may allow the patient to recover if the insult is reversible (e.g., myocarditis). If the lesion is not reversible, heart failure management usually
allows the child to return to normal activities for some period and to
delay, sometimes for months or years, the need for heart transplantation.

General Measures

Heart failure management focuses on maintaining adequate cardiac
output to allow for appropriate end-­organ function while reducing
volume overload and venous or pulmonary congestion. Encouraging
regular physical activity is important for preventing acquired cardiovascular comorbidities, but it is important that the child be allowed
to rest as needed and monitor for cardiac symptoms. Formal cardiopulmonary exercise testing can be used to assess the patient’s ability
to perform exercise in a controlled environment and is useful for providing exercise recommendations. Malnutrition is common in patients
with heart failure because of gastrointestinal symptoms related to mesenteric venous congestion, and patients often require supplemental
nutrition either with caloric fortification and/or nasogastric supplementation. For patients with pulmonary edema, positive pressure ventilation (PPV) may be required along with other drug therapies. For
those in low-­output heart failure, PPV can significantly reduce total
body oxygen consumption by eliminating the work of breathing and
help to reverse metabolic acidosis. Reverse remodeling agents, including β blockers, angiotensin-­blockers, combination angiotensin receptor/neprilysin inhibitors, and aldosterone antagonists, can provide
long-­term myocardial reverse remodeling. Appropriate blood pressure
control is important to reduce afterload and stress on the myocardium.
In patients with advanced heart failure and/or cardiogenic shock, providing adequate cardiac output to meet the metabolic demands and
provide adequate end-­organ perfusion may require inotropic agents
and, potentially, mechanical circulation support (Table 491.6).

2897

Diet

Infants with heart failure usually fail to thrive because of a combination of increased metabolic demands and decreased caloric intake.
Increasing daily calories is an important aspect of their management. Increasing the number of calories per ounce of infant formula
(or supplementing breastfeeding) may be beneficial. Many infants do
not tolerate an increase beyond 24 calories/oz because of diarrhea or
because these formulas provide too large a solute load for compromised kidneys.
Severely ill infants and children may lack sufficient strength for effective sucking because of extreme fatigue, rapid respirations, and generalized weakness. In these circumstances, nasogastric feedings may
be helpful. In many patients with cardiac enlargement, gastroesophageal reflux is a major problem. The use of continuous drip nasogastric
feedings at night, administered by pump, may improve caloric intake
while decreasing problems with reflux. Continued malnutrition may
be an important factor in the decision to undertake earlier surgical
intervention in patients who have an operable congenital heart lesion
or to proceed with mechanical circulatory support and/or listing for
transplantation in patients with cardiomyopathy. Iron supplementation
should be initiated in the presence of iron deficiency even in the absence
of anemia.
The use of low-­sodium formulas in the routine management of
infants with heart failure is not recommended because these preparations are often poorly tolerated and may exacerbate diuretic-­induced
hyponatremia. Human breast milk is the ideal low-­sodium nutritional
source. The use of more potent diuretic agents allows more palatable
standard formulas to be used for nutrition while controlling salt and
water balance by chronic diuretic administration. Most older children
can be managed with generally heart-­healthy diets that have low fat
and sugar content, although caloric supplementation may be needed if
there is significant malnutrition.

Diuretics

Diuretics are an important component of heart failure management by reducing volume overload and congestion. Diuretics interfere with reabsorption of water and sodium by the kidneys, which
results in a reduction in circulating blood volume and thereby
reduces pulmonary fluid overload and ventricular filling pressure.
Diuretics are usually the first mode of therapy initiated in patients
with congestive heart failure.
Loop diuretics, including Furosemide and bumetanide, are the
most commonly used diuretics in pediatric patients with heart failure. It inhibits the reabsorption of sodium and chloride in the distal
tubules and the loop of Henle. Patients requiring acute diuresis should
be given intravenous (IV) furosemide at an initial dose of 1-­2 mg/kg,
which usually results in rapid diuresis and prompt improvement in
clinical status, particularly if symptoms of pulmonary congestion are
present. Chronic furosemide therapy is then prescribed at a dose of
1-­4 mg/kg/24 hr given between 1 and 4 times a day. Careful monitoring of electrolytes is necessary with long-­term furosemide therapy
because of the potential for significant loss of potassium. Potassium
chloride supplementation is usually required unless the potassium-­
sparing diuretics are given concomitantly. Chronic administration
of furosemide may cause contraction of the extracellular fluid compartment and result in “contraction alkalosis” (see Chapter 73.7).
Diuretic-­induced hyponatremia may become difficult to manage in
patients with severe heart failure.
Thiazide diuretics, including chlorothiazide, are also used for
diuresis in children with heart failure. It is less immediate in action
and less potent than furosemide, and it affects the reabsorption
of electrolytes in the renal tubules only. The usual dose is 10-­40
mg/kg/24 hr in two divided doses. Potassium supplementation is
often required if chlorothiazide is used alone. Sodium glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors (dapagliflozin, empagliflozin)
also produce a natriuresis and have other beneficial direct cardiac
effects and have been recommended for some etiologies of heart
failure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2898 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 491.6  Dosage of Drugs Commonly Used for the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure
DRUG

DOSAGE*

DIGOXIN
Digitalization (1/2 initially, followed
by 1/4 q12h × 2)

Maintenance digoxin†
DIURETICS
Furosemide (Lasix)

Premature: 20 μg/kg
Full-­term neonate (up to 1 mo): 20-­30 μg/kg
Infant or child: 25-­40 μg/kg
Adolescent or adult: 0.5-­1 mg in divided doses
Note: These doses are PO; IV dose is 75% of PO dose
5-­10 μg/kg/day, divided q12h
Note: These doses are PO; IV dose is 75% of PO dose
IV: 0.5-­2 mg/kg/dose
PO: 1-­4 mg/kg/day, divided qd-­qid

Bumetanide (Bumex)

IV: 0.01-­0.1 mg/kg/dose
PO: 0.01-­0.1 mg/kg/day q24-­48h

Chlorothiazide (Diuril)

PO: 20-­40 mg/kg/day, divided bid or tid

Spironolactone (Aldactone)

PO: 1-­3 mg/kg/day, divided bid or tid

ADRENERGIC AGONISTS (ALL IV)
Dobutamine

2-­20 μg/kg/min

Dopamine

2-­20 μg/kg/min

Epinephrine

0.01-­1.0 μg/kg/min

PHOSPHODIESTERASE INHIBITORS (ALL IV)
Milrinone
0.25-­1.0 μg/kg/min
AFTERLOAD-­REDUCING AGENTS
Captopril (Capoten), all PO

Premature: start at 0.01 mg/kg/dose; 0.1-­0.4 mg/kg/day, divided q6-­24h
Infant: start at 0.15-­0.3 mg/kg/dose; 1.5-­6 mg/kg/day, divided q6-­12h
Child: start at 0.3-­0.5 mg/kg/dose; 2.5-­6 mg/kg/day, divided q6-­12h

Enalapril (Vasotec), all PO

0.08-­0.5 mg/kg/day, divided q12-­24h

Hydralazine (Apresoline)

IV: 0.1-­0.5 mg/kg/dose (maximum: 20 mg)
PO: 0.75-­5 mg/kg/day, divided q6-­12h

Nitroglycerin

IV: 0.25-­0.5 μg/kg/min start; increase to 20 μg/kg/min maximum

Nitroprusside (Nipride)

IV: 0.5-­8 μg/kg/min

β-­ADRENERGIC BLOCKERS
Carvedilol (Coreg)
Metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol-­XL)

PO: initial dose: 0.1 mg/kg/day (maximum: 6.25 mg) divided bid (may use tid in infants), increase gradually (usually
2-­wk intervals) to maximum of 0.5-­1 mg/kg/day over 8-­12 wk as tolerated; adult maximum dose: 50-­100 mg/day
PO, non–extended-­release form: 0.2 mg/kg/day divided bid, increase gradually (usually 2-­wk intervals) to
maximum dose of 1-­2 mg/kg/day
PO, extended-­release form (Toprol-­XL): given once daily; adult initial dose: 25 mg/day, maximum: 200 mg/day

*Pediatric doses based on weight should not exceed adult doses. Because recommendations may change, these doses should always be double-­checked. Doses may also need to
be modified in any patient with renal or hepatic dysfunction.
†Maintenance digitalis therapy is started approximately 12 hr after full digitalization. The daily dosage, one quarter of the total digitalizing dose, is divided in two and given at 12-­hr
intervals. The oral maintenance dose is usually 20–25% higher than when digoxin is used parenterally. The normal daily dose of digoxin for older children (>5 yr of age) calculated
by body weight should not exceed the usual adult dose of 0.125-­0.5 mg/24 hr.
IV, Intravenous; PO, oral; bid, twice daily, tid, 3 times daily; qid, 4 times daily; qd, every day.

Cardiac Reverse Remodeling
Angiotensin Antagonists

The renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone pathway becomes active as a compensatory response to heart failure, but these compensatory effects can
result in increased afterload and adverse remodeling of the myocardium, including development of cardiac fibrosis. Angiotensin antagonists, including angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and
aldosterone II receptor blockers (ARBs), reduce ventricular afterload
by decreasing peripheral vascular resistance and thereby improving
myocardial performance. Afterload reducers may be useful in children with heart failure secondary to cardiomyopathy and in patients
with severe mitral or aortic insufficiency. They may also be effective
in patients with heart failure caused by left-­to-­right shunts. ACEIs

and ARBs may have additional beneficial effects on cardiac remodeling independent of their influence on afterload by directly influencing adverse cardiac intracellular signaling pathways and decreasing
the formation of myocardial fibrosis. In adult patients with dilated
cardiomyopathy, the addition of an ACEI to standard medical therapy
reduces both morbidity and mortality.
The orally active ACEIs captopril, enalapril, and lisinopril produce arterial dilation by blocking the production of angiotensin II,
thereby resulting in significant afterload reduction. Venodilation and
consequent preload reduction also have been reported. In addition,
these agents interfere with aldosterone production and therefore also
help control salt and water retention. ACEIs have additional beneficial
effects on cardiac structure and function that may be independent of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 491 u Heart Failure
Activation of
NPS

+

+
BNP/ANP

Natriuretic
peptide receptor A

–
Neprilysin
–

+

Sacubitril/valsartan
Heart failure

orally in two divided doses of 2 mg/kg/24 hr. Adults with heart failure
have improved survival when an aldosterone inhibitor is included in
the diuretic regimen, likely through multiple effects, including a favorable effect on cardiac fibrosis. Eplerenone is an alternative to spironolactone and does not have the side effect of gynecomastia.

β Blockers
–

+
Activation of
RAAS

2899

ACE inhibitors

+

ARBs

–
RENIN
ACE

–

+
Angiotensinogen

Angiotensin
I

Angiotensin
II

Angiotensin
receptor

Fig. 491.4 Systems activated in heart failure and pathways blocked
by angiotensin-­
converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor
blockers, and neprilysin inhibitors (sympathetic nervous system activation pathway is not shown in the figure). ANP, Atrial natriuretic peptide;
BNP, B-­type natriuretic peptide; NPS, natriuretic peptide system; RAAS,
renin angiotensin aldosterone system. (From Arya A, Azad S, Sitaraman
R. Angiotensin receptor and neprilysin inhibitor: a new drug in pediatric cardiologist’s armamentarium. Ann Pediatr Cardiol. 2020;13[4]:334–
336, Fig. 1.)

Table 491.7  Valsartan/Sacubitril Recommended Dose*
(Twice Daily)(mg/kg)
STARTING

SECOND

FINAL

Pediatric patients <40 kg**
(mg/kg)

1.6

2.3

3.1

Pediatric patients at least
40 kg, <50 kg (mg)

24/26

49/51

72/78#

Pediatric patients at least
50 kg (mg)

49/51

72/78#

97/103

*Available as 24/26, 49/51, and 97/103 mg tablets, where the first drug is sacubitril and
the second drug is valsartan.
#Doses of 72/78 mg can be achieved using three 24/26 mg tablets. Titration: titrate
dose every 2 wk and target final dose.
**An oral suspension can be substituted at the recommended tablet dosage in patients
unable to swallow tablets.
From Arya A, Azad S, Sitaraman R. Angiotensin receptor and neprilysin inhibitor: a new
drug in pediatric cardiologist’s armamentarium. Ann Pediatr Cardiol. 2020;13(4):334–
336, Table 1.

their effect on afterload. Adverse reactions to ACEIs include hypotension and its sequelae (weakness, dizziness, syncope) and hyperkalemia.
A maculopapular pruritic rash is encountered in a small number of
patients, but the drug may be continued because the rash often disappears spontaneously with time. Neutropenia, renal toxicity, and
chronic cough also occur. Angioedema is a rare side effect of ACEIs
and is related to inhibiting breakdown of bradykinin. If patients have
had side effects related to bradykinin effect from ACEIs, including
chronic cough, ARBs may be an alternative therapy and include losartan and valsartan.
An angiotensin receptor combined with neprilysin inhibition
(ARNI) (valsartan/sacubitril) is approved for children 1-­18 years of
age with New York Heart Association class II-­IV and a left ventricular
ejection fraction ≤40%. The mechanism of action is noted in Figure
491.4 and the dosing in Table 491.7.

Aldosterone Antagonists

Spironolactone and eplerenone inhibit aldosterone and act both as
a reverse remodeling agent and a weak diuretic. They also enhance
potassium retention, often eliminating the need for oral potassium
supplementation in patients receiving diuretics. Aldosterone antagonists blunt the adverse cardiac remodeling effects and may reduce cardiac fibrosis that results in heart failure. Spironolactone is usually given

Studies in adults with dilated cardiomyopathy show that β-­adrenergic
blocking agents, introduced gradually as part of a comprehensive heart
failure treatment program, improve exercise tolerance, decrease hospitalizations, and reduce overall mortality. The agents most often used
are carvedilol, with both α-­ and β-­adrenergic receptor–blocking and
free radical–scavenging effects, and metoprolol, a β1-­adrenergic receptor–selective antagonist. β Blockers are used for the chronic treatment
of patients with heart failure and should not be administered when
patients are still in the acute phase of heart failure (i.e., receiving IV
adrenergic agonist infusions). Although highly efficacious in adults,
clinical studies in children have shown mixed results, potentially from
the significant heterogeneity of the populations being studied and differences in the types of β-­blocking agents.
Although ACEIs/ARBs along with β-­adrenergic–blocking agents
and aldosterone antagonists have been shown in multiple prospective,
randomized, controlled trials in adults to improve symptoms and mortality in adult heart failure patients, it is unclear if these medications
improve the natural history of heart failure in children. Nonetheless,
these medications are commonly used for the treatment of heart failure
and are recommended by consensus guidelines from the ISHLT and
Canadian Cardiovascular Society.

Afterload Reduction

Afterload reduction is an important component of heart failure management to reduce workload on the myocardium. Oral afterload-­
reducing agents, including ACEIs and ARBs, are often used for both
cardiac reverse remodeling and afterload reduction benefits. If renal
insufficiency is present, alternative oral afterload-­reducing agents may
be considered, including calcium channel blockers such as amlodipine, although they have potential side effects including peripheral
edema and gingival hyperplasia.
Intravenously administered afterload-­
reducing agents, including
milrinone (see later section on “Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors”), nicardipine, and nitroprusside, should be initiated only in a closely monitored clinical care setting. Nitroprusside’s short IV half-­life makes it
ideal for titrating the dose in critically ill patients. Peripheral arterial
vasodilation and afterload reduction are the major effects, but venodilation causing a decrease in venous return to the heart may also be
beneficial. Blood pressure must be continuously monitored because
sudden hypotension can occur. Consequently, nitroprusside is contraindicated in patients with preexisting hypotension. Because the drug is
metabolized, small amounts of circulating cyanide are produced and
detoxified in the liver to thiocyanate, which is excreted in urine. When
high doses of nitroprusside are administered for several days, toxic
symptoms related to thiocyanate poisoning may occur (fatigue, nausea,
disorientation, acidosis, and muscular spasm). If nitroprusside use is
prolonged, blood thiocyanate levels should be monitored.

Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors

Milrinone is useful in treating patients with low cardiac output who are
refractory to standard therapy. It has been shown to be highly effective
in managing the low-­output state present in children after open heart
surgery. It works by inhibiting phosphodiesterase, which prevents the
degradation of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Milrinone has both positive inotropic effects on the heart and peripheral
vasodilatory effects and has generally been used as an adjunct to dopamine or dobutamine therapy in the intensive care unit. It is given by
IV infusion at 0.25-­1 μg/kg/min. A major side effect is hypotension
secondary to peripheral vasodilation. The hypotension can generally
be managed by the administration of IV fluids to restore adequate
intravascular volume. Because of renal clearance of milrinone, caution
must be used in the setting of renal insufficiency. Long-­term milrinone

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2900 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
is often used to support patients while listed for heart transplantation,
and in select patients can be used in the outpatient setting.

α-­ and β-­Adrenergic Agonists

The α-­ and β-­adrenergic receptor agonists may be needed for advanced
heart failure with impaired cardiac output and are usually administered
in an intensive care setting, where the dose can be carefully titrated to
hemodynamic response. Continuous determinations of arterial blood
pressure and heart rate are performed; measuring serial mixed venous
oxygen saturations or cardiac output directly with a pulmonary thermodilution (Swan-­Ganz) catheter may be helpful in assessing drug efficacy,
although this technique is used much less in children than in adults.
These agents increase myocardial oxygen consumption and are associated
with increased arrhythmogenic burden and have been shown to increase
morbidity and mortality in adults with heart failure; thus they are usually
avoided as a long-­term therapy.
Dopamine is a predominantly β-­adrenergic receptor agonist, but it
has α-­adrenergic effects at higher doses. Dopamine has less chronotropic
and arrhythmogenic effect than the pure β-­agonist isoproterenol. At a
dose of 2-­10 μg/kg/min, dopamine results in increased contractility with
little peripheral vasoconstrictive effect. If the dose is increased beyond
15 μg/kg/min, however, its peripheral α-­adrenergic effects may result in
vasoconstriction.
Dobutamine, a derivative of dopamine, is also useful in treating low
cardiac output. It has direct inotropic effects and causes a moderate
reduction in peripheral vascular resistance. Dobutamine can be used
alone or as an adjunct to dopamine therapy to avoid the vasoconstrictive effects of higher-­dose dopamine. Dobutamine is also less likely to
cause cardiac rhythm disturbances.
Epinephrine is a mixed α-­ and β-­adrenergic receptor agonist that is
usually reserved for patients with cardiogenic shock and low arterial blood
pressure. Although epinephrine can raise blood pressure effectively, it also
increases systemic vascular resistance, and therefore increases the afterload
against which the heart has to work and is associated with an increased risk
of arrhythmia. Additionally, epinephrine is proarrhythmic and can result
in direct cardiac toxicity, including myocardial necrosis and apoptosis.

Digitalis Glycosides

Digoxin, once the mainstay of heart failure management in both children
and adults, is currently used less frequently as a result of the introduction
of other therapies and the recognition of its potential toxicities. Some cardiologists will use digitalis as an adjunct to ACEIs and diuretics in patients
with symptomatic heart failure, whereas others have stopped using it
altogether. Despite multiple clinical studies, predominantly in adults, the
controversy over digitalis remains. Some data suggest a beneficial effect
of digoxin on reducing death among infants with single ventricle heart
disease.
Digoxin is the digitalis glycoside used most often in pediatric patients.
It has a half-­life of 36 hours and is absorbed well by the gastrointestinal
tract (60–85%), even in infants. An initial effect is seen as early as 30 minutes after administration, and the peak effect for oral digoxin occurs at 2-­6
hours. When the drug is administered intravenously, the initial effect is
seen in 15-­30 minutes, and the peak effect occurs at 1-­4 hours. The kidney
eliminates digoxin, so dosing must be adjusted according to the patient’s
renal function. The half-­life of digoxin may be up to 6 days in patients
with anuria because slower hepatic excretion pathways are used in these
patients.
Rapid digitalization of infants and children may be carried out intravenously. This should be done with caution in patients with severe heart
failure. The dose depends on the patient’s age (see Table 491.6). The recommended digitalization schedule is to give half the total digitalizing dose
immediately and the succeeding two one-­quarter doses at 12-­hours intervals later. The ECG must be closely monitored and rhythm strips obtained
before each of the three digitalizing doses. Digoxin should be discontinued
if a new rhythm disturbance is noted. Prolongation of the P-­R interval is
not necessarily an indication to withhold digitalis, but a delay in administering the next dose or a reduction in the dosage should be considered,
depending on the patient’s clinical status. Minor ST segment or T-­wave
changes are frequently noted with digitalis administration and should not
affect the digitalization regimen. Baseline serum electrolyte levels should

be measured before and after digitalization. Hypokalemia and hypercalcemia exacerbate digitalis toxicity. Because hypokalemia is relatively common in patients receiving diuretics, potassium levels should be monitored
closely in those receiving a potassium-­wasting diuretic in combination
with digitalis. In patients with active myocarditis, some cardiologists recommend avoiding digitalis altogether, and if used, maintenance digitalis
should be started at half the normal dose without digitalization because of
the increased risk of arrhythmia in these patients.
Patients who are not critically ill may be given digitalis initially by the
oral route, and in most instances, digitalization is completed within 24
hours. When slow digitalization is desirable, for example, in the immediate
postoperative period, initiation of a maintenance digoxin schedule without
a previous loading dose achieves full digitalization in 7-­10 days.
Measurement of serum digoxin levels is useful in the following circumstances: (1) when an unknown amount of digoxin has
been administered or ingested accidently, (2) when renal function
is impaired or if drug interactions are possible, (3) when questions
regarding compliance are raised, and (4) when a toxic response is
suspected. In suspected toxicity, elevated serum digoxin levels are
not in themselves diagnostic of toxicity but must be interpreted as an
adjunct to other clinical and electrocardiographic findings (rhythm
and conduction disturbances). Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia,
hypercalcemia, cardiac inflammation secondary to myocarditis, and
prematurity may all potentiate digitalis toxicity. A cardiac arrhythmia
that develops in a child who is taking digitalis may also be related
to the primary cardiac disease rather than the drug; however, any
arrhythmia occurring after the institution of digitalis therapy must
be considered to be drug related until proven otherwise. Many drugs
interact with digoxin and may increase levels or risk of toxicity, so
care should be taken when a patient receiving digoxin is being considered for any additional pharmacologic therapy.

Additional Therapies

Several medications that have shown promise in the treatment of adult
patients with heart failure are being studied in pediatric patients. For
chronic heart failure, ivabradine has been studied in patients with elevated heart rates despite optimized β blocker use. Ivabradine is a selective
inhibitor of the If current in the sinus node and lowers heart rates without
decreasing myocardial contractility. The use of ivabradine was associated
with improved outcomes in adults with heart failure, and a recent study
of children with heart failure caused by dilated cardiomyopathy demonstrated improved left ventricular systolic function and clinical status.
Sodium-­glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, which blocks
reabsorption of glucose in the proximal renal tubule, are the newest class
of adult heart failure medications and, though developed as a treatment
for diabetes, have shown dramatic improvement in cardiac mortality
and morbidity in adults with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Given the mechanism of action, which includes glucosuria, there
is a risk for urinary tract infection and yeast infection. Additional possible side effects include acute kidney injury and bone fracture as well as
development of diabetic ketoacidosis in patients with diabetes. Further
studies are needed to determine what role, if any, these medications
will have in the treatment of pediatric heart failure.

ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC APPROACHES TO HEART
FAILURE MANAGEMENT

Significant improvements in symptomatology and functional capacity
have been achieved in select adult patients with cardiomyopathy using
biventricular resynchronization pacing. This technique improves
cardiac output by restoring normal synchrony between right and left
ventricular contraction, which is often lost in patients with dilated
cardiomyopathy (these patients usually manifest a left bundle branch
block on ECG). There is growing experience with resynchronization pacing in children, but it remains uncertain which population of
patients with heart failure benefit from this therapy.
Arrhythmias are a leading cause of sudden death in patients with
severe cardiomyopathy (both dilated and hypertrophic). Although antiarrhythmic medications can sometimes reduce this risk, for patients at
particularly high risk (e.g., those with a condition known to be associated with a high risk of ventricular arrhythmia or those who have already

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 491 u Heart Failure

2901

Table 491.8  Treatment of Cardiogenic Shock*
DETERMINANTS OF STROKE VOLUME
Preload

Contractility

Afterload

Parameters measured

CVP, PCWP, LAP, cardiac chamber
size on echocardiography

CO, BP, fractional shortening or ejection fraction
on echocardiography, MV O2 saturation

BP, peripheral perfusion, SVR

Treatment to improve
cardiac output

Volume expansion (crystalloid,
colloid, blood)

β-­Adrenergic agonists, phosphodiesterase
inhibitors

Afterload-­reducing agents:
milrinone, nitroprusside, ACEIs

*The goal is to improve peripheral perfusion by increasing cardiac output, where cardiac output = heart rate × stroke volume.
ACEIs, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors; BP, blood pressure; CO, cardiac output (measured with a thermodilution catheter); CVP, central venous pressure; LAP, left atrial
pressure (measured with an indwelling LA line); MV O2 saturation, mixed venous oxygen saturation (measured with a central venous catheter); PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge
pressure (measured with a thermodilution catheter); SVR, systemic vascular resistance (calculated from CO and mean BP).

experienced a “missed sudden death” episode), use of an implantable
cardioverter-­defibrillator can be lifesaving (see Chapter 485).

491.1 Cardiogenic Shock
Joseph W. Rossano and Danielle S. Burstein
Cardiogenic shock may be caused by (1) severe cardiac dysfunction before or after cardiac surgery, (2) septicemia, (3) severe burns,
(4) anaphylaxis, (5) cardiomyopathy, (6) myocarditis, (7) myocardial
infarction or stunning, and (8) acute central nervous system (CNS)
disorders. It is characterized by low cardiac output and results in inadequate tissue perfusion (see Chapter 85).
Treatment is aimed at restoring adequate cardiac output to prevent
the untoward effects of prolonged ischemia on vital organs, as well as
management of the underlying cause. Under normal physiologic conditions, cardiac output is increased as a result of sympathetic stimulation, which increases both contractility and heart rate. If contractility
is depressed, cardiac output may be improved by increasing the heart
rate, increasing ventricular filling pressure (preload) through the
Frank-­Starling mechanism, or decreasing systemic vascular resistance
(afterload). Optimal filling pressure is variable and depends on a number of extracardiac factors, including ventilatory support and intraabdominal pressure. The increased pressure necessary to fill a relatively
noncompliant ventricle should also be considered, particularly after
open heart surgery or in patients with restrictive or hypertrophic cardiomyopathies. If carefully administered incremental fluid does not
result in improved cardiac output, abnormal myocardial contractility
or an abnormally high afterload, or both, must be implicated as the
cause of the low cardiac output. Although an increase in heart rate may
improve cardiac output, an excessive increase in heart rate may reduce
cardiac output because of decreased time for diastolic filling. Additionally, high heart rates will increase myocardial oxygen demand, which
may be counterproductive in a state of limited tissue oxygen supply.
Myocardial contractility usually improves when treatment of the
basic cause of shock is instituted, hypoxia is eliminated, and acidosis is corrected. β-­Adrenergic agonists such as dopamine, epinephrine, and dobutamine improve cardiac contractility, increase heart
rate, and ultimately increase cardiac output. However, some of these
agents also have α-­adrenergic effects, which cause peripheral vasoconstriction and increase afterload, so careful consideration of the
balance of these effects in an individual patient is important. The use
of cardiac glycosides and β blockers to treat acute low-­cardiac-­output
states should be avoided.
Patients in cardiogenic shock may have a marked increase in systemic
vascular resistance (SVR) resulting in high afterload and poor peripheral
perfusion. If the increased SVR is persistent and the administration of
positive inotropic agents alone does not improve tissue perfusion, the
use of afterload-­reducing agents may be appropriate, such as nitroprusside or milrinone in combination with a β-­adrenergic agonist. Milrinone,
a phosphodiesterase inhibitor (see earlier), is also a positive inotropic
agent, and combined with a β-­adrenergic agonist, it works synergistically
to increase levels of myocardial cyclic adenosine monophosphate.

Sequential evaluation and management of cardiovascular shock are
mandatory (see Chapter 85). Table 491.8 outlines the general treatment
principles for acute cardiac circulatory failure under most circumstances.
In addition to cardiac-­specific medications, other treatments aimed at
improving oxygen capacity (e.g., blood transfusion for patients with
anemia) and decreasing oxygen demand (e.g., intubation, mechanical
ventilation, sedation, antipyretics) can be beneficial. Treatment of infants
and children with low cardiac output after cardiac surgery also depends
on the nature of the operative procedure, any intraoperative complications, and the physiology of the circulation after repair or palliation (see
Chapter 483). If cardiogenic shock does not respond rapidly to medical
therapy, consideration of mechanical support is warranted.

MECHANICAL CIRCULATORY SUPPORT

Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), which can provide
total cardiopulmonary support, is the most common short-­term modality to support circulatory failure in children. In experienced centers, children can be placed on ECMO rapidly, and therefore the modality can be
used in multiple settings, including low cardiac output syndrome (low-­
output heart failure) after cardiac surgery, rapidly deteriorating hemodynamics in several scenarios (e.g., myocarditis), and as resuscitation from
refractory cardiac arrest. The modality is ideal for short-­term support
when the underlying disease requiring ECMO is expected to resolve
within days to weeks. For multiple reasons, including the relatively high
complication rate and decreased mobility of many patients on ECMO, it
is not an ideal support modality for long-­term myocardial support.
Given the limitations of ECMO, there is a need to develop long-­term
support options for children with refractory heart failure. Ventricular
assist devices (VADs) include both short-­term and long-­term mechanical circulatory support and can be deployed either percutaneously or
surgically. In children, most of these devices are used with the intention
of subsequently performing a heart transplantation, although the devices
can be removed if myocardial function recovers. This is in contrast to
adult patients, many of whom are placed on these devices with no plan
for heart transplantation, the so-­called destination therapy. Successfully
managing patients on VAD support requires a dedicated multidisciplinary team.
For infants and small children, the most commonly used VADs are
paracorporeal devices, including paracorporeal pulsatile-­flow VADs
(e.g., Berlin Heart EXCOR) and paracorporeal continuous-­flow VADs
(e.g., Pedimag). These devices can be used for left, right, or biventricular support. They are classified as a paracorporeal device because the
pump sits outside the body. In older children and adolescents, intracorporeal continuous flow devices (e.g., HeartMate3) are preferred. These
VADs are completely internalized except for a drive line that connects
to the power source (Fig. 491.5). These VADs have fewer complications and can provide long-­term durable support outside the hospital.
These devices are often used in older children and adolescents, with
many of these patients discharged home on VAD support. Other types
of devices, including temporary percutaneous VAD (e.g., Impella) for
short-­term support and the total artificial heart for long-­term support, have also been used in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2902 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
100

1982-1989 (N = 908)

1990-2003 (N = 5,637)

2004-2008 (N = 2,442)

2009-6/2014 (N = 3,104)

B

Survival (%)

75

50
p-values significant at p < 0.05
25

Median survival (years): 1982-1989 = 9.8; 1990-2003 = 14.5;
2004-2008 = NA; 2009-6/2014 = NA
0
0

A

4

6

8

10

12
14
Years

16

18

20

22

24

100

C

A

2

Median survival (years): <1 = NA; 1-5 = 21.5;
6-10 = 16.5; 11-17 = 15.7

Fig. 491.5 Commonly used ventricular assist devices in children. A,
75
Survival (%)

Paracorporeal pneumatic pulsatile Berlin Heart EXCOR. B and C, Continuous flow devices: (B) HeartMate3; (C) HeartWare HVAD. (A courtesy
Berlin Heart, LLC; B from St. Jude Medical; C courtesy Medtronic, Inc.)

50
All pair-wise comparisons were significant at p < 0.05.
25

Chapter 492

Pediatric Heart and Heart-­
Lung Transplantation
492.1 Pediatric Heart Transplantation
Danielle S. Burstein and Joseph W. Rossano
Pediatric heart transplantation is considered the standard therapy that offers long-­term survival for end-­stage heart disease in
children. In adults, ventricular assist devices (VADs) are usually
employed as a long-­term therapy for patients not eligible for heart
transplantation, but in children the vast majority of VADs are used
as a bridge to transplantation as opposed to an alternative to transplantation. According to the International Society for Heart and
Lung Transplantation, as of January 2019, over 14,000 heart transplants had been performed on children in the world, with about
400 transplants annually—a quarter of these in children <1 year of
age. Survival rates have improved significantly over time, with most
of the improvement occurring in the early period after transplant.
This period continues to the associated with the greatest risk of
death, and many patients who survive the first year after transplant
are alive 20 years later (Fig. 492.1). Indeed, a growing number of
patients receiving a heart transplant in childhood are approaching
their 15-­, 20-­, and 30-­year posttransplant anniversaries. Current
(2011-2023) 1-year survival is ~90% and 5-year survival ~80%.

INDICATIONS

Heart transplantation is performed (1) in infants and children with
end-­stage cardiomyopathy who have become refractory to medical
therapy, (2) in patients with previously repaired or palliated congenital heart disease (CHD) who have developed ventricular dysfunction or other nonoperable late-­term complications, and (3)
less frequently in patients with complex CHD—pulmonary atresia
with intact septum and coronary arterial stenoses and some forms
of hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS)—for whom standard
surgical procedures are extremely high risk. Additionally, retransplantation accounts for approximately 5% of transplants annually.

<1 Year (N = 2,159)

1-5 Years (N = 2,128)

6-10 Years (N = 1,430)

11-17 Years (N = 3,826)

Overall (N = 9,543)
0
0

B

2

4

6

8

10

12
14
Years

16

18

20

22

24

Fig. 492.1 A, Survival after pediatric heart transplantation comparing
current and past eras. B, Long-­term survival among patients that lived
to 1-­yr post-­transplant. NA, Not applicable. (From Rossano JW, Dipchand AI, Edwards LB, et al. The Registry of the International Society
for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Nineteenth Pediatric Heart Transplantation Report—2016. Focus theme: primary diagnostic indications
for transplant. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2016;35[10]:1185–1195, Figs.
6 and 7.)

Cardiomyopathies account for >50% of heart transplants in pediatric patients older than 1 year, with the percentage of patients with
previously repaired complex CHD at approximately 30%. In infants
younger than 1 year, CHD previously represented >80% of transplants; this has decreased to 60% as standard surgical results for
complex CHD (e.g., HLHS) have improved.

RECIPIENT AND DONOR SELECTION

Potential heart transplant recipients must be free of serious noncardiac medical problems such as neurologic disease, active systemic
infection, severe hepatic or renal disease, and severe malnutrition. Many children with ventricular dysfunction are at risk for
the development of pulmonary vascular disease, which, if severe
enough, would also preclude heart transplantation. Therefore pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) is measured at cardiac catheterization in heart transplant candidates, both at rest and, if elevated,
in response to vasodilators. Patients with fixed elevated PVR above
6 index Wood units are at higher risk for heart transplantation and
may be considered candidates for heart-­lung transplantation (see
Chapter 492.2). However, with advances in postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension (e.g., inhaled nitric oxide),
many patients with moderate elevation in PVR can undergo heart
transplant alone. A comprehensive social services evaluation is an
important component of the recipient evaluation. Because of the
complex posttransplantation medical regimen, the family must
have a history of compliance. Detailed informed consent must be
obtained, indicating that the family (and, if old enough, the patient)
understand the lifelong commitment to immunosuppressive medication and careful monitoring.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2902 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
100

1982-1989 (N = 908)

1990-2003 (N = 5,637)

2004-2008 (N = 2,442)

2009-6/2014 (N = 3,104)

B

Survival (%)

75

50
p-values significant at p < 0.05
25

Median survival (years): 1982-1989 = 9.8; 1990-2003 = 14.5;
2004-2008 = NA; 2009-6/2014 = NA
0
0

A

4

6

8

10

12
14
Years

16

18

20

22

24

100

C

A

2

Median survival (years): <1 = NA; 1-5 = 21.5;
6-10 = 16.5; 11-17 = 15.7

Fig. 491.5 Commonly used ventricular assist devices in children. A,
75
Survival (%)

Paracorporeal pneumatic pulsatile Berlin Heart EXCOR. B and C, Continuous flow devices: (B) HeartMate3; (C) HeartWare HVAD. (A courtesy
Berlin Heart, LLC; B from St. Jude Medical; C courtesy Medtronic, Inc.)

50
All pair-wise comparisons were significant at p < 0.05.
25

Chapter 492

Pediatric Heart and Heart-­
Lung Transplantation
492.1 Pediatric Heart Transplantation
Danielle S. Burstein and Joseph W. Rossano
Pediatric heart transplantation is considered the standard therapy that offers long-­term survival for end-­stage heart disease in
children. In adults, ventricular assist devices (VADs) are usually
employed as a long-­term therapy for patients not eligible for heart
transplantation, but in children the vast majority of VADs are used
as a bridge to transplantation as opposed to an alternative to transplantation. According to the International Society for Heart and
Lung Transplantation, as of January 2019, over 14,000 heart transplants had been performed on children in the world, with about
400 transplants annually—a quarter of these in children <1 year of
age. Survival rates have improved significantly over time, with most
of the improvement occurring in the early period after transplant.
This period continues to the associated with the greatest risk of
death, and many patients who survive the first year after transplant
are alive 20 years later (Fig. 492.1). Indeed, a growing number of
patients receiving a heart transplant in childhood are approaching
their 15-­, 20-­, and 30-­year posttransplant anniversaries. Current
(2011-2023) 1-year survival is ~90% and 5-year survival ~80%.

INDICATIONS

Heart transplantation is performed (1) in infants and children with
end-­stage cardiomyopathy who have become refractory to medical
therapy, (2) in patients with previously repaired or palliated congenital heart disease (CHD) who have developed ventricular dysfunction or other nonoperable late-­term complications, and (3)
less frequently in patients with complex CHD—pulmonary atresia
with intact septum and coronary arterial stenoses and some forms
of hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS)—for whom standard
surgical procedures are extremely high risk. Additionally, retransplantation accounts for approximately 5% of transplants annually.

<1 Year (N = 2,159)

1-5 Years (N = 2,128)

6-10 Years (N = 1,430)

11-17 Years (N = 3,826)

Overall (N = 9,543)
0
0

B

2

4

6

8

10

12
14
Years

16

18

20

22

24

Fig. 492.1 A, Survival after pediatric heart transplantation comparing
current and past eras. B, Long-­term survival among patients that lived
to 1-­yr post-­transplant. NA, Not applicable. (From Rossano JW, Dipchand AI, Edwards LB, et al. The Registry of the International Society
for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Nineteenth Pediatric Heart Transplantation Report—2016. Focus theme: primary diagnostic indications
for transplant. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2016;35[10]:1185–1195, Figs.
6 and 7.)

Cardiomyopathies account for >50% of heart transplants in pediatric patients older than 1 year, with the percentage of patients with
previously repaired complex CHD at approximately 30%. In infants
younger than 1 year, CHD previously represented >80% of transplants; this has decreased to 60% as standard surgical results for
complex CHD (e.g., HLHS) have improved.

RECIPIENT AND DONOR SELECTION

Potential heart transplant recipients must be free of serious noncardiac medical problems such as neurologic disease, active systemic
infection, severe hepatic or renal disease, and severe malnutrition. Many children with ventricular dysfunction are at risk for
the development of pulmonary vascular disease, which, if severe
enough, would also preclude heart transplantation. Therefore pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) is measured at cardiac catheterization in heart transplant candidates, both at rest and, if elevated,
in response to vasodilators. Patients with fixed elevated PVR above
6 index Wood units are at higher risk for heart transplantation and
may be considered candidates for heart-­lung transplantation (see
Chapter 492.2). However, with advances in postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension (e.g., inhaled nitric oxide),
many patients with moderate elevation in PVR can undergo heart
transplant alone. A comprehensive social services evaluation is an
important component of the recipient evaluation. Because of the
complex posttransplantation medical regimen, the family must
have a history of compliance. Detailed informed consent must be
obtained, indicating that the family (and, if old enough, the patient)
understand the lifelong commitment to immunosuppressive medication and careful monitoring.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 492 u Pediatric Heart and Heart-­Lung Transplantation 2903
Donor shortage is a serious problem for both adults and children. At the national registry of transplant recipients in the United
States, the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS), allografts
are matched by ABO blood group and body weight. However, ABO
matching may not be required for young infants less than 2 years of
age because of the immaturity of the immune system. Patients, especially with a history of CHD, who have undergone prior operations
may have antibodies against human leukocyte antigens (HLAs).
Patients with elevated anti-­HLA antibodies are at risk for a positive
cross match and early graft dysfunction. These antibodies can also
contribute to late graft dysfunction through antibody-­mediated
rejection and development of cardiac allograft vasculopathy. For
patients with these elevated antibodies, there are strategies to avoid
a positive cross match through a prospective cross match or a virtual cross match, although this may prolong the waiting list time.
There are also desensitization therapies that may reduce circulating
HLA antibody production, although they do not affect historical
antibodies, and current data remain unclear how effective desensitization therapy is for reducing posttransplant rejection risk. Contraindications to organ donation include prolonged cardiac arrest
with persistent moderate to severe cardiac dysfunction, ongoing
systemic illness or infection, and preexisting severe cardiac disease.
Physicians caring for a patient who may be a potential donor should
always contact the organ donor coordinator at their institution,
who can best judge the appropriateness of organ donation and has
experience in interacting with potential donor families. A history of
resuscitation alone or reparable CHD is not an automatic exclusion
for donation.
The decision of when to place a patient on the transplant waiting
list is based on many factors, including degree of ventricular function, markedly decreased exercise tolerance as determined by cardiopulmonary exercise testing (see Chapter 472.5), poor response
to medical heart failure therapy, multiple hospitalizations for heart
failure, arrhythmia, progressive deterioration in renal or hepatic
function, early stages of pulmonary vascular disease, and poor
nutritional status. Patients with severe ventricular dysfunction are
often started on a regimen of anticoagulation to reduce the risk of
mural thrombosis and thromboembolism. Patients with progressive
heart failure resulting in decreases in end-­organ (renal or hepatic)
function unresponsive to standard pharmacologic treatment may
be candidates for a VAD. The use of these devices has increased dramatically over the past decade, and currently over half of patients
with dilated cardiomyopathy are on VAD support before transplant.
VADs can improve hemodynamics and end-­organ function, allow
for rehabilitation, and allow some patients to be discharged home
on VAD support (see Chapter 491).

PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT

Heart transplantation in children can be performed either with a
biatrial or bicaval anastomosis. In the biatrial anastomosis, both
donor and recipient hearts are excised so that the posterior portions
of the atria containing the venae cavae and pulmonary veins are
left intact. The aorta and pulmonary artery are divided above the
level of the semilunar valves. The anterior portions of the donor’s
atria are then connected to the remaining posterior portions of the
recipient’s atria, thereby avoiding the need for delicate suturing of
the venae cavae or pulmonary veins. Previously, the donor and
recipient great vessels were connected via end-­to-­end anastomoses.
This has been supplanted in many centers by the bicaval anastomosis, with the donor right atrium (and sinus node) left intact and the
suture lines at the superior and inferior vena cavae; the left atrial
connection is still performed as in the biatrial anastomosis.
In the immediate postoperative period, immunosuppression is
achieved with induction therapy that includes an antilymphocyte
therapy for the first 5-­7 days; common agents include antithymocyte globulin (ATG) and the humanized anti–interleukin-­2 receptor
antibodies (basiliximab). Steroids are also commonly used within
the first 5-­7 days and then are often weaned off or discontinued.
Antiproliferative agents (mycophenolate mofetil [MMF]) are also

started immediately after transplant and are transitioned to an oral
compound once enteral medications are tolerated. The most common combinations of chronic immunosuppression are a calcineurin
inhibitor (CNI; tacrolimus or cyclosporine) plus an antiproliferative agent (MMF or azathioprine). Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors (sirolimus or everolimus) may be added to
decrease the dose of CNI if renal insufficiency occurs. Many centers do not use steroids as part of maintenance immunosuppression
but do use them as bolus treatment for acute rejection episodes.
Immunosuppression levels are usually reduced after the first year
posttransplant if there are no significant concerns for rejection. An
ongoing U.S. multicenter pediatric trial called the TEAMMATE
trial is comparing conventional immunosuppression therapy
(tacrolimus and mycophenolate) with low-­dose tacrolimus with
everolimus and mycophenolate to determine which combination
of immunosuppression is better at improving long-­term pediatric
post–heart transplant outcomes.
Many pediatric heart transplant recipients can be extubated from
endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation support within
the first 48 hours after transplantation and are out of bed in several
days. In patients with preexisting high-­risk factors, postoperative
recovery may be considerably prolonged. For those with preoperative pulmonary hypertension, the use of nitric oxide in the postoperative period can allow the donor right ventricle to hypertrophy
in response to elevated pulmonary artery pressures. Occasionally,
these patients will require extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) for primary graft dysfunction.

DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE GRAFT
REJECTION

Posttransplantation management consists of adjusting medications to
maintain a balance between the risk of rejection and the side effects
of over-­immunosuppression. Acute graft rejection is a leading cause
of death in pediatric heart transplant recipients. The incidence of
acute rejection is greatest in the first 3 months after transplantation
and decreases considerably thereafter. Many pediatric patients experience at least one episode of acute rejection in the first 2 years after
transplantation, although modern immunosuppressive regimens
have decreased the frequency of severe rejection episodes. Because
the symptoms of rejection can mimic many routine pediatric illnesses
(e.g., pneumonia, gastroenteritis), the transplant center should be
notified whenever a heart transplant recipient is seen in the pediatrician’s office or emergency department for acute illnesses.
Clinical manifestations of acute rejection may include fatigue,
fluid retention, fever, diaphoresis, abdominal symptoms, and a
gallop rhythm. The electrocardiogram (ECG) may show reduced
voltage, atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, or heart block but is
usually nondiagnostic. X-­ray examination may show an enlarged
heart, effusions, or pulmonary edema but typically only in the more
advanced stages of rejection. Natriuretic peptide levels are usually
increased during episodes of acute rejection. Most rejection episodes occur without any detectable clinical symptoms. On echocardiography, indices of systolic left ventricular function may be
decreased; however, these usually do not deteriorate until rejection
is at least moderately severe. Techniques to evaluate wall thickening
and left ventricular diastolic function have not fulfilled their promise as predictors of early rejection. Most transplant centers do not
rely on echocardiography alone for rejection surveillance.
Myocardial biopsy is the most reliable method of monitoring
patients for rejection. Biopsy specimens are taken from the right
ventricular side of the interventricular septum and can be harvested
relatively safely, even in small infants. In infants, surveillance biopsies are usually performed less often and may be as infrequent as
once or twice per year. Children may have clinically unsuspected
rejection episodes even 5-­10 years after transplantation; most pediatric transplant centers continue routine surveillance biopsies,
although at less frequent intervals. Cardiac MRI evaluation has
been an effective noninvasive method to perform rejection surveillance and to diagnose actual rejection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2904 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Gene expression profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear
cells has been validated in adults as a highly sensitive, moderately
selective method of rejection surveillance. These results have not
been confirmed in children. Other promising current techniques
include the profiling of donor cell–free DNA released in the serum
of patients during episodes of graft injury. Progress has also been
made in genetic profiling as a means to determine which patients
are most at risk for rejection. Children who have single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) leading to greater activity of inflammatory cytokines or decreased activity of regulatory cytokines are at
increased risk of rejection.
Cardiac rejection can be classified as cellular, antibody-­mediated,
or mixed. Criteria for grading cellular rejection are based on a system developed by the International Society for Heart and Lung
Transplantation (ISHLT) that considers the degree of cellular infiltration and whether myocyte necrosis is present. ISHLT rejection
grade 1R is usually mild enough that it is often not treated with
bolus steroids, and many of these episodes resolve spontaneously.
For patients with ISHLT grade 2R rejection, treatment is instituted with either intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone or a “bump
and taper” of oral prednisone. Asymptomatic patients further out
from transplant with normal echocardiograms may be treated as
outpatients. Patients with grade 3R, or anyone with hemodynamic
instability, are admitted to the hospital for IV corticosteroid and
potentially more aggressive antirejection therapy. For rejection episodes resistant to steroid therapy, additional therapeutic regimens
include antilymphocyte preparation (antithymocyte globulin),
methotrexate, or total lymphoid irradiation. Refractory rejection is
often considered a contraindication for retransplantation because
of the relatively poor outcomes compared with other indications for
retransplantation.
Criteria for grading antibody-­mediated rejection are based on
a system developed by the ISHLT that considers histologic and
immunopathologic findings. In contrast to cellular rejection,
antibody-­
mediated rejection is mediated by circulating donor-­
specific antibodies (DSAs) and can be detected by immunostaining of the biopsy specimen for the complement component C4d,
for macrophages expressing CD68, and for evidence of histologic

50
CAV

Acute rejection

Infection (non-CMV)

Graft failure

Percentage of deaths

40

30

20

COMPLICATIONS OF IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
Infection

Infection is also a leading cause of death in pediatric transplant
patients (Fig. 492.2). The incidence of infection is greatest in the
first 3 months after transplantation, when immunosuppressive
doses are highest. Viral infections are most common and account
for as many as 25% of infectious episodes. Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
infection was once a leading cause of morbidity and mortality and
may occur as a primary infection in patients without previous exposure to the virus or as a reactivation. Severe CMV infection can be
disseminated or associated with pneumonitis or gastroenteritis and
may provoke an episode of acute graft rejection or graft coronary
disease. Most centers use IV ganciclovir or CMV immune globulin (Cytogam), or both, as prophylaxis in any patient receiving a
heart from a donor who is positive for CMV or in any recipient who
has serologic evidence of previous CMV disease. Oral preparations
of ganciclovir with improved absorption profiles are available for
chronic therapy, usually for 3-­6 months after transplant, and have
largely replaced IV preparations for prophylaxis. These regimens
have significantly reduced the burden of CMV disease in heart
transplant patients. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) enhances
the ability to diagnose CMV infection and monitor the efficacy of
therapy serially.
Most normal childhood viral illnesses are well tolerated and do
not usually require special treatment. Otitis media and routine
upper respiratory tract infections can be treated in the outpatient
setting, although fever or symptoms that last beyond the usual
course require further investigation. Gastroenteritis, especially
with vomiting, can result in greatly reduced absorption of immunosuppressive medications and provoke a rejection episode. In this
setting, drug levels should be closely monitored and use of IV medications considered. Gastroenteritis can also be a sign of rejection,
so a high index of suspicion must always be maintained. Varicella
is another childhood illness of concern for immunosuppressed
patients. If a heart transplant recipient acquires clinical varicella
infection, treatment with IV acyclovir usually attenuates the illness.
Bacterial infections occur next in frequency after viral, with the lung
the most common site of infection, followed by blood, urinary tract,
and less often, the sternotomy site. Other sources of posttransplantation
infection include fungi and protozoa. Many centers use trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole for prophylaxis during the first several months after
transplant to prevent Pneumocystis jiroveci infection.

Growth Stunting

10

0

damage. Antibody-­mediated rejection is less responsive to standard
therapies for acute cellular rejection (e.g., bolus corticosteroids) and
has been treated with plasmapheresis, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), the anti–CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab, and
the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, all with mixed results. The
long-­term outcome of patients with persistent DSAs or antibody-­
mediated rejection is poor, with many having early graft failure and
premature development of graft vasculopathy.

0-30 Days
(N = 256)

31 Days 1 Year
(N = 297)

>1 Year 3 Years
(N = 236)

>3 Years 5 Years
(N = 204)

>5 Years 10 Years
(N = 366)

>10 Years
(N = 408)

Fig. 492.2 Major causes of death after pediatric heart transplantation by time since transplant. CAV, Cardiac allograft vasculopathy; CMV,
cytomegalovirus. (From Rossano JW, Dipchand AI, Edwards LB, et al.
The Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Nineteenth Pediatric Heart Transplantation Report—2016. Focus theme: primary diagnostic indications for transplant. J Heart Lung
Transplant. 2016;35[10]:1185–1195, Fig. 10.)

Patients requiring chronic corticosteroid therapy usually have
decreased linear growth. Thus many pediatric transplant programs
aim for steroid-­free immunosuppression within the first year after
transplant. In patients who experience rejection when steroids
are withdrawn, alternate-­day corticosteroid regimens may result
in improved linear growth. Total lymphoid irradiation has also
shown promise as a steroid-­sparing protocol. Despite these concerns, the majority of long-­term survivors of pediatric heart transplantation have normal growth.

Hypertension

Hypertension is common in patients treated with CNIs, caused by a combination of plasma volume expansion and defective renal sodium excretion. Corticosteroids usually potentiate calcineurin-­induced hypertension.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 492 u Pediatric Heart and Heart-­Lung Transplantation 2905
Renal Function

Chronic administration of cyclosporine or tacrolimus can lead to a
tubulointerstitial nephropathy in adults, but severe renal dysfunction is less common in children. Most pediatric patients gradually
have an increase in serum creatinine in the first year after transplantation; if renal dysfunction occurs, it usually responds to a
decrease in CNI dosage. The addition of sirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, allows a reduction in CNI dose in patients with renal dysfunction, although it is unclear whether this strategy leads to long-­term
improved renal function. Infection with BK virus, a growing problem in renal transplant patients, has been described as a source of
renal dysfunction in heart transplant patients. Fortunately, pediatric heart transplant patients infrequently require dialysis or renal
transplantation.

Neurologic Complications

Neurologic side effects of cyclosporine and tacrolimus include tremor,
myalgias, paresthesias, and, rarely, seizures. These complications can
be treated with reduced doses of medication and occasionally with oral
magnesium supplementation. A rare form of encephalopathy known as
posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) can occur in
patients taking CNIs (cyclosporine or tacrolimus). PRES presents with
hypertension, headaches, and seizures, requires MRI for diagnosis, and
is usually managed by changing CNI or, in rare cases, eliminating CNIs
totally in favor of other immunosuppressive agents (e.g., sirolimus,
MMF).

Tumors

One of the serious complications limiting long-­term survival in
pediatric heart transplant patients is the risk of neoplastic disease.
The most common is posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease
(PTLD), a condition associated with Epstein-­
Barr virus (EBV)
infection. Patients who are EBV seronegative at transplant (usually infants and young children) are at increased risk of developing
PTLD if they subsequently seroconvert, acquiring the virus either
from the donor organ or from primary infection. Unlike true cancer, many cases of PTLD respond to a reduction in immunosuppression. A monoclonal antibody directed against the CD20 antigen
on activated lymphocytes (rituximab), in conjunction with steroids
and cyclophosphamide therapy, has been effective against some
forms of PTLD. However, PTLD can behave more aggressively, and
many patients eventually require chemotherapy. An increased risk
of skin cancer requires that children use appropriate precautions
when exposed to sunlight.

Cardiac Allograft Vasculopathy

Cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) is a disease of the coronary
arteries that occurs in approximately 20% of children 5 years after
transplant. The cause is still unclear, although it is thought to be a
form of immunologically mediated vessel injury. Multiple factors,
including rejection episodes, infections, hypercholesterolemia,
and hyperglycemia, are thought to increase the risk of CAV. Unlike
native coronary atherosclerosis, CAV is a diffuse process with a high
degree of distal vessel involvement. Because the transplanted heart
has been denervated, patients may not experience symptoms such
as angina pectoris during ischemic episodes, and the initial manifestation may be cardiovascular collapse or sudden death. Most centers perform coronary angiography annually to screen for coronary
abnormalities; some also perform coronary intravascular ultrasound
in larger children and adolescents. Standard coronary artery bypass
procedures are usually not helpful because of the diffuse nature of
the process, although transcatheter stenting can sometimes be effective for isolated lesions. For patients with severe CAV, repeat heart
transplantation has been the only effective treatment. Thus prevention has been the focus of most current research. The cell-­c ycle

inhibitors sirolimus and everolimus have been shown to decrease
coronary arterial intimal thickening in adult transplant patients.
Cholesterol-­lowering HMG-­C oA (3-­hydroxy-­3-­methyl-­coenzyme
A) reductase inhibitors (e.g., pravastatin, atorvastatin) have been
associated with a lower risk of CAV.

Other Complications

Corticosteroids usually result in cushingoid facies, steroid acne, and
striae. Cyclosporine can cause a subtle change in facial features, such
as hypertrichosis and gingival hyperplasia. These cosmetic features
can be particularly disturbing to adolescents and may be the motivation for noncompliance, one of the leading risks for late morbidity and
mortality. Most of these cosmetic complications are dose related and
improve as immunosuppressive medications are weaned. Tacrolimus
does not have the cosmetic side effects of cyclosporine. Osteoporosis
and aseptic necrosis are additional reasons for reducing the steroid
dosage as soon as possible. Diabetes and pancreatitis are rare but serious complications.

Rehabilitation

Despite the potential risks of immunosuppression, the prospect
for rehabilitation in pediatric heart transplant recipients is excellent; most have no functional limitations in their daily lives. They
can attend daycare or school and participate in competitive sports
and other age-­appropriate activities. Standardized measurements of
ventricular function are close to normal. Because the transplanted
heart is denervated, the increase in heart rate and cardiac output
during exercise is slower in transplant recipients, and maximal
heart rate and cardiac output responses are mildly attenuated. These
subtle abnormalities are rarely noticeable by the patient.
Growth of the transplanted heart is excellent, although a mild
degree of ventricular hypertrophy is often seen, even years after
transplantation. The sites of atrial and great vessel anastomoses
usually grow without the development of obstruction. In neonates
who undergo transplantation for HLHS, however, juxtaductal aortic
coarctation may recur.
A serious problem with noncompliance may occur once patients
reach adolescence, and life-­threatening rejection may result. Early
intervention by social workers, counselors, and psychologists may be
able to reduce this risk.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

492.2 Heart-­Lung and Lung Transplantation
Samuel B. Goldfarb, Danielle S. Burstein, and
Joseph W. Rossano
More than 700 heart-­lung and 2,500 lung (single or double) pediatric transplants have been performed and reported to ISHLT, with
>100 procedures performed annually. The majority of these are lung
transplantation, with only three heart-­lung transplants reported in
2017. Only 16 heart-lung transplants have been performed in the
United States in the past 5 years compared to over 140 lung transplants during this same time frame. Primary indications for lung
transplantation include cystic fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension,
interstitial lung disease, surfactant deficiencies, and retransplant.
Indications for heart-­lung transplant include complex CHD along
with either pulmonary parenchymal or vascular disease. Patients
with normal hearts are candidates for lung transplantation even
in the setting of right ventricular dysfunction. This had led to the
marked decline in heart-­lung transplant procedures in the current
era. In some patients with CHD, double-­lung transplantation can
be performed in combination with repair of intracardiac defects.
Patients with cystic fibrosis are not candidates for single-­lung grafts

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2906 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
because of the risk of infection from the diseased contralateral lung.
Patients are selected according to many of the same criteria as for
heart transplant recipients (see Chapter 492.1).
Posttransplant immunosuppression is usually achieved with a
triple-­drug regimen, combining a CNI (cyclosporine or tacrolimus)
with an antiproliferative agent (MMF or azathioprine) and prednisone. Most patients receive induction therapy with an antithymocyte or anti–T-­cell preparation. Unlike patients with isolated heart
transplants, patients with lung or heart-­lung transplants cannot be
weaned totally off steroids. Prophylaxis against P. jiroveci infection
is achieved with trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole or aerosolized
pentamidine. Ganciclovir and CMV immune globulin prophylaxis
are used as in heart transplant recipients (see Chapter 492.1). Antifungal medications are used in the perioperative and posttransplant
periods in patients who have pretransplant colonization.
Pulmonary rejection is common in lung or heart-­lung transplant recipients, whereas heart rejection is encountered much less
often than in patients with isolated heart transplants. Acute cellular rejection (ACR) occurs in approximately 10–30% of patients
in the first year after transplant depending on the recipient’s age.
Younger recipients have a lower incidence of ACR. Antibody-­
mediated rejection (AMR) and chronic lung allograph dysfunction
(CLAD) are other forms of rejection. Symptoms of lung rejection
may include fever and fatigue, although many episodes are minimally symptomatic. Signs of rejection could include changes in lung
function testing and radiographic findings. Surveillance for acute
rejection is performed by monitoring pulmonary function (forced
vital capacity; forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1]; forced
expiratory flow, midexpiratory phase [FEF25–75%]), systemic arterial
oxygen tension, chest radiographs, chest CT, transbronchial biopsy,
and open lung biopsy. The gold standard for ACR is tissue diagnosis, generally performed with transbronchial biopsies. AMR is
diagnosed based on findings of donor-­specific antibodies and tissue biopsy often associated with graft dysfunction. CLAD is a form
of chronic rejection. It can present as an obstructive lung disease in
the form of obliterative bronchiolitis. CLAD can also present with
significant pulmonary fibrosis in the form of restrictive allograft
dysfunction (RAD). In heart-­lung transplant recipients, hearts are
assessed for rejection similar to the approach described in Chapter
492.1.
Actuarial survival rates after lung or heart-­lung transplantation
in children are currently 75–80% at 1 year and 50% at 5 years after
transplant; improved patient selection and postoperative management are continually improving these survival statistics from prior
eras. In the analysis of survival at 5 years conditional on survival
at 12 months, rates significantly improve for both lung and heartlung regardless of underlying condition. One year conditional survival rates at 5 years for both are roughly 70%. Some groups, such
as patients with CHD in the absence of Eisenmenger syndrome,
have particularly poor outcomes with transplant. Graft failure
and infection are the leading cause of early death, whereas a form
of chronic rejection in the form of CLAD or RAD accounts for
almost 50% of cases of late mortality. Other causes of early morbidity and mortality include technical complications, multiorgan failure, primary graft dysfunction, and cardiovascular causes.
Additional late complications include the development of late graft
failure, malignancies, infection, and other side effects of chronic
immunosuppression.
Postoperative indices of cardiopulmonary function and exercise
capacity show significant improvement. Problems of donor availability
are even more severe with lung transplantation than with isolated heart
transplantation. However, significant advances in ex vivo lung perfusion have great potential to expand the number of organs available for
transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 8

Diseases of the Peripheral
Vascular System
Chapter 493

Diseases of the Blood
Vessels (Aneurysms and
Fistulas)
493.1 Aneurysms
Daniel Bernstein
See also Chapter 208.
Aneurysms of the coronaries and occasionally the systemic arteries
may complicate Kawasaki disease and are the leading cause of morbidity in this disease (Figs. 493.1 and 493.2). Persistent moderate to
large aneurysms carry several risks: embolism and thromboembolism
(a clot developing in the aneurysm because of stagnant blood flow and
obstructing flow and/or breaking off and traveling more distally down
the coronary, resulting in myocardial ischemia/infarction) and stenosis
(the distal end of the aneurysm tends to become narrowed over time,
limiting downstream coronary blood flow). Management includes
anticoagulation to prevent thrombosis and β blockers to reduce myocardial oxygen requirements (see Chapter 210).
COVID-­19–associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) typically occurs a few weeks after active SARS-­CoV-­2 infection and can cause coronary artery dilation and aneurysms, in addition to
other significant cardiac manifestations (ventricular dysfunction, arrhythmias, and conduction abnormalities; see Chapters 311 and 449.1).
Other than in Kawasaki disease and MIS-­C, aneurysms are not common in children and occur most frequently in the aorta in association
with coarctation of the aorta, patent ductus arteriosus, Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome type IV (vascular ecchymotic form), hyper-­IgE syndrome,
Marfan syndrome, and the four forms of Loeys-­Dietz syndrome (see
Chapter 641). Aneurysms may be seen in the arterial tortuosity syndrome and the multisystem smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome
(MSMDS) (see Chapter 493.4). MSMDS is characterized by congenital mydriasis, patent ductus arteriosus, aortic and other arterial
aneurysms, as well as moyamoya-like cerebrovascular disease and pulmonary hypertension. The affected gene is ACTA2. Aneurysms may
also occur secondary to an infected embolus; infection contiguous to
a blood vessel; trauma; congenital abnormalities of vessel structure,
especially the medial wall; and arteritis, including polyarteritis nodosa,
Behçet syndrome, and Takayasu arteritis (see Chapter 210.2).

493.2 Arteriovenous Fistulas
Daniel Bernstein
Arteriovenous fistulas may be limited and small or may be large and
extensive, producing systemic complications (see Chapters 554 and
691). The most common sites in infants and children are within the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 493 u Diseases of the Blood Vessels (Aneurysms and Fistulas)

2907

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Ao

A

B
Fig. 493.1 Two-­dimensional echocardiograms comparing a normal left

main coronary artery (arrow in A) with a giant coronary artery aneurysm
(outlined by cross marks in B) in a patient with Kawasaki disease. Ao, Aorta.

Ao

Fig. 493.2 Pathologic specimen showing giant aneurysm of left main
coronary artery (arrow). Ao, Ascending aorta.

cranium, in the liver, in the lung, in the extremities, and in vessels
in or near the thoracic wall. These fistulas, although usually congenital, may follow trauma or may be a manifestation of hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-­Weber-­Rendu disease). Femoral
arteriovenous fistulas are a rare complication of percutaneous femoral catheterization.

Clinical symptoms occur only in association with large arteriovenous communications when arterial blood flows into a low-­
pressure venous system without the resistance of the capillary bed;
local venous pressure is increased, and arterial flow distal to the
fistula is decreased. Systemic arterial resistance falls because of the
runoff of blood through the fistula. Compensatory mechanisms
include tachycardia and increased stroke volume so that cardiac
output rises. Total blood volume is also increased. In large fistulas,
left ventricular dilation, a widened pulse pressure, and high-­output
heart failure can occur. CT, MRI, or injection of contrast material
into an artery proximal to the fistula confirms the diagnosis.
Large intracranial arteriovenous fistulas most often occur in
newborn infants in association with a vein of Galen malformation.
The large intracranial left-­to-­right shunt results in heart failure secondary to the demand for high cardiac output. Patients with smaller
communications may not have cardiovascular manifestations but
may later be disposed to hydrocephalus (see Chapter 631.9) or seizures. The diagnosis can often be made by auscultation of a continuous murmur over the cranium. Older children with more diffuse
intracranial arteriovenous malformations may be recognized on the
basis of intracranial calcification and high cardiac output without
cardiac failure.
Coronary arteriovenous fistulas can develop between a coronary
artery and any of the cardiac chambers (coronary cameral fistula)
or great vessels. These fistulas can result in steal of blood away from
the heart muscle downstream of the fistula resulting in ischemia
and, in rare cases, can even cause obstruction of ventricular inflow
caused by physical interference with atrioventricular valve function.
Hepatic arteriovenous fistulas may be generalized or localized in
the liver and may be hemangioendotheliomas or cavernous hemangiomas. The fistula may be located between the hepatic artery and the
ductus venosus or portal vein. Congenital hemorrhagic telangiectasia
may also be present. Large arteriovenous fistulas are associated with
increased cardiac output and heart failure. Hepatomegaly is usual, and
systolic or continuous murmurs may be audible over the liver.
Peripheral arteriovenous fistulas generally involve the extremities and can be associated with disfigurement, swelling of the
extremity, and visible hemangiomas. Their presence can be complicated by breathing difficulties if located near the upper airways and
causing obstruction. Because only a small minority results in large
arterial runoff, cardiac failure is uncommon.

TREATMENT

Medical management of heart failure is initially helpful in neonates
with these conditions; with time, the size of the shunt may diminish and symptoms spontaneously regress. Hemangiomas of the liver
often eventually disappear completely. Large liver hemangiomas
have been treated with corticosteroids, β blockers, ε-­aminocaproic
acid, interferon, local compression, embolization, or local irradiation; the beneficial effects of these management options are
not firmly established because individual patients display marked
variation in clinical course without treatment. Transcatheter closure is becoming the treatment of choice for many patients with a
symptomatic arteriovenous fistula. Embolic agents that have been
used include detachable balloons, steel (Gianturco) coils, plugs, and
liquid tissue adhesives (cyanoacrylate). Often, multiple procedures
are necessary before flow is significantly reduced. Gamma knife
radiosurgery has been used successfully in patients with cerebral
arteriovenous malformations. Surgical removal of a large fistula
may be attempted in patients with severe cardiac failure and lack
of improvement with medical treatment. Surgical treatment may be
contraindicated or unsuccessful when the lesion is extensive and
diffuse or is located in a position where adjoining tissue may be
injured during the surgery or related procedures. β-­Adrenergic
blockers such as propranolol have dramatically changed the treatment for cutaneous hemangiomas, with excellent results.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2908 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Fig. 493.3 Lateral radiograph of the neonate showing calcification of
the descending aorta and its bifurcation (arrows). (From Karthikeyan G.
Generalized arterial calcification of infancy. J Pediatr. 2013;162:1074,
Fig 3.)

calcification of muscular arteries with fibrotic myointimal proliferation and subsequent vascular stenosis leading to tissue ischemia, poor function, or infarction. Diffuse arterial calcification
may begin in utero, leading to hydrops fetalis; in the neonate,
diffuse arterial calcification leads to respiratory distress and heart
failure or myocardial infarction (coronary, pulmonary arteries),
hypertension (renal arteries), and poor femoral pulses (aorta, femoral arteries).
Pathogenic variants in the ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase 1 gene
(ENPP1) are noted in 75% of patients. Serum calcium, phosphate, and
alkaline phosphatase levels are normal; the vascular calcification may
be seen on plain x-­ray films (Fig. 493.3), ultrasonography (Fig. 493.4),
or CT scans (Fig. 493.5), which may reveal calcifications not visible on
plain films.
A subset of patients with GACI have monoallelic or biallelic
pathogenic variants in the adenosine triphosphate–binding cassette subfamily C number 6 gene (ABCC6), which is responsible for
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE). PXE, an autosomal recessive
disorder, is classically associated with a later onset of ectopic mineralization of elastic fibers in the skin, eyes, joints, and arteries. In
addition, some surviving infants with ENPP1 variant develop PXE
symptoms involving the skin and retina (angioid streaking).
Infants with GACI have been treated with bisphosphonates
with variable success. In addition, some survivors with the ENPP1
variant have developed hypophosphatemic-­
hyperphosphaturic
rickets.
In the absence of stroke or encephalomalacia, most survivors
are developmentally normal. In some survivors the vascular calcification resolves and is replaced by fibrosis. The differential diagnosis
includes Singleton-­Merten syndrome (aortic calcification, dental
anomalies, osteopenia), hypervitaminosis D, hyperparathyroidism, congenital syphilis (aortitis), twin-­twin transfusion syndrome
(recipient), and idiopathic iliac artery calcification of infancy.

ARTERIAL CALCIFICATIONS CAUSED BY
DEFICIENCY OF CD73

This rare autosomal recessive disorder, caused by pathogenic variants
in the 5-­exonucleotidase CD73 (NT5E), results in joint and arterial
(lower-­extremity) calcification in adults. Patients present with intermittent claudication and joint pain. Onset is probably before adulthood, since patients may be undiagnosed with nonspecific findings
during adolescence.

493.4 Arterial Tortuosity
Robert M. Kliegman
Fig. 493.4 Ultrasonography of abdominal aorta showing calcification
of descending aorta and its branches (arrows). (From Karthikeyan G. Generalized arterial calcification of infancy. J Pediatr. 2013;162:1074, Fig. 1.)

493.3 Generalized Arterial Calcification of
Infancy (Idiopathic Infantile Arterial
Calcification)
Robert M. Kliegman
Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is a rare
and often lethal autosomal recessive disorder characterized by

Arterial tortuosity may be seen in many different diseases and genes
(Table 493.1). These disorders are usually recognized by their phenotype, and all may present during childhood. Tortuosity is best
defined by magnetic resonance angiography (Fig. 493.6). When
present, it often increases the risk for early cardiovascular morbidity for patients with Marfan or Loeys-­Dietz syndrome.
Arterial tortuosity syndrome is another genetic arteriopathy
caused by pathogenic variants in the SCL2A10 gene. It has many features of other connective tissue diseases, including hyperextensible
and soft velvety skin, high-­arched palate, micrognathia, abdominal
hernias, and joint hypermobility. The prognosis for patients with
arterial tortuosity syndrome is quite variable, but the presence of
vascular stenosis is associated with a poorer prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 493 u Diseases of the Blood Vessels (Aneurysms and Fistulas)

2909

SCA
ITA
ETT

MPA
LM

LtPA

RtPA

LtPA

RCA

AA

CA

SA

LtRA

LtRA
SMA
SMA
CIA
Rt
CIA

LtCIA
EIA

Fig. 493.5 Coronal maximum intensity projection (MIP) CT scans demonstrate an endotracheal tube (ETT) and extensive vascular calcifications.
PA, Pulmonary artery; SA, splenic artery; RA, renal artery; CIA, common iliac artery; BA, brachial artery; CA, celiac axis; SMA, superior mesenteric
artery; SCA, subclavian artery. (From Bolster F, Ali Z, Southall P, et al. Generalized arterial calcification of infancy—findings at post-­mortem computed
tomography and autopsy. Forensic Sci Int. 2015;254:e7–e12, Fig 3.)

Table 493.1  Genetic Disorders Associated with Aortic
Disease and Arterial Tortuosity
GENE

DISORDER

TGFBR1

Loeys-­Dietz syndrome, FTAAD

TGFBR2

Loeys-­Dietz syndrome, FTAAD

FBN1

Marfan syndrome

SMAD3

Osteoarthritis-­aneurysm
syndrome, FTAAD

SLC2A10

Arterial tortuosity syndrome

TGFB2

FTAAD

PRKG1

FTAAD

FBLN4/EFEMP2

Cutis laxa

ATP7A

Occipital horn syndrome,
Menkes syndrome

Monosomy X/mosaic monosomy
X

Turner syndrome

FTAAD

Familial aortic aneurysm and
dissection

ACTA2

Multisystem smooth muscle
dysfunction syndrome

A

B

Fig. 493.6 Examples of vertebral artery tortuosity in Marfan syndrome
with FBN1 pathogenic variant (A) and Loeys-­Dietz syndrome with a
TGFBR2 mutation (B). (From Morris SA. Arterial tortuosity in genetic
arteriopathies. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2015;30:587–593, Fig 1.)

FTAAD, Familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection.
Adapted from Morris SA. Arterial tortuosity in genetic arteriopathies. Curr Opin Cardiol.
2015;30:587–590, Table 1, p. 590.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2910 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System

Chapter 494

Systemic Hypertension
Ian R. Macumber and Joseph T. Flynn
Hypertensive children, although frequently asymptomatic, already
may manifest evidence of target organ damage. Up to 40% of hypertensive children have left ventricular hypertrophy, and hypertensive children have increased carotid intima-­to-­media thickness, a
marker of early atherosclerosis. Primary (essential) hypertension
occurring during childhood often continues into adulthood. Children with blood pressure (BP) >90th percentile exhibit a 2.4-­fold
greater risk of having hypertension as adults. Similarly, almost half
of hypertensive adults had a BP >90th percentile as children. Adolescent hypertension is also an independent predictor of both end-­
stage kidney disease and left ventricular dysfunction in middle-­age
males.

PREVALENCE OF HYPERTENSION IN CHILDREN

In infants and young children, systemic hypertension is uncommon, with a prevalence of <1%, but, when present, often indicates an underlying disease process (secondary hypertension).
Severe and symptomatic hypertension in children is usually caused
by secondary hypertension. In contrast, the prevalence of primary
hypertension, mostly in older school-­age children and adolescents,
has increased in prevalence in parallel with the obesity epidemic.
Estimates are variable, but data from the U.S. National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) show that approximately
9% of American youth have elevated BP and 3–4% have hypertension. A meta-­analysis suggests a similar worldwide prevalence of
hypertension in children. The normative data from the 2017 American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) clinical practice guidelines have
resulted in an overall trend of increased hypertension prevalence.
The influence of obesity on elevated BP is evident in children as
young as 2-­5 years old. Approximately 20% of American youth have
obesity, and up to 10% of these have hypertension.

DEFINITION OF HYPERTENSION

Normal BP in adults is <120/80 mm Hg. Elevated blood pressure is
considered systolic BP of 120-­129 and diastolic BP <80 mm Hg. Stage
1 hypertension is systolic 130-­139 or diastolic 80-­89 mm Hg; Stage 2
hypertension is systolic ≥140 or diastolic ≥90 mm Hg. This definition
is based on potential outcomes because it relates degree of BP elevation with significant likelihood of subsequent cardiovascular events.
Because hypertension-­
associated cardiovascular events (e.g., myocardial infarction, stroke) occur rarely in childhood, the definition of
hypertension in children is statistical and based on the distribution
of BP in healthy children, not outcomes. The AAP clinical practice
guideline on childhood hypertension maintains the same statistical
approach to defining and categorizing childhood BP as in previous guidelines from the National High Blood Pressure Education
Program (NHBPEP):
• Normal BP: BP <90th percentile for age, sex, and height or <120/<80
(systolic/diastolic) mm Hg for adolescents ≥13 years old
• Elevated BP: BP reading ≥90th percentile and <95th percentile for
age, sex, and height or 120-­129/<80 mm Hg for adolescents ≥13
years old
• Hypertension: BP >95th percentile for age, sex, and height or
≥130/80 mm Hg for adolescents ≥13 years old. Hypertensive-­level
BP is further staged as follows:
Stage 1 hypertension: BP >95th percentile for age, sex, and height
up to the 95th percentile + 11 mm Hg or 130-­139/80-­89 mm Hg
for adolescents ≥13 years of age
Stage 2 hypertension: BP ≥95th percentile + 12 mm Hg for age, sex,
and height or >140/90 mm Hg for adolescents ≥13 years of age

The BP cut-­points for adolescents ≥13 years old and use of the
term elevated BP instead of prehypertension were chosen to align
with revised BP cut-­points and terminology found in the American
Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC)
guideline for adult hypertension. The European Society of Hypertension (ESH) pediatric BP guideline also suggested that an absolute BP cutoff be used for adolescents age 16 and older, rather than
using BP percentiles. For these older adolescents, the ESH guidelines define high-­normal BP as 130-­139/85-­89 mm Hg and hypertension as ≥140/90 mm Hg.
The AAP guideline* also contains tables of normative BP values
for children and adolescents based on a reanalysis of the NHBPEP
database, removing all overweight and obese children. This revision
results in BP values that are 2-­3 mm Hg lower than the corresponding BP values in the 2004 NHBPEP Fourth Report, illustrating the
impact of the childhood obesity epidemic on BP in young persons.
The AAP guideline also contains a simplified table of BP values that
may require further evaluation, which should be useful for screening (Table 494.1).

BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT IN CHILDREN

The AAP guideline recommends that children 3 years or older
should have their BP measured during annual preventive visits,
unless the child has risk factors such as obesity, chronic kidney disease (CKD), or diabetes, in whom it should be checked at every
healthcare encounter. In contrast, the ESH pediatric guideline recommends checking BP at every healthcare encounter for all children >3 years old. Selected children <3 years old should also have
their BP measured, including those with a history of prematurity,
congenital heart disease, kidney disease, solid-­organ transplant,
cancer, treatment with drugs known to raise BP, other illnesses
associated with hypertension (e.g., neurofibromatosis, tuberous
sclerosis), or evidence of increased intracranial pressure. The preferred method is by auscultation using a sphygmomanometer (BP)
with a cuff appropriate for the size of the child’s arm.
Elevated readings should be confirmed on repeat visits before
determining that a child is hypertensive. The BP should be measured with the child in the seated position after a period of quiet for
at least 5 minutes, and it is recommended that the BP be checked
3 times, averaging the results. Careful attention to cuff size is necessary to avoid overdiagnosis, because a cuff that is too short or
narrow artificially increases BP readings. An appropriate-­sized cuff
has an inflatable bladder whose length covers 80–100% of the upper
arm circumference (measured midway between the acromion process and olecranon) and whose width is at least 40% of the arm
circumference. A wide variety of cuff sizes should be available in
any medical office where children are routinely seen.
Systolic blood pressure (SBP) is indicated by appearance of the first
Korotkoff sound. Diastolic blood pressure (DBP) has been defined by
consensus as the fifth Korotkoff sound, unless the Korotkoff sounds can
be heard down to 0 mm Hg, in which case the fourth Korotkoff sound
should be reported as the DBP. Palpation is useful for rapid assessment
of SBP, although the palpated BP is generally about 10 mm Hg lower
than that obtained by auscultation. Oscillometric techniques are used
frequently in infants and young children, but they are susceptible to
artifacts and are best for measuring mean arterial pressure (MAP). In
addition, different devices use different proprietary algorithms to back-­
calculate SBP and DBP from the MAP, making comparison between
devices difficult.

Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring

Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) is frequently
used as a tool to assess pediatric hypertension. The patient wears a
device that records BP every 20-­30 minutes throughout a 24-­hour
period, during usual daily activities, including sleep. This monitoring allows calculation of the mean daytime BP, sleep BP, and mean
* https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/140/3/e20171904/38358/ClinicalPractice-Guideline-for-Screening-and.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 494 u Systemic Hypertension
BP over 24 hours. The physician can also determine the proportion
of BP measurements that are in the hypertensive range (BP load)
and whether there is an appropriate decrease in BP during sleep
(nocturnal dip), generally considered normal if there is a decrease
in nocturnal BP of >10% from awake values. The cuff should be
placed on the patient’s nondominant arm. It is recommended that
the patient keep a journal of sleep and awake times, medication timing, and other events that may be relevant to BP readings. Clinicians
should only perform ABPM if they have had specific training in
performing and interpreting the results.
ABPM readings are more strongly correlated with target-­organ
damage in children than casual/office BP readings and are more
sensitive for a diagnosis of hypertension than either manual or
automated office blood pressures. The 2017 AAP guideline strongly
recommends that ABPM be performed on all patients with elevated
office readings to confirm the diagnosis of hypertension. In addition, ABPM is necessary to diagnose white coat hypertension
(elevated office BP but normal ambulatory BP) and masked hypertension (normal office BP but elevated ambulatory BP). It should
be noted that white coat hypertension is not a benign condition,
and children with white coat hypertension may be at increased risk
of developing sustained hypertension in the future. In adults, white
coat hypertension has been associated with higher all-­cause and
cardiovascular mortality compared to normotensive individuals.
ABPM is also a useful tool for evaluating effectiveness of antihypertensive therapy. ABPM is recommended to assess BP patterns
in high-­risk patient populations, such as children with CKD, solid-­
organ transplant, diabetes mellitus, and severe obesity.
ABPM is an extremely useful tool for evaluating and managing hypertension in appropriate patient populations, but it does
have limitations. Not every patient will tolerate APBM, including
younger children (although there are reports of successful ABPM
in toddlers 18 months old) and some children with developmental
delay. Nonetheless, it is usually feasible to perform ABPM in children ≥6-­7 years. The most accepted normative data come from the
German Working Group on Pediatric Hypertension. However, there
are concerns with this dataset: (1) it includes only Central European
White children and thus might not be generalizable to other ethnicities; (2) there were relatively few shorter children included, which

Table 494.1  Simplified Table of Screening Blood Pressure
Values (mm Hg) Requiring Further Evaluation
MALES
AGE (YR)

FEMALES

SYSTOLIC

DIASTOLIC

SYSTOLIC

DIASTOLIC

1

98

2

100

52

98

54

55

101

58

3

101

58

102

60

4

102

60

103

62

5

103

63

104

64

6

105

66

105

67

7

106

68

106

68

8

107

69

107

69

9

107

70

108

71

10

108

72

109

72

11

110

74

111

74

12

113

75

114

75

≥13

120

80

120

80

From Flynn JT, Kaelber DC, Baker-­Smith CM, et al. Clinical practice guideline for
screening and management of high blood pressure in children and adolescents.
Pediatrics. 2017;140(3):e20171904, Table 6.

2911

may limit its application to patients with chronic diseases such as
CKD; and (3) there was very little variability in DBP values, which
is not consistent with data from other BP measurement techniques
showing that DBP varies with both age and height.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Blood pressure is the product of cardiac output (CO) and peripheral
vascular resistance (PVR). An increase in either CO or PVR results in
an increase in BP; if either of these factors increases while the other
decreases, BP may not increase. When hypertension is the result of
another disease process, it is referred to as secondary hypertension.
When no identifiable cause can be found, it is referred to as primary
hypertension.
Secondary hypertension is most common in infants and younger
children. It is most often caused by kidney abnormalities; additional
etiologies include cardiovascular disease and endocrinopathies.
Younger age, severely elevated BP, and symptomatic hypertension
make a secondary cause of hypertension more likely. Many childhood
diseases can be responsible for chronic hypertension (Table 494.2) or
acute/intermittent hypertension (Table 494.3). The most likely cause
varies with age. Hypertension in the premature infant is sometimes

Table 494.2  Conditions Associated with Chronic
Hypertension in Children
RENAL
Recurrent pyelonephritis/renal scarring
Chronic glomerulonephritis
Prematurity
Congenital dysplastic kidney
Polycystic kidney disease
Vesicoureteral reflux nephropathy
Segmental hypoplasia (Ask-­Upmark kidney)
Obstructive kidney disease
Renal tumors
Renal trauma
Systemic lupus erythematosus (other connective tissue diseases)
VASCULAR
Coarctation of thoracic or abdominal aorta
Renal artery lesions (stenosis, fibromuscular dysplasia, thrombosis,
aneurysm)
Umbilical artery catheterization with thrombus formation
Neurofibromatosis (intrinsic or extrinsic narrowing for vascular lumen)
Renal vein thrombosis
Vasculitis (ANCA associated, polyarteritis nodosa, Takayasu arteritis)
Arteriovenous shunt
Williams-­Beuren syndrome
Moyamoya disease
ENDOCRINE
Hyperthyroidism
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (11β-­hydroxylase and 17-­hydroxylase
defect)
Cushing syndrome
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess
Glucocorticoid remedial aldosteronism (familial aldosteronism type 1)
Glucocorticoid resistance (Chrousos syndrome)
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 (Gordon syndrome)
Pheochromocytoma
Other neural crest tumors (neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma,
ganglioneuroma)
Liddle syndrome
Geller syndrome
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Intracranial mass
Hemorrhage
Residual after brain injury
Quadriplegia (dysautonomia)
Sleep disordered breathing
ANCA, Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2912 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 494.3  Conditions Associated with Transient or
Intermittent Hypertension in Children
RENAL
Acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura with nephritis
Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
Acute kidney injury
After renal transplantation (immediately and during episodes of
rejection)
Hypervolemia
Pyelonephritis
Renal trauma
Leukemic infiltration of the kidney
DRUGS AND POISONS
Cocaine
Oral contraceptives
Sympathomimetic agents
Amphetamines
Phencyclidine
Corticosteroids and adrenocorticotropic hormone
Cyclosporine, sirolimus, or tacrolimus treatment after transplantation
Licorice (glycyrrhizic acid)
Lead, mercury, cadmium, thallium
Antihypertensive withdrawal (clonidine, methyldopa, propranolol)
Vitamin D intoxication
Ma-­huang
CENTRAL AND AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Increased intracranial pressure
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Burns
Familial dysautonomia
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
Posterior fossa lesions
Porphyria
Poliomyelitis
Encephalitis
Spinal cord injury (autonomic storm)
MISCELLANEOUS
Preeclampsia
Pain, anxiety
Hypercalcemia
After coarctation repair
White blood cell transfusion
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation

associated with umbilical artery catheterization, renal artery thrombosis, or bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Hypertension during early
childhood may be caused by kidney disease, coarctation of the aorta,
endocrine disorders, or medications.
Kidney disease (e.g., acute or chronic glomerulonephritis, reflux
or obstructive nephropathy, hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, polycystic kidney disease, congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary
tract) and renovascular hypertension account for approximately
90% of children with secondary hypertension. Parenchymal kidney
disease and renal artery stenosis lead to water and sodium retention
thought to be, in part, secondary to increased renin secretion. Coarctation of the aorta must always be considered, even in adolescents.
Obstructive sleep apnea is associated with hypertension in children,
and patients with hypertension and symptoms of obstructive sleep
apnea (snoring, daytime somnolence, insomnia, pauses in breathing) should be referred for polysomnography. Several endocrinopathies are associated with hypertension, usually those involving the
thyroid, parathyroid, and adrenal glands. Systolic hypertension and
tachycardia are common in hyperthyroidism; DBP is not usually
elevated. Hypercalcemia, whether secondary to hyperparathyroidism or other causes, often results in mild elevation in BP because
of an increase in vascular tone. Adrenocortical disorders (e.g.,

aldosterone-­secreting tumors, sodium-­retaining congenital adrenal hyperplasia, Cushing syndrome) may produce hypertension in
patients with increased mineralocorticoid secretion. It is important
to consider conditions associated with real or apparent mineralocorticoid excess and thus a suppressed renin level (with or without
hypokalemia) form of secondary hypertension (Table 494.4 and Fig.
494.1). Pheochromocytomas are catecholamine-­secreting tumors
that give rise to hypertension because of the cardiac and peripheral vascular effects of epinephrine and norepinephrine. Children with pheochromocytoma usually have sustained rather than
the intermittent or exercise-­induced hypertension seen in adults.
Pheochromocytoma develops in approximately 5% of patients with
neurofibromatosis and can also be seen in certain genetic disorders
such as von Hippel-­Lindau disease. Rarely, secondary hypertension can be caused by pseudohyperaldosteronism, which leads to
elevated BP in the face of a suppressed renin level. Such disorders
include Liddle syndrome, apparent mineralocorticoid excess, and
glucocorticoid-­
remediable aldosteronism. Altered sympathetic
tone can be responsible for acute or intermittent elevation of BP in
children with Guillain-­Barré syndrome, poliomyelitis, burns, and
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome. Intracranial lesions also affect sympathetic outflow from the central nervous system.
A number of drugs of misuse, therapeutic agents, and toxins may cause hypertension (Table 494.5). Cocaine may provoke
a rapid increase in BP and can result in seizures or intracranial
hemorrhage. Phencyclidine causes transient hypertension that
may become persistent in chronic abusers. Tobacco use may also
increase BP. Sympathomimetic agents used as nasal decongestants,
appetite suppressants, and stimulants for attention-­deficit disorder
produce peripheral vasoconstriction and varying degrees of cardiac
stimulation. Individuals vary in their susceptibility to these effects.
Oral contraceptives should be suspected as a contributor to elevated
BP in adolescent girls, although the incidence is lower with the use
of low-­estrogen preparations. Immunosuppressant agents such as
cyclosporine and tacrolimus cause hypertension in organ transplant
recipients, and the effect is exacerbated by the coadministration of
corticosteroids. BP may be elevated in patients with poisoning by a
heavy metal (lead, cadmium, mercury).
In older school-­age children and adolescents, primary hypertension becomes increasingly common. These patients often are overweight, have a strong family history of hypertension, and have BP
values at, or only slightly above, the 95th percentile for age. Isolated
systolic hypertension is also more consistent with primary hypertension, whereas diastolic hypertension may suggest a secondary cause.
The cause of primary hypertension is likely to be multifactorial;
obesity, genetic alterations in calcium and sodium transport, vascular smooth muscle reactivity, the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone
system (RAAS), sympathetic nervous system overactivity, and
insulin resistance have been implicated in this disorder. Elevated
uric acid levels may play a role in the pathophysiology of primary
hypertension, and elevated uric acid levels have been associated
with higher SBP and DBP in children. Proof-­of-­concept studies
have confirmed that lowering of uric acid levels results in lower BP
in overweight youth with hypertension or prehypertension. Some
children and adolescents demonstrate salt-­sensitive hypertension.
This is more common in children with primary hypertension and
may be ameliorated by weight loss and sodium restriction.
Normotensive children of hypertensive parents may show abnormal
physiologic responses that are similar to those of their parents. When
subjected to stress or competitive tasks, the offspring of hypertensive
adults, as a group, respond with greater increases in heart rate and BP
than do children of normotensive parents. Similarly, some children of
hypertensive parents may excrete higher levels of urinary catecholamine metabolites or may respond to sodium loading with greater
weight gain and increases in BP than do those without a family history of hypertension. The abnormal responses in children with affected
parents tend to be greater in the Black population than among White
individuals.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 494 u Systemic Hypertension

2913

Table 494.4  Clinical Findings in Patients with Mineralocorticoid Excess
CONDITION

INVOLVED GENE

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

CAH: 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency

CYP11B1
(autosomal recessive)

Early growth spurt initially, then short adult stature,
advanced bone age, premature adrenarche, acne,
precocious puberty in males, amenorrhea/hirsutism/
virilism in females

CAH: 17α-­hydroxylase deficiency

CYP17A1
(autosomal recessive)

Pseudohermaphroditism (male), sexual infantilism (female)

Apparent mineralocorticoid excess

HSD11β; deficiency of 11β hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
(autosomal recessive)

Growth stunting/short stature, nephrocalcinosis,
hypokalemia, low renin, hypoaldosteronism

Liddle syndrome

SCNN1A
SCNN1B
SCNN1G
(autosomal dominant)

Severe hypertension, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis,
muscle weakness

Geller syndrome (exacerbated by
pregnancy)

GOF variant in mineralocorticoid receptor
gene NR3C2
(autosomal dominant)

Early onset of hypertension (before age 20 yr), exacerbated
in pregnancy: hypokalemia, low renin

Glucocorticoid remediable
aldosteronism (GRA) (familial
aldosteronism type 1)

Chimeric gene with ACTH responsive
promoter of 11β hydroxylase fused with
aldosterone synthase gene
(autosomal dominant)

Early onset of hypertension, presence of family history of
mortality or morbidity from early hemorrhagic stroke

Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2
(Gordon syndrome)

WNK1
WNK4
KLHL3
CUL3
(autosomal dominant)

Short stature, hyperkalemic and hyperchloremic metabolic
acidosis, borderline blood pressure, low renin

Glucocorticoid resistance (children)
(Chrousos syndrome)

NR3C1
(autosomal dominant or sporadic)

Ambiguous genitalia, precocious puberty; women may have
androgen excess: acne, excessive hair, oligo/anovulation,
infertility

CAH, Congenital adrenal hyperplasia; GOF, gain of function.
Modified from Melcescu E, Phillips J, Moll G, et al. 11 Beta-­hydroxylase deficiency and other syndromes of mineralocorticoid excess as a rare cause of endocrine hypertension. Horm
Metab Res. 2012;44:867–878, Table 1.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Monogenic hypertension combined
with hypokalemia

Salt insensitive

Familial
pheochromocytoma
(KIF1B, SDHB, TMEM127,
VHL, GDNF, RET, SDHD,
MAX, SDHC, SDHA,
SDHAF2, NF1)

Salt sensitive

Low aldosterone

High aldosterone

Apparent mineralocorticoid
excess (HSD11B2)
11-hydroxylase deficiency
(CYP11B1)
17-hydroxylase deficiency
(CYP17A1)
Glucocorticoid resistance
(NR3C1)
Geller syndrome (NR3C2)
Liddle syndrome (SCNN1A,
SCNN1B, SCNN1G)

Familial
hyperaldosteronism-I
(CYP11B1/CYP11B2
hybrid gene)
Familial
hyperaldosteronism-II
(CLCN2)
Familial
hyperaldosteronism-III
(KCNJ5)
Familial
hyperaldosteronism-IV
(CACNA1H)

Fig. 494.1 Algorithm showing the overall categorization of mono-

genic hypertension combined with hypokalemia. Involved genes are
italicized and in parentheses. (From Lu YT, Fan P, Zhang D, et al. Overview of monogenic forms of hypertension combined with hypokalemia.
Frontiers Pediatr. 2021;8:Article 543309, Fig. 1.)

Children and adolescents with primary hypertension are usually
asymptomatic; the BP elevation is usually mild and is detected during a routine examination or evaluation before athletic participation.
These children may also be obese. Children with secondary hypertension can have BP elevations ranging from mild to severe. Unless
the BP has been sustained or is rising rapidly, hypertension does not
usually produce symptoms. Therefore clinical manifestations may
instead reflect the underlying disease process, such as growth failure
in children with CKD. Children and adolescents with acute severe
hypertension, in contrast, present with BP elevation well above stage
2 hypertension and severe symptoms that may represent acute target-­
organ injury.
Subclinical hypertensive target-­organ injury is a common clinical
manifestation in children with primary hypertension. Using echocardiography with pediatric normative data, left ventricular hypertrophy
is detected in up to 40% of hypertensive children. Other markers of
target-­organ damage that have been demonstrated in hypertensive
children include hypertensive retinopathy, increased carotid intima-­to-­
media thickness, and increased vascular stiffness. Studies have shown
that children with hypertension perform worse on tests of neurocognition than normotensive children and that these test results improve
with successful treatment of hypertension. Target-­
organ effects of
increased BP can be detected in adolescents even at BP levels below
what is currently considered hypertensive.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2914 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 494.5  Drugs That May Elevate Blood Pressure
CLASS

DRUG

Antiinflammatory agents

COX-­2 inhibitors (celecoxib)
NSAIDs (ibuprofen, ketorolac)

Corticosteroids

Prednisone
Hydrocortisone
Dexamethasone

CNS stimulants

ADHD medications
(methylphenidate,
atomoxetine)
Caffeine

Drugs of misuse

Amphetamines
Cocaine
MDMA
Phencyclidine
Tobacco

Estrogen-­and progesterone-­
containing agents

HRT
Oral contraceptives

Heavy metals

Cadmium
Lead
Mercury

Immunosuppressive agents

Cyclosporine
Sirolimus
Tacrolimus

Psychiatric agents

SNRI
SSRI
Tricyclic antidepressants

Supplements

Ephedra
Guarana
Ginseng
Licorice
St. John’s wort
Ma-­huang

Sympathomimetic agents

Appetite suppressants
Decongestants

COX-­2, Cyclooxygenase-­2; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; ADHD,
attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder; HRT, hormone replacement therapy; SNRI,
serotonin-­norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor.

DIAGNOSIS

The first step in diagnosing hypertension is recognition of elevated BP.
BP readings taken in the office should be compared to normative BP
tables (see 2017 AAP guidelines), indexed by height and sex, to ensure
that the patient is normotensive. Multiple studies have shown substantial underrecognition of hypertension in children and adolescents,
with less than half of elevated BP readings recognized, and even fewer
with appropriate follow-­up. This may be related to the complexity of
the normative tables, although other factors such as provider experience and the presence or absence of obesity have also been shown to
affect recognition of elevated BP readings. In addition to use of the
simplified screening table found in the 2017 AAP guideline (see Table
494.1), this issue could also be overcome by building alerts into the
electronic medical record. Elevated office BP readings should be confirmed using ABPM to identify children with white coat hypertension,
who may not require further evaluation. This may require referral to an
appropriate subspecialist.
Once the diagnosis of sustained hypertension is made, the evaluation
should be directed toward uncovering potential underlying causes of the
hypertension (Fig. 494.2), evaluating for comorbidities, and screening
for evidence of target-­organ damage. The extent of the evaluation for
underlying causes of hypertension depends on the type of hypertension that is suspected. An extensive evaluation may be necessary when
secondary hypertension is a strong consideration, such as in younger

Documented hypertension

Gradient between upper and
lower blood pressures
Yes

No
Abnormal urinalysis

Coarctation
of aorta
Yes

No

Predominant
white blood cells

Predominant
red blood cells

Reflux nephritis
Recurrent urinary
tract infections
Renal anomaly
(and infection)

Postinfectious
nephritis
Lupus nephritis
Henoch Schönlein
purpura
Nephrocalcinosis
Nephrolithiasis
Other nephritis
Renal vein
thrombosis
Thromboembolism
Tumor

Endocrine

Renovascular lesion

Essential hypertension

Fig. 494.2 Initial diagnostic algorithm in the evaluation of hypertension. (From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2004, p. 222.)

children, or in older children with severe, symptomatic hypertension.
Alternatively, school-­age children and adolescents with overweight/
obesity and a family history of hypertension who have mild elevations
of BP may only need limited testing.
In all patients, a careful history and physical examination are warranted. Birth history should be documented to screen for prematurity
and other perinatal events that may affect later BP. A family history
for metabolic disease, kidney disease, early cardiovascular events, and
other forms of secondary hypertension should be obtained. Growth
parameters should be determined to detect evidence of chronic disease. BP should be obtained in all four extremities to detect coarctation (thoracic or abdominal) of the aorta. Table 494.6 identifies other
features of the physical examination that may provide evidence of an
underlying cause of hypertension. Unless the history and physical
examination suggest another cause, children with confirmed hypertension should have an evaluation to detect kidney disease, including
urinalysis, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and complete blood count. Standard renal ultrasound should be considered in
patients with a higher suspicion of secondary hypertension to assess
for discrepancies in kidney size, structural abnormalities, and other
potential causes of hypertension. Table 494.7 provides a more complete
list of studies to consider in the clinical evaluation of a child with confirmed hypertension. Measuring serum potassium is essential because
hypokalemia may be present in renovascular hypertension and many
monogenic forms of hypertension (including Liddle syndrome, glucocorticoid remedial aldosteronism, and apparent mineralocorticoid
excess), whereas hyperkalemia may be seen in Gordon syndrome (see
Fig. 494.1). Hypokalemia may also be seen with a pheochromocytoma.
Renovascular hypertension is often associated with other diseases but
may be isolated (Table 494.8). Magnetic resonance (MR) or computed
tomography (CT) angiography can reveal renal artery stenosis, but formal intraarterial angiography may be needed to detect intrarenal vascular stenoses (Fig. 494.3) and in infants and young children, in whom
noninvasive imaging techniques often are not helpful because of small
vessel size. Doppler renal ultrasonography is of similar limited utility

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 494 u Systemic Hypertension

2915

Table 494.6  Physical Examination Findings in Patients with Hypertension
PHYSICAL FINDINGS

POTENTIAL RELEVANCE

GENERAL
Pale mucous membranes, edema, growth retardation

Chronic renal disease

Elfin facies, upturned nose, short stature, cognitive impairment

Williams syndrome

Webbing of neck, low hairline, widespread nipples, wide carrying angle

Turner syndrome

Moon face, buffalo hump, hirsutism, truncal obesity, striae, acne

Cushing syndrome

HABITUS
Thinness

Pheochromocytoma, renal disease, hyperthyroidism

Virilization

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia

Rickets

Chronic renal disease

SKIN
Café-­au-­lait spots, neurofibromas

Neurofibromatosis, pheochromocytoma

Tubers, “ash-­leaf” spots

Tuberous sclerosis

Rashes

Systemic lupus erythematosus, vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura),
impetigo with acute nephritis

Pallor, evanescent flushing, sweating

Pheochromocytoma

Needle tracks

Illicit drug use

Bruises, striae

Cushing syndrome

Acanthosis nigricans

Type 2 diabetes, insulin resistance

EYES
Extraocular muscle palsy

Nonspecific, chronic, severe

Fundal changes

Nonspecific, chronic, severe

Proptosis

Hyperthyroidism

HEAD AND NECK
Goiter

Thyroid disease

Adenotonsillar hypertrophy

Sleep-­disordered breathing

Webbed neck

Turner syndrome

CARDIOVASCULAR SIGNS
Absent of diminished femoral pulses, low leg pressure relative to arm
pressure

Aortic coarctation

Heart size, rate, rhythm; murmurs; respiratory difficulty, hepatomegaly

Aortic coarctation, congestive heart failure

Bruits over great vessels

Arteritis or arteriopathy

Rub

Pericardial effusion secondary to chronic renal disease

PULMONARY SIGNS
Pulmonary edema

Congestive heart failure, acute nephritis

Picture of bronchopulmonary dysplasia

Bronchopulmonary dysplasia–associated hypertension

ABDOMEN
Epigastric bruit

Primary renovascular disease or in association with Williams syndrome,
neurofibromatosis, fibromuscular dysplasia, or arteritis

Abdominal masses

Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma, polycystic kidneys,
hydronephrosis, dysplastic kidneys

Jaundice

Alagille arteriohepatic dysplasia

NEUROLOGIC SIGNS
Neurologic deficits

Chronic or severe acute hypertension with stroke

Muscle weakness
GENITALIA
Ambiguous, virilized
SKELETAL
Short metacarpal (fourth, fifth) bones, short stature

Hyperaldosteronism, Liddle syndrome (hypokalemic low renin
hypertension)
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (11β-­or 17α-­hydroxylase deficiencies)
Autosomal dominant hypertension with brachydactyly (Bilginturan
disease)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2916 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 494.7  Clinical Evaluation of Confirmed Hypertension
STUDY OR PROCEDURE

PURPOSE

TARGET POPULATION

EVALUATION FOR IDENTIFIABLE CAUSES
History, including sleep history, family history,
risk factors, diet, and habits such as smoking
and drinking alcohol; physical examination

History and physical examination help focus
subsequent evaluation

All children with persistent BP ≥90th percentile

Blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, electrolytes,
urinalysis, and urine culture

R/O renal disease and chronic pyelonephritis,
mineralocorticoid excess states

All children with persistent BP ≥95th percentile

Complete blood count

R/O anemia, consistent with chronic renal
disease

All children with signs of chronic kidney
disease

Renal ultrasound

R/O renal scar, congenital anomaly, or
disparate renal size

All children with signs or symptoms concerning
for secondary cause of hypertension

Identify hyperlipidemia, identify metabolic
abnormalities

Overweight patients with BP at 90th to
94th percentile; all patients with BP ≥95th
percentile; family history of hypertension or
cardiovascular disease; child with chronic
renal disease

Drug screen

Identify substances that might cause
hypertension

History suggestive of possible contribution by
substances or drugs

Polysomnography

Identify sleep-­disordered breathing

History of loud, frequent snoring, or daytime
somnolence

EVALUATION FOR COMORBIDITY
Fasting lipid panel, fasting glucose

EVALUATION FOR TARGET-­ORGAN DAMAGE
Echocardiogram
Identify left ventricular hypertrophy and other
indications of cardiac involvement
Retinal exam

ADDITIONAL EVALUATION AS INDICATED
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
Renovascular imaging
Magnetic resonance or CT angiography

Patients with comorbid risk factors* and BP
90th to 94th percentile; all patients with BP
≥95th percentile

Identify retinal vascular changes

Patients with comorbid risk factors and BP
90th to 94th percentile; all patients with BP
≥95th percentile

Identify white coat hypertension, abnormal
diurnal BP pattern, BP load

All children with persistent BP ≥95th percentile

Identify renovascular disease

Young children with stage 1 hypertension
and any child or adolescent with stage 2
hypertension

Identify catecholamine-­mediated hypertension

Patients with signs and symptoms concerning
for pheochromocytoma

Arteriography: digital subtraction or classic
Plasma and urine catecholamines

*Comorbid risk factors also include diabetes mellitus and kidney disease.
R/O, Rule out.
From National High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group on High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. The fourth report on the diagnosis, evaluation, and
treatment of high blood pressure in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(2 Suppl 4th Report):562.

in children because of poor patient cooperation, imaging difficulties
related to obesity, and operator inexperience. Doppler renal ultrasonography has a sensitivity of approximately 60–65% in patients with
renovascular disease; specificity is 95%. CT angiography has a sensitivity and specificity of 88% and 81%, respectively, compared to 80% and
63% for MR angiography. Doppler ultrasonography is not recommended
when screening for renovascular hypertension in the 2017 AAP guideline
except in selected patients.
The presence of primary hypertension often clusters with other risk
factors. All hypertensive children should be screened for comorbidities
that may increase cardiovascular risk, including dyslipidemia and glucose intolerance. A nonfasting lipid panel is usually sufficient to screen
for dyslipidemia but should be followed up by a fasting panel if abnormal. Similarly, a random fasting glucose level may be obtained initially
but will need to be followed up with a fasting level if abnormal. In addition, a sleep history should be obtained in children with confirmed
hypertension to screen for sleep-­disordered breathing, an entity that

is associated with high BP, particularly in overweight children. Patients
with symptoms of sleep-­disordered breathing should be referred to a
sleep specialist for evaluation.
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is the most common manifestation of target-­organ damage in hypertensive children. Left ventricular (LV) mass measurements should be indexed to height to
account for the effect of body size and body surface area (BSA).
LVH is defined as LV mass >51 g/m 2.7 in those 8 years of age and
older, or LV mass >115 g/BSA for boys and >95 g/BSA for females
<8 years of age. According to the 2017 AAP guideline, echocardiography should be obtained when treatment with antihypertensive
medications is being considered.

PREVENTION

Prevention of high BP may be viewed as part of the prevention of cardiovascular disease and stroke, the leading cause of death in adults in
the United States. Other risk factors for cardiovascular disease include

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 494 u Systemic Hypertension
Table 494.8  Causes of Renovascular Hypertension in
Children
Fibromuscular dysplasia
Syndromic causes
Neurofibromatosis type 1
Tuberous sclerosis
Williams syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Other syndromes
Vasculitis
Takayasu arteritis (disease)
Polyarteritis nodosa
Kawasaki disease
Other systemic vasculitides
Extrinsic compression
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
Other tumors
Other causes
Radiation
Umbilical artery catheterization
Trauma
Congenital rubella syndrome
Transplant renal artery stenosis
From Tullus K, Brennan E, Hamilton G, et al. Renovascular hypertension in children.
Lancet. 2008;371:1453–1463, Panel 1.

Step 1

Begin with the recommended
initial dose of desired medication

Step 2

Increase dose until desired BP target
is reached, or maximum dose is reached

If BP control is not achieved:

If BP control is not achieved:
Add a second medication with
a complementary mechanism of action

Step 3

Proceed to highest recommended dose if necessary and desirable

If BP control is not achieved:

Step 4

Add a third
antihypertensive drug
of a different class

OR

Consult a physician
experienced in treating
childhood and adolescent
hypertension

Fig. 494.4 Stepped-­care approach to antihypertensive therapy in

children and adolescents. BP, Blood pressure. (From Flynn JT, Daniels
SR. Pharmacologic treatment of hypertension in children and adolescents. J Pediatr. 2006;149:746–754, Fig 2.)

TREATMENT

Fig. 494.3 Renal angiogram in 7-­yr-­old child with hypertension. Right
renal artery is visible with a string-­of-­beads appearance characteristic of
fibromuscular dysplasia (arrows). The aorta and left renal artery appear
normal. (From Tullus K, Brennan E, Hamilton G, et al. Renovascular hypertension in children. Lancet. 2008;371:1453–1463, Fig 1.)

obesity, elevated serum cholesterol levels, high dietary sodium intake,
and a sedentary lifestyle, as well as alcohol and tobacco use. The increase
in arterial wall rigidity and blood viscosity that is associated with
exposure to the components of tobacco may exacerbate hypertension.
Public health, population-­based approaches to prevention of primary
hypertension in both adults and children include a reduction in obesity,
reduced sodium intake, avoidance of tobacco intake, and an increase
in physical activity through school-­and community-­based programs.

2917

The mainstay of therapy for children with asymptomatic mild
hypertension without evidence of target-­organ damage is therapeutic lifestyle modification with dietary changes and regular exercise.
Weight loss is the primary therapy in obesity-­related hypertension. It is recommended that all hypertensive children have a diet
increased in fresh fruits, fresh vegetables, fiber, and nonfat dairy
and reduced in sodium. The DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop
Hypertension) diet has been suggested as a nutritional approach to
prevent or treat hypertension (www.dashdiet.org). The diet focuses
on lowering sodium intake and increasing potassium-­, calcium-­,
and magnesium-­containing foods, such as six to eight servings of
whole grains, four to five servings of fruits, and four to five servings
of vegetables per day and low-­fat dairy foods. For adults, the standard DASH diet contains 2,300 mg of sodium (also recommended
by the American Heart Association) and the low-­sodium DASH
diet recommends up to 1,500 mg of sodium per day. Studies suggest that although the DASH diet has potential beneficial effects on
blood pressure, adherence to the diet remains low among adolescents. In addition, regular aerobic physical activity for at least 30-­60
minutes on most days along with a reduction of sedentary activities
to <2 hours a day is recommended.
Indications for pharmacologic therapy include symptomatic
hypertension, stage 2 hypertension without a modifiable risk factor,
hypertension in patients with comorbidities such as diabetes (types
1 and 2) or CKD, and persistent hypertension despite nonpharmacologic measures. When indicated, antihypertensive medication
should be initiated as a single agent at a low dose (Fig. 494.4). The
dose can then be increased until the goal BP is achieved. Once the
highest recommended dose is reached, or if the child develops side
effects, a second drug from a different class can be added.
Most classes of antihypertensive agents have been shown to
reduce blood pressure in children and adolescents, although no
data exist demonstrating one class to be superior. Per the 2017 AAP
practice care guidelines, ACEIs, ARBs, thiazide diuretics, and calcium channel blockers are considered acceptable initial agents for
use in children. The choice of antihypertensive agent for a patient
should be tailored to the etiology of that patient’s hypertension
whenever possible. Table 494.9 gives recommended dosing information for antihypertensive agents in children and adolescents.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2918 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
Table 494.9  Recommended Doses for Selected Antihypertensive Agents for Use in Hypertensive Children and Adolescents
CLASS

DRUG

STARTING DOSE

INTERVAL

MAXIMUM DOSE*

Aldosterone receptor
antagonist

Eplerenone

25 mg/day

qd-­bid

100 mg/day

Spironolactone†

1 mg/kg/day

qd-­bid

3.3 mg/kg/day up to 100 mg/day

Angiotensin-­converting
enzyme inhibitors

Benazepril†

0.2 mg/kg/day up to
10 mg/day
0.5 mg/kg/dose (0.05 mg/
kg/dose in infants)
0.08 mg/kg/day
0.1 mg/kg/day up to
10 mg/day
0.07 mg/kg/day up to
5 mg/day
5-­10 mg/day
1.6 mg/m2/day

qd

0.6 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg/day

tid

6 mg/kg/day up to 450 mg/day

qd
qd

0.6 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg/day
0.6 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg/day

qd

0.6 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg/day

qd
qd

80 mg/day
6 mg/m2/day up to 10 mg/day

1-­6 yr: 0.2 mg/kg/day
6-­17 yr:
<50 kg 4-­8 mg qd
>50 kg 8-­16 mg qd
0.75 mg/kg/day up to
50 mg/day
20 to <35 kg 10 mg qd;
≥35 kg 20 mg qd
6-­17 yr: 1.3 mg/kg/day up
to 40 mg/day

qd

1-­6 yr: 0.4 mg/kg up to 4 mg/day
6-­17 yr:
<50 kg: 16 mg qd
>50 kg: 32 mg qd
1.4 mg/kg/day up to 100 mg/day

Captopril†
Enalapril†
Fosinopril
Lisinopril†
Quinapril
Ramipril
Angiotensin receptor
blockers

Candesartan

Losartan†
Olmesartan
Valsartan†

qd
qd
qd

20 to <35 kg: 20 mg qd
≥35 kg: 40 mg qd
6-­17 yr: 2.7 mg/kg/day up to
160 mg/day

α-­ and β-­adrenergic
antagonists

Labetalol†
Carvedilol

2-­3 mg/kg/day
0.1 mg/kg/dose up to
6.25 mg bid

bid
bid

10-­12 mg/kg/day up to 1.2 g/day
0.5 mg/kg/dose up to 25 mg bid

β-­adrenergic antagonists

Atenolol†
Bisoprolol/HCTZ
Metoprolol
Propranolol

0.5-­1 mg/kg/day
2.5/6.25 mg/day
1-­2 mg/kg/day
1 mg/kg/day

qd-­bid
qd
bid
bid-­tid

2 mg/kg/day up to 100 mg/day
10/6.25 mg/day
6 mg/kg/day up to 200 mg/day
8 mg/kg/day up to 640 mg/day

Calcium channel blockers

Amlodipine†

1-­5 yr: 0.1 mg/kg/day
≥6 yr: 2.5 mg/day

qd

Felodipine
Isradipine†
Extended-­release
nifedipine

2.5 mg/day
0.05-­0.15 mg/kg/dose
0.2-­0.5 mg/kg/day

qd
tid-­qid
qd-­bid

1-­5 yr: 0.6 mg/kg/day up to 5 mg/
day
≥6 yr: 10 mg/day
10 mg/day
0.6 mg/kg/day up to 10 mg/day
3 mg/kg/day up to 120 mg/day

Central α-­agonist

Clonidine†

5-­10 μg/kg/day

bid-­tid

25 μg/kg/day up to 0.9 mg/day

Diuretics

Amiloride
Chlorthalidone
Chlorothiazide
Furosemide
HCTZ

5-­10 mg/day
0.3 mg/kg/day
10 mg/kg/day
0.5-­2.0 mg/kg/dose
0.5-­1 mg/kg/day

qd
qd
bid
qd-­bid
qd

20 mg/day
2 mg/kg/day up to 50 mg/day
20 mg/kg/day up to 375 mg/day
6 mg/kg/day
3 mg/kg/day up to 37.5 mg/day

Vasodilators

Hydralazine
Minoxidil

0.25 mg/kg/dose
0.1-­0.2 mg/kg/day

tid-­qid
bid-­tid

7.5 mg/kg/day up to 200 mg/day
1 mg/kg/day up to 50 mg/day

*The maximum recommended adult dose should never be exceeded.
†Information on preparation of a stable extemporaneous suspension is available for these agents.
bid, Twice daily; HCTZ, hydrochlorothiazide; qd, once daily; qid, 4 times daily; tid, 3 times daily.
Adapted from Flynn JT. Management of hypertension in the young: role of antihypertensive medications. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2011;58(2):111–120.

There have been changes in the recommended BP goals for the treatment of hypertension in children and adolescents. Data from the SPRINT
(SBP intervention) trial group suggests that stricter goals (SBP goal of 120
vs 140 mm Hg) improve cardiovascular outcomes in adults. In children
with CKD, the ESCAPE (Effects of Strict BP Control and Angiotensin-­
Converting Enzyme Inhibition on the Progress of Chronic Renal Failure in
Pediatric Patients) trial group showed slower progression of CKD if the 24-­
hour MAP was kept below the 50th percentile on ABPM compared to the
50th to 95th percentile. It is now recommended that treatment achieve BP

<90th percentile for age or <130/80 mm Hg, whichever is lower. A lower
goal based on ABPM (24-­hour MAP <50th percentile) is recommended
for children and adolescents with CKD. ACEIs or ARBs should be used
for children with diabetes and microalbuminuria or proteinuric kidney
disease.
Acute severe hypertension, sometimes referred to as accelerated
hypertension or hypertensive crisis, is defined as severe hypertension (often with BP values well in excess of stage 2 hypertension)
accompanied by symptoms such as headache, dizziness, or nausea/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 494 u Systemic Hypertension

Fig. 494.5 MRI of the brain of a 6-­yr-­old child with end-­stage kidney

disease and hypertensive encephalopathy (i.e., posterior reversible leukoencephalopathy syndrome). Bilateral occipital high signal intensity
is more pronounced on the left side. (From Daroff RB, Fenichel GM,
Jankovic J, et al., eds. Bradley’s Neurology in Clinical Practice, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012: Fig. 49B.4, p. 924.)

2919

vomiting, and in more severe cases, retinopathy, encephalopathy,
cardiac failure, acute kidney injury, and seizures. These situations
have also been described as hypertensive urgency and hypertensive
emergency, respectively. This nomenclature can lead to confusion
because there is often no absolute distinction between the two
situations, and treatment will often depend on clinical judgment.
Hypertensive encephalopathy (generalized or posterior reversible
encephalopathy syndrome) is suggested by the presence of headache, vomiting, temperature elevation, visual disturbances, ataxia,
depressed level of consciousness, imaging abnormalities, and seizures (Fig. 494.5); it is one of the more common presentations of
acute severe hypertension in children and adolescents. Acute severe
hypertension may also manifest with decreased vision (cortical
blindness) and papilledema, congestive heart failure, or accelerated
deterioration of kidney function.
For patients with acute severe hypertension and life-­threatening
symptoms, intensive care unit (ICU) admission and intravenous
(IV) drug infusion are indicated so that decreases in BP can be
carefully monitored and titrated (Table 494.10). Ideally, arterial
lines should be used for continuous BP monitoring; if this is not
available, oscillometric devices can be used for frequent/repeated
BP measurement. Drug choices include labetalol, nicardipine, and
sodium nitroprusside. Because too rapid a reduction in BP may
interfere with adequate organ perfusion, a stepwise reduction in
pressure should be planned. In general, BP should be reduced by

Table 494.10  Antihypertensive Drugs for Management of Severe Hypertension in Children Age 1-­17 Years
DRUG

CLASS

DOSE

ROUTE

USEFUL FOR SEVERELY HYPERTENSIVE PATIENTS WITH LIFE-­THREATENING SYMPTOMS
Esmolol
β-­Adrenergic blocker
100-­500 μg/kg/min
IV infusion

COMMENTS
Very short acting—constant infusion
preferred; may cause profound
bradycardia

Hydralazine

Direct vasodilator

0.2-­0.4 mg/kg/dose

IV, IM

Should be given every 4 hr when given
IV bolus

Labetalol

α-­ and β-­Adrenergic
blocker

Bolus: 0.20-­1.0 mg/kg/dose,
up to 40 mg/dose
Infusion: 0.25-­3.0 mg/kg/hr

IV bolus or infusion

Asthma and overt heart failure are
relative contraindications

Nicardipine

Calcium channel blocker

Bolus: 30 μg/kg up to 2 mg/
dose
Infusion: 0.5-­4 μg/kg/min

IV bolus or infusion

May cause reflex tachycardia

Sodium
nitroprusside

Direct vasodilator

0.5-­10 μg/kg/min

IV infusion

Monitor cyanide levels with prolonged
(>72 hr) use or in renal failure or
coadminister with sodium thiosulfate

USEFUL FOR SEVERELY HYPERTENSIVE PATIENTS WITH LESS SIGNIFICANT SYMPTOMS
Clonidine
Central α-­agonist
0.05-­0.1 mg/dose, may be
PO
repeated up to 0.8 mg total
dose

Side effects include dry mouth and
drowsiness

Fenoldopam

Dopamine receptor
agonist

0.2-­0.8 μg/kg/min

IV infusion

Produced modest reductions in blood
pressure in a pediatric clinical trial in
patients up to age 12 yr

Hydralazine

Direct vasodilator

0.25 mg/kg/dose, up to 25 mg/
dose

PO

Extemporaneous suspension stable for
only 1 wk

Isradipine

Calcium channel blocker

0.05-­0.15 mg/kg/dose, up to
5 mg/dose

PO

Stable suspension can be compounded

Minoxidil

Direct vasodilator

0.1-­0.2 mg/kg/dose, up to
10 mg/dose

PO

Most potent oral vasodilator; long acting

IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, oral.
Adapted from Flynn JT, Tullus K. Correction to severe hypertension in children and adolescents: pathophysiology and treatment. Pediatr Nephrol. 2012;27(3):503–504.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2920 Part XVIII u The Cardiovascular System
no more than 25% of the planned reduction over the first 8 hours,
with a gradual normalization of BPs over the next 24-­48 hours. For
patients with less severe symptoms, such as headache or nausea/
vomiting, oral medications such as clonidine or isradipine can be
used if the patient can tolerate oral medications. Short-­acting IV
medications such as hydralazine or labetalol are acceptable if the
patient cannot take oral drugs.
Treatment of secondary hypertension must also focus on the underlying disease, such as CKD, hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma,

coarctation of the aorta, or renovascular hypertension. The treatment
of renovascular hypertension includes antihypertensive medications,
angioplasty, or surgery. If bilateral renovascular hypertension or renovascular disease in a solitary kidney is suspected, drugs acting on the
RAAS are usually contraindicated because they may reduce glomerular
filtration rate and lead to acute kidney injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Diseases of the Blood

PART

XIX

Section 1

The Hematopoietic
System
Chapter 495

Development of the
Hematopoietic System
Stella T. Chou
HEMATOPOIESIS IN THE HUMAN EMBRYO AND
FETUS

Hematopoiesis is the process by which the cellular elements of blood are
formed. In the developing human embryo and fetus, hematopoiesis has
three developmental waves and is conceptually divided into three anatomic stages: mesoblastic, hepatic, and myeloid. Mesoblastic hematopoiesis occurs in extraembryonic structures, principally in the yolk sac,
and begins between the 10th and 14th days of gestation. By 6-­8 weeks
of gestation, the liver replaces the yolk sac as the primary site of blood
cell production, and during this time, the placenta also contributes as a
hematopoietic site. By 10-­12 weeks, extraembryonic hematopoiesis has
ceased. Hepatic hematopoiesis occurs through the remainder of gestation and then diminishes during the second ­trimester while bone marrow (myeloid) hematopoiesis increases. The liver is the predominant
erythropoietic organ through 20-­24 weeks of gestation.
Each hematopoietic organ houses distinct populations of cells. The
yolk sac predominantly produces erythrocytes, megakaryocytes, and
macrophages. The fetal liver is primarily an erythropoietic organ, while
the bone marrow produces erythrocytes, megakaryocytes, and leukocytes. The types of leukocytes present in the fetal liver and marrow differ with gestation. Macrophages precede neutrophils in the marrow,
and the ratio of macrophages to neutrophils decreases as gestation
progresses. Regardless of gestational age or anatomic location, production of all hematopoietic tissues begins with multipotent cells capable
of both self-­renewal and clonal maturation into all blood cell lineages.
Progenitor cells differentiate under the influence of transcription factors and hematopoietic growth factors.
The classical model of hematopoietic differentiation involves differentiation into increasingly lineage-­specific progenitors, although
there may also be alternate pathways that are used separately or in
combination with classical pathways (Fig. 495.1). In the classical pathway, long-­term repopulating hematopoietic stem cells (LTR-­HSCs) are
characterized by their ability to self-­renew and differentiate into cells
that are multipotent. Multipotent progenitors (MPPs) have reduced
self-­renewal capacity and differentiate into common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) or common myeloid progenitors (CMPs). The CMP
differentiates into all the blood lineages except for lymphoid. The
commitment of hematopoietic cells to increasingly lineage-­restricted
cells requires cytokine stimulation and regulation by transcription
factors.

Erythrocytes in the fetus are larger than in adults, and at 22-­23 weeks’
gestation, the mean corpuscular volume can be as high as 135 femtoliters (fL) (Fig. 495.2A). Similarly, the mean corpuscular hemoglobin
is very high at 22-­23 weeks and falls relatively linearly with advancing
gestation (see Fig. 495.2B). In contrast, the mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration is constant throughout gestation at 34 ±1 g/dL.
While the size and quantity of hemoglobin in erythrocytes diminish
during gestation, the hematocrit and blood hemoglobin concentration
gradually increase (Fig. 495.3).
Platelet concentration in the blood increases gradually between
22 and 40 weeks’ gestation (Fig. 495.4), but the platelet size, assessed
by mean platelet volume, remains constant at 8 ±1 fL. No differences
are observed between males and females in fetal and neonatal reference ranges for erythrocyte indices, hematocrit, hemoglobin, platelet
counts, or mean platelet volume measurements.

FETAL GRANULOCYTOPOIESIS

Neutrophils are first observed in the human fetus about 5 weeks after conception as small clusters of cells around the aorta. The fetal bone marrow
space begins to develop around the eighth week, and from 8-­10 weeks, the
marrow space enlarges, but no neutrophils appear there until 10.5 weeks.
From 14 weeks through term, the most common granulocytic cell type
in the fetal bone marrow space is the neutrophil. Neutrophils and macrophages originate from a common progenitor cell, but macrophages appear
before neutrophils in the fetus, first in the yolk sac, liver, lung, and brain, all
before the bone marrow cavity is formed.
Granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (G-­CSF) and macrophage
colony-­stimulating factor (M-­CSF) are expressed in developing fetal
bone as early as 6 weeks after conception, and both are expressed in
the fetal liver as early as 8 weeks. Granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­
stimulating factor (GM-­
CSF) and stem cell factor (SCF) also are
distributed widely in human fetal tissues. However, no changes in
expression of any of these factors, or of their specific receptors, appear
to be the signal for fetal production of neutrophils or macrophages.
Fetal blood contains few neutrophils until the third trimester. At 20
weeks’ gestation, the blood neutrophil count is 0-­500/mm3. Although
mature neutrophils are scarce, progenitor cells with the capacity to
generate neutrophil clones are abundant in fetal blood. When cultured
in vitro in the presence of recombinant G-­CSF, they mature into large
colonies of neutrophils. The physiologic role of G-­CSF includes upregulating neutrophil production, and the low number of circulating neutrophils in the mid-­trimester human fetus may be caused, in part, by
low production of G-­CSF. Monocytes isolated from the blood of adults
produce G-­CSF when stimulated with a variety of inflammatory mediators, such as bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or interleukin (IL)-­1.
In contrast, monocytes isolated from the blood or organs of fetuses up
to 24 weeks’ gestation generate only small quantities of G-­CSF protein
and messenger RNA (mRNA) after LPS or IL-­1 stimulation. Despite
this, G-­CSF receptors on the surface of neutrophils of newborn infants
are equal in number and affinity to those on adult neutrophils.
In the fetus, actions of the granulocytic factors (G-­CSF, M-­CSF, GM-­
CSF, and SCF) are not limited to hematopoiesis. Receptors for each of

2921
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2922 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Stem Cell
Growth
Factors

Wnt
Jagged
Angiopoietin-like 2/3
BMP
Osteopontin

LTRHSC

RUNX-1
SCL/TAL-1
LMO-2
MLL
Gfi-1
TEL
BMI-1
GATA2

Stem Cell
Transcription
Factors

MPP
Early-acting
Hematopoietic
Growth Factors

MLP

?

SCF
IL-3
GM-CSF
Flt3 Ligand
IL-11
IL-6
IL-1
Tpo

CLP

CMP

PU.1
Ikaros
E2A
EBF
PAX-5
BCL11A

MEP

GMP
GATA1
GATA2
FOG-1

GATA1
FOG-1
Gfi-1b BFU-E
EKLF

Epo
LineageSpecific
Hematopoietic
Growth Factors

CFU-E

Notch-1
TCF-1
GATA3

CFUMEG

CFUG

GATA1
Gfi-1b

Tpo

PU.1
C/EBP

C/EBP
CFUM

C/EBP
Gfi-1

G-CSF

CFUb
GATA1

M-CSF

CFUEo

PreB Cell

PreNK

PreT Cell

B Cell

NK Cell

T Cell

C/EBP
GATA1

IL-5

Epo

erythrocyte

platelet

polymorphonuclear
leukocyte

monocyte/
macrophage

basophil

IL-1

eosinophil

endothelial cell

IL-3
GM-CSF
IL-5

TNF
and fibroblast

SCF GM-CSF
IL-6
G-CSF
IL-11 M-CSF

Fig. 495.1 Major cytokine sources and actions to promote hematopoiesis. Cells of the bone marrow microenvironment, such as macrophages,

endothelial cells, and reticular fibroblasts, produce macrophage colony-­stimulating factor (M-­CSF), granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating
factor (GM-­CSF), and granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (G-­CSF) after stimulation. These cytokines and others listed in the text have overlapping
interactions during hematopoietic differentiation, as indicated; for all lineages, optimal development requires a combination of early-­and late-­acting
factors. BFU, Burst-­forming unit; BMP, bone morphogenic protein; CFU, colony-­forming unit; CLP, common lymphoid progenitor; CMP, common
myeloid progenitor; Epo, erythropoietin; GMP, granulocyte-monocyte progenitor; IL, interleukin; LTR-HSC, long-term repopulating-hematopoietic
stem cell; MEP, megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor; MLP, multipotent lymphoid progenitor; MPP, multipotent progenitor; SCF, stem cell factor;
TNF, tumor necrosis factor; Tpo, thrombopoietin. (From Sieff CA, Daley GO, Zon LI. The anatomy and physiology of hematopoiesis. In Orkin SH,
Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015.)

these are located in areas of the fetal central nervous system and gastrointestinal tract, where their patterns of expression change with development.

FETAL THROMBOPOIESIS

Several biologic differences exist between fetal, neonatal, and adult megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis. There is a developmentally unique
pattern of fetal/neonatal megakaryopoiesis characterized by rapid proliferation, followed by full cytoplasmic maturation without polyploidization.

Fetal and neonatal megakaryocytes are significantly smaller, exhibit lower
ploidy, and produce fewer platelets. However, fetal and neonatal megakaryocytes have a higher proliferative potential than adult progenitors.
These differences allow fetuses and neonates to populate their rapidly
expanding bone marrow space and blood volume while maintaining normal platelet counts.
Megakaryocyte progenitors are categorized as burst-­forming
unit–megakaryocytes (BFU-­
MK), which are primitive megakaryocyte

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 495 u Development of the Hematopoietic System
140

2923

60

135
130

50
Hematocrit (%)

MCV (fL)

125
120
115
110

40

105
30

100
95

20
10

90
22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42

A

20

A

Weeks Gestation
48

30

40

30

40

Time (wk)
6

46
5
Red cell count (1012/I)

44

MCH (pg)

42
40
38
36
34

4

3

2

32
30

1
10

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42

B

B

Weeks Gestation

Fig. 495.2 A, Erythrocyte mean corpuscular volume (MCV), and B,

mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) from 22 weeks’ gestation through
term. The lines represent the 5th percentile, the mean, and the 95th
percentile reference range. (From Christensen RD, Jopling J, Henry
E, et al. The erythrocyte indices of neonates, defined using data from
over 12,000 patients in a multihospital healthcare system. J Perinatol
2008;28:24–28.)

20
Time (wk)

Fig. 495.3 Reference ranges of fetal hematocrit (A) and fetal red
blood cell count (B) by cordocentesis throughout gestations.

400,000

Platelet Count

300,000

200,000

Fig. 495.4 Platelet count from 22

100,000

0
Gestational Age 22
Sample Size 11

23
66

24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
106 108 146 198 215 254 317 510 698 1090 1798 2456 3286 3910 5478 7600 4685 1143 71
5th %ile

Mean

95th %ile

weeks’ gestation through term. The
lines represent the 5th percentile, the
mean, and the 95th percentile reference range. (From Wiedmeier SE,
Henry E, Sola-­Visner MC, et al. Platelet
reference ranges for neonates, defined
using data from over 47,000 patients
in a multihospital healthcare system. J
Perinatol 2009;29:130–136.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2924 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
5c

3c
Chromosome 11

2



G A

1

 

1 1
Chromosome 16
2 1 2 2 1
0

10

20

Embryonic:

30

40

50

60

Gower 1

2 2

Gower 2

2 2

Portland

2 2

70

Kb

Fetal: Hemoglobin F 2 2
Hemoglobin A 2 2
Adult:

Hemoglobin A2 2 2

Fig. 495.5 Organization of the globin genes. The bottom line reflects

the scale in kilobases. The upper segment represents the β-­like globin
genes on chromosome 11, and the lower segment the α-­like genes
on chromosome 16. Regions of the gene that code for primary globin
proteins are shown as blue segments, and regions that code for pseudogenes (“ψ,” nonexpressed remnants) are shown as pink segments.
The composition of embryonic, fetal, and adult hemoglobins is listed.
α, Alpha; β, beta; γ, gamma; δ, delta; ε, epsilon; ζ, zeta.

progenitors, and colony-­forming unit–megakaryocytes (CFU-­MK), which
are more differentiated. BFU-­MK produce large multifocal colonies containing ≥50 megakaryocytes, whereas CFU-­MK generate smaller (3-­50
cells/colony) unifocal colonies. Megakaryocytes are identified by their
morphologic characteristics as they undergo endoreduplication, which
results in large cells with polyploid nuclei. Megakaryocytes, unlike megakaryocyte progenitors, do not have the capacity to generate colonies.
Rather, they undergo maturation, progressing from small mononuclear
cells to large polyploid cells. The modal megakaryocyte ploidy (the number
of sets of complete chromosomes) in normal adult marrow is 16N. In the
fetus and neonate, ploidy is lower, primarily 2N and 4N, and mature megakaryocyte size is smaller. Large megakaryocytes generate more platelets
than do small megakaryocytes; in vitro studies suggest that megakaryocytes of neonates produce fewer platelets than do their adult counterparts.
The exact mechanisms by which megakaryocytes release platelets into
the circulation remain incompletely understood. In situ examination of
this process suggests that mature megakaryocytes migrate to a perivascular site and extend a process through the endothelium, giving rise to
proplatelets, which then release platelets. An alternate mechanism is that
platelets are released from megakaryocytes in the lungs as a result of shear
forces.
Thrombopoietin (TPO) is the dominant regulator of megakaryocyte
development and platelet production. TPO is predominantly produced in
the liver from early fetal to adult life but is also expressed by cells in the kidney, and, to a lesser extent, by smooth muscle and marrow cells. TPO concentrations are higher in healthy neonates of any gestational age than in
healthy adults. TPO is a primary stimulator of megakaryocyte and platelet
production, but SCF, IL-­3, IL-­11, IL-­6, and erythropoietin also stimulate
megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis in vitro and in vivo. Importantly,
TPO promotes expansion of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and progenitor cells, and the TPO receptor is expressed on HSCs and erythroid
progenitors in addition to megakaryocyte progenitors, megakaryocytes,
and mature platelets.

FETAL ERYTHROPOIESIS

Similar to hematopoietic production of other cell lineages, fetal erythropoiesis is regulated by growth factors produced by the fetus, not
by the mother. Erythropoietin (EPO) does not cross the human placenta. Stimulating maternal EPO production does not enhance fetal
erythropoiesis, nor does suppressing maternal erythropoiesis by
hypertransfusion.

EPO plays a central regulatory role on the proliferation and maturation of erythroid progenitors. Erythroid-­committed progenitors consist
of burst-­forming unit–erythroid (BFU-­E) and colony-­forming unit–erythroid (CFU-­E) cells. In colony-­forming assays, human BFU-­E cells are
more proliferative, forming colonies of multiple clusters of erythroblasts,
as compared with CFU-­E cells, which form one or two clusters, with
each containing 8-­100 hemoglobinized erythroblasts. EPO is essential for
erythrocyte production from CFU-­E cells by inducing survival and proliferation of erythroblasts. EPO binds to specific receptors on the surface
of committed erythroid precursors, and its expression is regulated by an
oxygen-­sensing mechanism through the hypoxia-­inducible factor (HIF)
family of proteins. HIF-­1α and HIF-­2α are regulated by oxygen tension,
whereas HIF-­1β is constitutively expressed. Together, HIF proteins maintain oxygen homeostasis and regulate erythropoiesis by inducing EPO
under hypoxic conditions.
EPO is produced by monocytes and macrophages in the fetal liver
during the first and second trimesters. After birth, the anatomic site of
EPO production shifts to the kidney. The specific stimulus for this shift
is unknown but may involve the increase in arterial oxygen tension that
occurs at birth. Epigenetic modification of gene expression may also
play a role because it appears that renal and hepatic EPO genes are methylated to different degrees. Although EPO mRNA and protein can be
found in the human fetal kidney, it is not known whether this production is biologically relevant. It appears that renal production of EPO is
not essential for normal fetal erythropoiesis, as evidenced by the normal
serum EPO concentration and normal hematocrit of anephric fetuses.

Hemoglobins in the Fetus and Neonate

Hemoglobin is a tetramer of four globin chains with an iron-­containing
porphyrin ring called heme covalently bound to each chain. A dynamic
interaction between heme and globin gives hemoglobin its unique properties in the reversible transport of oxygen. The hemoglobin molecule
consists of two alpha (α)-­like and two beta (β)-­like polypeptide chains,
with each chain having a heme group attached (Fig. 495.5). There are two
β-­globin genes and four α-­globin genes. Within erythrocytes of an early
embryo, fetus, child, and adult, six different hemoglobins may normally
be detected (Fig. 495.6): the embryonic hemoglobins (Gower-­1, Gower-­2,
and Portland), fetal hemoglobin (HbF), and the adult hemoglobins (HbA
and HbA2). The electrophoretic mobilities of hemoglobins vary with their
chemical structures.
Expression and quantitative relationships among the hemoglobins are
determined by complex developmental processes. Globin chain expression is developmental stage specific and occurs through two hemoglobin switches, mediated primarily through changes of the β-­globin genes
expressed. There are five functional β-­like globin chain genes: embryonic
(HBE1), two fetal (HBG1, HBG2), and two adult (HBD, HBB); and three
α-­like globin chain genes: embryonic (HBZ) and two adult (HBA1, HBA2).
Primitive erythroid cells primarily express embryonic globins. The first β-­
globin switch occurs at approximately 6 weeks’ gestation to fetal globin
(HBG), which coincides with the onset of definitive hematopoiesis. The
major hemoglobin in the fetus (HbF) consists of two α and two gamma
(γ) globin chains (α2γ2). The second globin switch is responsible for the
expression of the major hemoglobin of adults (HbA), consisting of two α
and two β polypeptide chains (α2β2) and is first expressed at mid-­gestation.
A key regulator of the fetal-­to-­adult hemoglobin switch is the transcription factor BCL11A, which binds to the β-­globin gene and acts to silence
γ-­globin expression and thus HbF.

Embryonic Hemoglobins

The blood of early human embryos contains two slowly migrating hemoglobins, Gower-­1 and Gower-­2, and Hb Portland, which has HbF-­like
mobility. The zeta (ζ) chains of Hb Portland and Gower-­1 are structurally
quite similar to α chains. Both Gower hemoglobins contain the epsilon
(ε) β-­like globin polypeptide chain. Hb Gower-­1 has the structure ζ2ε2,
whereas Gower-­2 has α2ε2. Hb Portland has the structure ζ2γ2. In embryos
up to 6 weeks’ gestation, the Gower hemoglobins predominate but are no
longer detectable by 3 months of gestation.

Fetal Hemoglobin

By 6-­8 weeks’ gestation, HbF (α2γ2) is the predominant hemoglobin;
at 24 weeks’ gestation, it constitutes 90% of the total hemoglobin. HbF

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 495 u Development of the Hematopoietic System
100

100

HbF production
HbF production, after
premature delivery

80

40
F
22
20

A—22

22

A 0
Globin subunits: % of total

80

A
60

A2—22

22

50

Fetal hemoglobin %

Hemoglobins: % of total

F—22

B

2925

60

40



40

20



G

30
20


10
0



A


0

10

3

0


20

30

BIRTH
Crown–Rump
5 10 15 20  cm
FETUS

10

20

30

40WK

AGE:
NEWBORN

Fig. 495.6 Changes in hemoglobin tetramers (A) and in globin subunits (B) during human development from embryo to early infancy. (From
Polin RA, Fox WW. Fetal and Neonatal Physiology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998: p. 1769.)

declines modestly in the third trimester, such that the HbF comprises
70–80% of the total hemoglobin. HbF production decreases rapidly
postnatally (Fig. 495.7), and by 6-­12 months of age declines to adult
concentrations of <2%. Understanding the molecular basis of the fetal-­
to-­adult hemoglobin switch is of interest because of the therapeutic
benefits to patients with β-­thalassemia and sickle cell disease, whose
clinical severity is improved with modest elevation of HbF. The exact
mechanisms by which BCL11A acts to repress HbF are not fully elucidated, but erythroid-­specific enhancers of BCL11A have been identified and are potential targets for therapeutic HbF induction.

Adult Hemoglobins

HbA constitutes 5–10% of total hemoglobin at 24 weeks’ gestation and
steadily increases, so that at term, HbA averages 30% of total hemoglobin. By 6-­12 months of age, individuals reach adult concentrations of
HbA. The minor adult hemoglobin component, HbA2, contains delta (δ)
chains and has the structure α2δ2. At birth, <1.0% of HbA2 is detected,
but by 12 months of age the normal level is 2.0–3.4%. Throughout life,
the normal ratio of HbA to HbA2 is approximately 30:1.

Alterations of Hemoglobins

HbF levels may be elevated with hemoglobinopathies, hereditary persistence of HbF, or bone marrow failure syndromes or may be associated
with stress erythropoiesis. Because the HbF level is elevated during the first
years of life, knowledge of its normal pattern of decline is important (see
Figs. 495.6 and 495.7). Two disorders resulting from pathogenic variants
in the β-­globin gene (HBB), β-­thalassemia and sickle cell disease, become
symptomatic postnatally as fetal γ-­globin expression decreases and adult
β-­globin increases. In both these disorders, elevated HbF levels persist in
childhood and later. In patients with the most severe type, β0 thalassemia,
except for a small amount of HbA2, HbF is the only hemoglobin produced.
At the other end of the spectrum, in individuals with β-­thalassemia trait,
the postnatal decrease of HbF is delayed and mildly elevated levels of HbF
(>2%) may persist throughout life. Individuals with sickle cell disease, who
also have a pathogenic variant in the HBB gene, typically demonstrate
elevated levels of HbF, ranging from approximately 5% to up to 30%. In
contrast, elevated HbF is not characteristic of α-­thalassemia syndromes,
but tetramers of γ chains (γ4 or Hb Barts) may be found in the neonatal
period. Because α-­globin chains are expressed in fetal and adult hemoglobin, four α gene pathogenic variants leading to functional deletions are

32 36
40
Postconceptional, 1
wks

2

3

4

5

6

Term postnatal, mos

Fig. 495.7 Pre-­and postnatal changes in the percentage of total

hemoglobin represented by fetal hemoglobin (HbF) (yellow). The triangles represent postnatal production by reticulocytes in premature
infants, and the circles represent cord blood and postnatal reticulocyte
production in term infants. (From Brown MS. Fetal and neonatal erythropoiesis. In: Stockman JA, Pochedly C eds. Developmental and Neonatal Hematology. New York: Raven Press, 1988.)

not compatible with life. Fetuses die in utero or shortly after birth from the
severe anemia and hydrops fetalis. Inheritance of only one normal gene of
the four (α −/−) results in hemoglobin H disease, which is usually associated with a moderate anemia. Inheritance of two or three normal α genes
results in α-­thalassemia trait or carrier status, respectively.
Hereditary persistence of HbF (HPFH) is a benign genetic condition
caused by heterozygous deletions or nucleotide substitutions in regions of
the β-­globin locus that regulate transcription of HBG1 and HBG2, causing
persistent pancellular HbF expression levels of approximately 30% of total
hemoglobins. Individuals with HPFH do not exhibit anemia.
Preterm infants treated with human recombinant EPO increase HbF
production during active erythropoiesis. Moderate elevations of HbF
may also occur in many diseases accompanied by hematologic stress,
such as hemolytic anemias, leukemia, and bone marrow failure syndromes, such as Diamond Blackfan anemia.
The normal adult level of HbA2 (2.0–3.4%) is seldom altered. Levels of
HbA2 > 3.4% are found in most persons with the β-­thalassemia trait and in
those with megaloblastic anemias secondary to vitamin B12 and folic acid
deficiency. Decreased HbA2 levels are found in those with iron-­deficiency
anemia (see Chapter 504) and α-­thalassemia (see Chapter 511.10).

RED CELL LIFE SPAN IN THE FETUS AND NEONATE

In general, the highest hematocrit during a person’s lifetime occurs
at birth, and the lowest hematocrit occurs at the physiologic nadir
that occurs 8-­10 weeks postnatally. A shortened life span of fetal and
neonatal red blood cells (RBCs) has been suggested as an important
component. The average erythrocyte life span in normal adults is
approximately 120 days. The life span of fetal/neonatal erythrocytes
was once estimated to be considerably less, with an average of 60-­90
days suggested by chromium (51Cr)-­labeled erythrocyte studies. However, newer studies indicate that the life span of fetal/neonatal RBCs is
similar to that of adults. Neocytolysis is the active removal of young
erythrocytes that were generated in relatively hypoxic conditions, after
normoxic or hyperoxic conditions. This process has also been suggested as an explanation for the physiologic nadir of neonates.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2926 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
more complete transfer of oxygen to the tissues. This same shift in the
oxygen dissociation curve can also occur at high altitude. Higher levels
of erythropoietin (EPO) and consequent increased RBC production by
the bone marrow further help the body to adapt.

Chapter 496

Anemias

HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Courtney D. Thornburg

A detailed history and thorough physical exam are essential when evaluating an anemic child. Important historical facts include demographics, diet, medications, chronic diseases, infections, travel, and exposures.
A family history of anemia and associated difficulties (e.g., splenomegaly, jaundice, early-­age onset of gallstones) is also important. Often, few
physical symptoms or signs result solely from a low hemoglobin, particularly when the anemia develops slowly. Clinical findings generally
do not become apparent until the hemoglobin level falls to <7-­8 g/dL.
Clinical features can include pallor, sleepiness, irritability, and decreased
exercise tolerance. Pallor can involve the tongue, nail beds, conjunctiva,
palms, or palmar creases. A flow murmur is often present. Ultimately,
weakness, tachypnea, shortness of breath on exertion, tachycardia, cardiac dilation, and high-­output heart failure results from increasingly
severe anemia, regardless of its cause. Unusual physical findings linked
to specific underlying disease etiologies are discussed in detail in sections describing the associated disorders and in Table 496.3.

Anemia is defined as a reduction of the hemoglobin concentration
or red blood cell (RBC) volume below the range of values occurring
in healthy persons. Normal ranges for hemoglobin and hematocrit
(packed red cell volume) vary substantially with age and between males
and females (Table 496.1) and by race and ethnicity (Table 496.2).
Anemia is a significant global health problem affecting children and
reproductive-­age females (Figs. 496.1 and 496.2).
Physiologic responses to anemia include increased cardiac output,
augmented oxygen extraction (increased arteriovenous oxygen difference), and shunting of blood flow toward vital organs and tissues.
In addition, the concentration of 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate increases
within the RBC. The resultant “rightward shift” of the oxygen dissociation curve reduces the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen and results in

Table 496.1  	 Normal Mean and Lower Limits of Normal for Hemoglobin, Hematocrit, and Mean Corpuscular Volume
HEMOGLOBIN (g/dL)

HEMATOCRIT (%)

MEAN CORPUSCULAR VOLUME (fL)

AGE (yr)

MEAN

LOWER LIMIT

MEAN

LOWER LIMIT

MEAN

LOWER LIMIT

0.5-­1.9

12.5

11.0

37

33

77

70

2-­4

12.5

11.0

38

34

79

73

5-­7

13.0

11.5

39

35

81

75

8-­11

13.5

12.0

40

36

83

76

12-­14 female

13.5

12.0

41

36

85

78

12-­14 male

14.0

12.5

43

37

84

77

15-­17 female

14.0

12.0

41

36

87

79

15-­17 male

15.0

13.0

46

38

86

78

18-­49 female

14.0

12.0

42

37

90

80

18-­49 male

16.0

14.0

47

40

90

80

From Brugnara C, Oski FJ, Nathan DG, eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology of Infancy and Childhood, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2009: p. 456.

Table 496.2  	 NHANES-­III Hemoglobin Values for Non-­Hispanic Whites and Blacks Ages 2-­18 Yr*
WHITE NON-­HISPANIC
AGE (yr)

MEAN

2-­5
6-­10

BLACK

−2 SD

MEAN

−2 SD

12.21

10.8

11.95

10.37

12.87

11.31

12.40

10.74

11-­15 male

13.76

11.76

13.06

10.88

11-­15 female

13.32

11.5

12.61

10.85

16-­18 male

15.00

13.24

14.18

12.42

16-­18 female

13.39

11.61

12.37

10.37

*Sample size is 5,142 (White, 2,264; Black, 2,878).
NHANES-­III, Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; SD, standard deviation.
Adapted from Robbins EB, Blum S. Hematologic reference values for African American children and adolescents. Am J Hematol 2007;82:611–614.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 496 u Anemias

2927

Anaemia prevalence
Mild (5.0–19.9%)
Moderate (20.0–39.9%)
Severe (40.0%)
Regression-based estimate

Fig. 496.1 Global prevalence of anemia in children of preschool age (0-­5 yr). (Adapted from Worldwide prevalence of anaemia 1993–2005. In
WHO Global Database on Anaemia. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2008.)

Genetic hemoglobin
disorders
Thalassemias
Hemoglobin variants
Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency
Ovalocytosis

Nutrition
Iron deficiency
Folic acid deficiency
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Vitamin A deficiency
Protein energy malnutrition

Infectious disease
Soil-transmitted helminths
Malaria
Schistosomiasis
Tuberculosis
AIDS
Leishmaniasis
Tropical sprue
Malabsorption and disorders
of the small intestine

Fig. 496.2 Causes of anemia in countries with low-­or middle-­
income populations. (From Balarajan Y, Ramakrishnan U, Özaltin E,
et al. Anaemia in low-­income and middle-­income countries. Lancet
2011;378:2123–2134; Fig 3.)

LABORATORY STUDIES

Initial laboratory testing should include hemoglobin, hematocrit, RBC
indices, white blood cell (WBC) count and differential, platelet count,
reticulocyte count, and examination of the peripheral blood smear. The
need for additional laboratory studies is dictated by the history, physical exam, and initial testing.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Anemia can result from many underlying pathologic processes. To
narrow the diagnostic possibilities, anemias may be classified based on
their morphology and physiology (Fig. 496.3).

Anemias may be morphologically categorized by red cell size
(mean corpuscular volume [MCV]) and microscopic appearance.
Anemias can be classified as microcytic, normocytic, or macrocytic
based on whether the MCV is low, normal, or high, respectively
(Table 496.4). RBC size also changes with age, and normal developmental changes in MCV should be accommodated before a designation is made (see Table 496.1). Examination of a peripheral
blood smear often reveals changes in RBC appearance that will help
to further narrow the diagnostic categories (Fig. 496.4 and Table
496.5). Details regarding morphologic changes associated with specific disorders are described in subsequent sections.
Anemias may also be further divided based on underlying pathophysiology. The two major categories are decreased production
and increased destruction (or loss). These two groups are not
always mutually exclusive. Decreased RBC production may be a
consequence of either ineffective erythropoiesis or complete failure
of erythropoiesis. Increased destruction or loss may be secondary to
hemolysis, sequestration, or bleeding. The peripheral blood reticulocyte percentage or absolute number helps to distinguish between
the two physiologic categories. The normal reticulocyte percentage of total RBCs during most of childhood is approximately 1%,
with an absolute reticulocyte count of 25,000-­75,000/mm3. In the
presence of anemia, EPO production and the absolute number of
reticulocytes should rise. Low or normal numbers of reticulocytes
generally represent an inadequate response to anemia that is associated with relative bone marrow failure or ineffective erythropoiesis.
Increased numbers of reticulocytes represent a normal bone marrow response to ongoing RBC destruction (hemolysis), sequestration, or loss (bleeding).
Figure 496.3 presents a useful approach to assessing the common
causes of anemia in the pediatric age group. Children with microcytic
anemia and low or normal reticulocyte counts most often have defects
in erythroid maturation or ineffective erythropoiesis. Iron deficiency
is the most common cause (see Chapter 504). Thalassemia trait constitutes the primary differential diagnosis when iron deficiency is
suspected (see Chapter 511). Distinctions between these entities are
presented in Table 504.2. Chronic disease or inflammation (more
often normocytic), lead poisoning, and sideroblastic anemias should
also be considered and are discussed in other chapters. Microcytosis
and elevated reticulocyte counts are associated with thalassemias and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2928 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 496.3  	 Physical Findings in the Evaluation of Anemia
SYSTEM

OBSERVATION

SIGNIFICANCE

Skin

Hyperpigmentation

Fanconi anemia, dyskeratosis congenita

Café-­au-­lait spots

Fanconi anemia

Vitiligo

Vitamin B12 deficiency

Partial oculocutaneous albinism

Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome

Jaundice

Hemolysis, hepatitis

Petechiae, purpura

Bone marrow infiltration, autoimmune hemolysis with autoimmune
thrombocytopenia (Evans syndrome), hemolytic-­uremic syndrome

Erythematous rash

Parvovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus

Butterfly rash

Systemic lupus erythematosus

Frontal bossing

Thalassemia major, severe iron deficiency, chronic subdural hematoma

Microcephaly

Fanconi anemia
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia

Microphthalmia

Fanconi anemia

Retinopathy

Sickle cell disease, types SS and SC

Optic atrophy, blindness

Osteopetrosis

Blocked lacrimal gland

Dyskeratosis congenita

Kayser-­Fleischer ring

Wilson disease

Head

Eyes

Blue sclera

Iron deficiency

Ears

Deafness

Osteopetrosis

Mouth

Glossitis

Vitamin B12 deficiency, iron deficiency

Angular stomatitis

Iron deficiency

Cleft lip, palate

Diamond-­Blackfan anemia

Pigmentation

Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome (intestinal blood loss)

Telangiectasia

Osler-­Weber-­Rendu syndrome (blood loss)

Leukoplakia

Dyskeratosis congenital

Shield chest or widespread nipples

Diamond-­Blackfan anemia

Murmur

Endocarditis; prosthetic valve hemolysis

Hepatomegaly

Hemolysis, infiltrative tumor, chronic disease, hemangioma, cholecystitis

Splenomegaly

Acquired hemolytic anemia, inherited hemolytic anemia (hereditary
spherocytosis, pyruvate kinase deficiency, sickle cell disease [age of presentation
varies based on phenotype]), thalassemia, malaria, leukemia/lymphoma,
Epstein-­Barr virus, portal hypertension, hemophagocytic syndromes

Nephromegaly

Fanconi anemia

Absent kidney

Fanconi anemia

Absent thumbs

Fanconi anemia

Thenar eminence hypoplasia:
triphalangeal thumb

Diamond-­Blackfan anemia

Spoon nails

Iron deficiency

Beau line (nails)

Heavy metal intoxication, severe illness

Mees line (nails)

Heavy metals, severe illness, sickle cell disease

Dystrophic nails

Dyskeratosis congenita

Edema

Milk-­induced protein-­losing enteropathy with iron deficiency, renal failure

Hemorrhoids

Portal hypertension

Heme-­positive stool

Intestinal hemorrhage

Irritable, apathy

Iron deficiency

Peripheral neuropathy

Deficiency of vitamins B1 and B12, lead poisoning

Dementia

Deficiency of vitamins B12 and E

Ataxia, posterior column signs

Deficiency of vitamins B12 and E

Stroke

Sickle cell disease, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria

Chest
Abdomen

Extremities

Rectal
Nerves

Adapted from Scott JP. Hematology. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1994: p. 520.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 496 u Anemias
Microcytic

Normocytic

Macrocytic

Reticulocyte count

Reticulocyte count

Reticulocyte count

Low/Inadequate

High

• Iron deficiency
• Thalassemia syndromes
• Thalassemia trait
• Hemoglobin C and E
• Chronic disease/
disorders
inflammation
• Pyropoikilocytosis
• Lead poisoning
• Sideroblastic anemias
• Copper deficiency
• Iron refractory iron
deficiency anemia

Low/Inadequate
• Chronic disease/
inflammation
• RBC aplasia
(TEC, infection, drugs)
• Malignancy
• Endocrinopathies
• Renal failure
• Acute bleeding
• Hypersplenism
• Dyserythropoietic
Anemia II
• Hemophagocytic
syndrome

High

Low/Inadequate

2929

High

• Dyserythropoietic
• Antibody mediated
• Folate deficiency
anemia I, III
hemolysis
• Vitamin B12 deficiency
• Active hemolysis
• Hypersplenism
• Acquired aplastic anemia
with very elevated
• Microangiopathy
• Congenital aplastic anemia
reticulocyte count
(Diamond-Blackfan,
(HUS, TTP, DIC,
Fanconi anemia,
Kasabach-Merritt)
Pearson syndrome)
• Membranopathies
(spherocytosis, elliptocytosis, • Drug induced
ovalocytosis)
• Trisomy 21
• Enzymopathies
• Hypothyroidism
(G6PD, PK deficiencies)
• Orotic aciduria
• Liver disease
• Hemoglobinopathies
• Thiamine responsive
(HBSS, SC)
anemia
• Myelodysplasias
• Drugs

Fig. 496.3 Use of the mean corpuscular volume (MCV) and reticulocyte count in the diagnosis of anemia. (Adapted from Brunetti M, Cohen J. The
Harriet Lane Handbook, 17th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2005. p. 338.)

Table 496.4  Causes of High or Low Mean Corpuscular
Volume
LOW MEAN CORPUSCULAR VOLUME
Iron deficiency
Thalassemias
Lead toxicity
Anemia of chronic disease
Copper deficiency
Sideroblastic anemia
Hemoglobin E
Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis
HIGH MEAN CORPUSCULAR VOLUME
Normal newborn
Elevated reticulocyte count
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia (congenital hypoplastic anemia)
Fanconi anemia
Aplastic anemia
Down syndrome
Hypothyroidism (occasionally)
Orotic aciduria
Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome
Drugs (zidovudine, chemotherapy)
Chronic liver disease
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic anemia
Myelodysplasias
Dyserythropoietic anemias
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis: Common Diseases and Their Mimics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023:
Table 49.5, p. 910.

hemoglobin C and E (see Chapter 511). Notably, thalassemias and
hemoglobinopathies are most often seen in patients of Mediterranean,
Middle Eastern, African, or Asian descent.
Normocytic anemia and low reticulocyte count characterize
many anemias. The anemia of chronic disease/inflammation
is usually normocytic (see Chapter 504). The anemia associated
with renal failure, primarily a result of reduced EPO production,

will invariably be associated with clinical and laboratory evidence
of significant kidney disease. Decreased or absent RBC production secondary to transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (see
Chapter 499), infection, medications, or endocrinopathy usually
results in a normocytic anemia, as does bone marrow infiltration by
malignancy. Normocytic anemia in combination with leukopenia
(or significant leukocytosis with blasts) and/or thrombocytopenia
should raise suspicion for malignancy. See Chapters 517 and 518
to review pancytopenias. Acute bleeding, hypersplenism, and congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II are also normocytic (see
Chapter 501).
In children with normocytic anemia and an appropriate (high)
reticulocyte response, the anemia is usually caused by bleeding,
hypersplenism, or ongoing hemolysis. In hemolytic conditions,
reticulocytosis, indirect hyperbilirubinemia, and increased serum
lactate dehydrogenase are indicators of accelerated erythrocyte
destruction. Many causes of hemolysis result from conditions that
are extrinsic (usually acquired) or intrinsic (usually congenital) to
the erythrocyte. Abnormal RBC morphology (e.g., spherocytes,
dacryocytes or sickle forms, and schistocytes) identified on the
peripheral smear is often helpful in ascertaining the cause.
The anemia seen in children with macrocytic blood cells is
sometimes megaloblastic, resulting from impaired DNA synthesis
and nuclear development (see Chapter 503). The peripheral blood
smear in megaloblastic anemias contains large macroovalocytes,
and the neutrophils often show nuclear hypersegmentation. The
major causes of megaloblastic anemia include folate deficiency,
vitamin B12 deficiency, and rare inborn errors of metabolism.
Other macrocytic anemias with low or normal reticulocyte counts
include acquired and congenital (Diamond-­Blackfan anemia and
Fanconi anemia) aplastic anemias and hypothyroidism. Patients
with trisomy 21 have macrocytic cells, although an accompanying
anemia is generally not present. High MCV and reticulocytosis is
seen in congenital dyserythropoietic anemias I and III and in situations where hemolysis results in such a large outpouring of young
red cells that the MCV is abnormally high.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2930 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

A

B

D

C

E

Fig. 496.4 Morphologic abnormalities of the red blood cell. A, Normal. B, Macrocytes (folic acid or vitamin B12 deficiency). C, Hypochromic microcytes (iron deficiency). D, Target cells (HbCC disease). E, Schistocyte (hemolytic-­uremic syndrome). (Courtesy Dr. Elias Schwartz, Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia.)

Table 496.5  Peripheral Blood Morphologic Findings in Various Anemias
MICROCYTES
Iron deficiency
Thalassemias
Lead toxicity
Anemia of chronic disease

BASOPHIL STIPPLING
Thalassemia
Lead intoxication
Myelodysplasia

MACROCYTES
Newborns
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia
Fanconi anemia
Aplastic anemia
Liver disease
Down syndrome
Hypothyroidism

RED BLOOD CELL FRAGMENTS, HELMET CELLS, BURR CELLS
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
Waring blender syndrome (artificial heart valve)
Uremia
Liver disease

SPHEROCYTES
Hereditary spherocytosis
Immune hemolytic anemia (newborn or acquired)
Hypersplenism
SICKLED CELLS
Sickle cell anemias (SS disease, SC disease, Sβ+ thalassemia, Sβ0
thalassemia)
ELLIPTOCYTES
Hereditary elliptocytosis
Iron deficiency
Megaloblastic anemia
TARGET CELLS
Hemoglobinopathies (especially hemoglobin C and SC and thalassemia)
Liver disease
Xerocytosis

HYPERSEGMENTED NEUTROPHILS
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
BLASTS
Leukemia (ALL or AML)
Severe infection (rarely)
LEUKOPENIA/THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Fanconi anemia
Aplastic anemia
Leukemia
Hemophagocytic histiocytosis
HOWELL-­JOLLY BODIES
Asplenia, hyposplenia
Severe iron deficiency
DACROCYTES (TEARDROP CELLS)
Myelodysplasia
Leukemia
Neuroblastoma

ALL, Acute lymphocytic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; SC, sickle cell C disease; SS, sickle cell S disease.
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis: Common Diseases and Their Mimics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023: Table
49.7, p. 910.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 497 u Congenital Hypoplastic Anemia (Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia)

Section 2

Anemias of Inadequate
Production
Chapter 497

Congenital Hypoplastic
Anemia (Diamond-­
Blackfan Anemia)
Courtney D. Thornburg
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare, congenital bone marrow
failure syndrome that usually becomes symptomatic in early infancy.
More than 90% of cases are recognized in the first year of life. The disorder is characterized by anemia, usually normochromic and macrocytic; reticulocytopenia; and insufficient or absent red blood cell (RBC)
precursors in an otherwise normally cellular bone marrow. Up to 50%
of affected individuals have additional, extrahematopoietic anomalies.

ETIOLOGY

The most common DBA-­associated pathogenic variants are in RPS19
(Fig. 497.1). This gene encodes a component protein of the small 40S
ribosomal subunit and pathogenic variants are present in approximately 25–30% of patients with additional ribosomal protein (RP)

100%
Multiple

% cases with putative causal mutations

TSR2
MT
75%

GATA1
CECR1

2931

genes, each encoding a different small (40S) or large (60S) ribosomal
subunit protein, implicated as well. All of these pathogenic variants
are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, with 40–45% of cases
inherited from a parent and 55–60% with a de novo pathogenic variant.
Less frequently, X-­linked inherited cases of DBA involve pathologic
genetic variants in GATA1 or TSR2. Patients with GATA1-­related DBA
usually have no extra hematopoietic manifestations (Fig. 497.2). TSR2-­
related DBA is associated with mandibulofacial dysostosis. Approximately 20% of cases do not have an identified genetic variant. Because
most causative variants are in ribosomal genes, the disorder is often
referred to as a ribosomopathy.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

DBA affects about 5-­10 individuals per million live births. Notably, there
is substantial phenotypic diversity in DBA, even in families whose members share the same pathologic genetic variant, suggesting that additional
genetic modifiers affect phenotypic expression of the disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Profound anemia usually becomes evident by 2-­6 months of age, occasionally somewhat later. Approximately 25% of patients are anemic at
birth, although hydrops fetalis occurs rarely; 92% are diagnosed within
the first year of life. Approximately 40–50% of patients have congenital
anomalies, and more than one anomaly is found in 25% of DBA patients
(Table 497.1). Craniofacial abnormalities are the most common (50% of
patients) and include a depressed nasal bridge and high-­arched palate.
Skeletal anomalies, mostly upper limb and hand, affect 30–40%. This
includes thumb abnormalities, including flattening of the thenar eminence and triphalangeal thumb, that may be bilateral or ­unilateral. The
radial pulse may be absent. Genitourinary (39%), cardiac (30%), ophthalmologic, and musculoskeletal anomalies have also been described.
Short stature is common, but it is often unclear whether this characteristic results from the disease itself, related therapies, or both.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The RBCs are usually macrocytic for age, but no hypersegmented
neutrophils or other characteristics of megaloblastic anemia are
appreciated on the peripheral blood smear. RBC characteristics are
like those of a “fetal” RBC population, with increased expression
of “i” antigen and elevated fetal hemoglobin (HbF). Erythrocyte
adenosine deaminase (eADA) activity is increased in most patients
with DBA, a finding that helps distinguish congenital RBC aplasia
from acquired transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC)
(see Chapter 499). Because elevated eADA activity is not a fetal
RBC feature, measurement of this enzyme may be particularly helpful when diagnosing DBA in very young infants. Thrombocytosis,

RPL15
RPL35A
50%

RPL11

Ribosomal gene
variants:

RPL5

increased eADA
extrahematopoietic
anomalies: skeletal,
renal, heart,
orofacial, bone,
endocrine

RPS17
RPS24
25%

RPS26

Steroid
responsiveness,
congenital red cell
hypoplasia,
increased MCV,
increased fHb,
transfusion-dependent
iron overload

GATA1 gene
variants:
neutropenia,
dyserythropoiesis,
thrombocytopenia

RPS19

0%

Fig. 497.1 Mutational spectrum of likely pathogenic variants in DBA.

Percentage of putative causal mutations in each gene. A total of 78% of
case subjects have a putative causal mutation. (Modified from Ulirsch JC,
Verboon JM, Kazerounian S, et al. The genetic landscape of Diamond-­
Blackfan anemia. Am J Hum Genetics 2018;103:930–947, Fig.1.)

Malignant transformation?
Activation of p53?
BM aplasia?

Fig. 497.2 Common and distinct phenotypes in congenital red cell
aplasia caused by variants in RP genes and in GATA1. BM, Bone marrow; eADA, erythrocyte adenosine deaminase activity; fHb, fetal hemoglobin; MCV, mean corpuscular volume. (Adapted from Weiss MJ, Mason PJ, Bessler M. What's in a name? J Clin Invest 2012;122:2346–2349.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2932 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
or rarely thrombocytopenia, and occasionally neutropenia, may
also be present. Reticulocytopenia is characteristic despite severe
anemia. Bone marrow erythrocyte precursors are greatly reduced
in most patients; other marrow elements are usually normal. Serum
iron levels are elevated. Unlike Fanconi anemia, there is no increase

in chromosomal breaks when lymphocytes are exposed to alkylating agents. Table 497.2 outlines suggested diagnostic criteria for
“classical” DBA. Patients may be diagnosed with “nonclassical”
DBA or “probable” DBA depending on their individual genetic test
results, family history, and major and minor criteria.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Table 497.1  Range of Congenital Anomalies Observed
in Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia
TYPE/LOCATION

ANOMALIES

Craniofacial

Hypertelorism
Broad, flat nasal bridge
Cleft palate
High-­arched palate
Microcephaly
Micrognathia
Microtia
Low-­set ears
Low hairline
Ptosis

Ophthalmologic

Congenital glaucoma
Strabismus
Epicanthal folds
Congenital cataract

Neck

Short neck
Webbed neck
Sprengel deformity
Klippel-­Feil deformity

Thumbs

Triphalangeal
Duplex or bifid
Hypoplastic
Flat thenar eminence
Absent radial artery

Urogenital

Absent kidney
Horseshoe kidney
Hypospadias

DBA must be differentiated from other anemias associated with reticulocytopenia. The syndrome of TEC is often the primary alternative
diagnosis. Table 499.1 shows a useful comparison of findings in these
two disorders (see Chapter 499). TEC often is differentiated from DBA
by its relatively late onset, although it occasionally develops in infants
younger than 6 months of age. Macrocytosis, congenital anomalies,
fetal RBC characteristics, and elevated eADA are generally associated
with DBA and not TEC.
Other inherited macrocytic bone marrow failure syndromes, particularly Fanconi anemia and Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome
(see Chapter 517), should also be considered, as should myelodysplastic syndrome. Aase syndrome includes congenital RBC aplasia
with triphalangeal thumb, congenital heart disease, and cleft palate. Hemolytic disease of the newborn can also mimic features of
DBA because it can have a protracted course and can be coupled
with greatly reduced erythropoiesis. The anemia in this disorder
usually resolves spontaneously at 5-­8 weeks of age. Several types
of chronic hemolytic diseases may be complicated by an aplastic
crisis, characterized by reticulocytopenia and decreased numbers
of RBC precursors. This event usually occurs after the first several
months of life and is often caused by parvovirus B19 infection (see
Chapter 499). Infection with parvovirus B19 in utero is also associated with pure RBC aplasia in infancy and even with hydrops fetalis
at birth (see Chapter 298). When diagnosing DBA in young infants,
it is important to rule out parvovirus B19 infection using a polymerase chain reaction assay because serologic testing may be inaccurate. Other infections, including HIV, as well as drugs, immune
processes, and Pearson syndrome (see Chapter 498), should also be
ruled out.

TREATMENT

Cardiac

Ventricular septal defect
Atrial septal defect
Coarctation of the aorta
Complex cardiac anomalies

Other

Low birth weight
Short stature
Syndactyly
Learning difficulties

Multiple anomalies, most often including craniofacial, are present in up to 25% of affected individuals. At least one anomaly is present in 40–50%.
From Vlachos A, Ball S, Dahl N, et al. Diagnosing and treating Diamond-­Blackfan anaemia: Results of an international clinical consensus conference. Br J Haematol 2008;142:
859–876, Table IV.

Corticosteroids are a mainstay of therapy, and approximately 80%
of patients initially respond. Because corticosteroids impair linear
growth as well as physical and neurocognitive development, many
hematologists maintain infants on chronic transfusion therapy and
delay the start of steroids until after age 1 year. Prednisone or prednisolone in doses totaling 2 mg/kg/day is used as an initial trial. An
increase in RBC precursors is usually seen in the bone marrow 1-­3
weeks after therapy is begun and is followed by peripheral reticulocytosis. The hemoglobin can reach normal levels in 4-­6 weeks,
although the rate of response is quite variable. Once it is established
that the hemoglobin concentration is increasing, the dose of corticosteroid may be reduced gradually by tapering and then by eliminating all except a single, lowest effective daily dose. This dose may

Table 497.2  	 Diagnostic Criteria for Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia
SUPPORTING CRITERIA
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA

MAJOR CRITERIA

MINOR CRITERIA

Age younger than 1 yr

Pathogenic variant described in “classical
DBA”

Elevated red cell adenosine deaminase

Macrocytic anemia with no other significant
cytopenias

Positive family history

Congenital anomalies described in “classical”
DBA

Reticulocytopenia

Elevated HbF

Normal marrow cellularity with paucity of bone
marrow erythroid precursors

No evidence for another inherited bone marrow failure syndrome

“Classical DBA” diagnosis is made if all the diagnostic criteria are met.
DBA, Diamond Blackfan anemia, HbF, fetal hemoglobin.
From Vlachos A, Ball S, Dahl N, et al. Diagnosing and treating Diamond-­Blackfan anaemia: results of an international clinical consensus conference. Br J Haematol 2008;142:859–876.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 498 u Pearson Syndrome 2933
then be doubled, used on alternate days, and tapered still further
while maintaining the hemoglobin level at ≥9 g/dL. The target maintenance dose should not exceed 0.5 mg/kg/day or 1 mg/kg every
other day. In some patients, very small amounts of prednisone, as
low as 2.5 mg twice a week, may be sufficient to sustain adequate
erythropoiesis. Scheduled surveillance examinations and testing for
corticosteroid side effects should be pursued in all patients, regardless of dose. Appropriate Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis should
be considered after the first month of high-­dose steroids and continued until the patient is on low-­dose alternate-­day therapy. In the
setting of illness, stress steroids should be considered for children
on chronic corticosteroids. Many children with DBA stop taking
corticosteroids, usually because of unacceptable side effects (i.e.,
cushingoid features, pathologic fractures, cataracts) or the evolution of corticosteroid refractoriness.
Chronic red cell transfusions are required in approximately
35% of patients, including patients who are never steroid responsive (30%), are steroid refractory (15%), or cannot be weaned to
acceptable low dose (50%). Transfusions are given at intervals of
3-­5 weeks to maintain a hemoglobin level >8 g/dL. Some younger
children may require hemoglobin >9 g/dL to sustain normal growth
and activities. Appropriate screening and ultimately the initiation of chelation therapy are required for transfusion-­related iron
overload.
L-­leucine (700 mg/m2 orally three times per day) has been evaluated in a phase I/II trial patients with DBA 2 years of age and
older. In 43 evaluable patients, 16% had erythroid response, 36%
had increase in weight, and 44% had an increase in linear growth
velocity.
Spontaneous remission of anemia with independence from steroid or red cell transfusion therapy has been reported. The likelihood of remission is 25% by age 25 years, with most of these
patients experiencing remission during the first decade. Mild macrocytic anemia and increased erythrocyte ADA levels persist in
these circumstances.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) can be curative. Indications for HSCT include steroid resistance or unacceptable toxicity and transfusion dependence as well as significant
complications of chronic red cell transfusions including iron overload and alloimmunizations. HLA-­matched sibling HSCT is recommended for transfusion-­dependent children with DBA. One
recommendation is for HSCT between ages 3 and 9 years, and some
advocate HSCT at a younger age to avoid iron overload and allosensitization from chronic red cell transfusions. It is important that
sibling donors be carefully screened, including genotype if known,
to ensure that the donor does not carry the pathologic genetic variant. Overall, outcomes are improving for matched-­sibling and alternative donor HSCT.

Chapter 498

Pearson Syndrome
Courtney D. Thornburg
Pearson syndrome (PS) is a rare multisystem mitochondrial disorder
that presents with a hypoplastic anemia that may be initially confused
with Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome (anemia) or transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (see Chapter 499). The marrow failure usually
appears in the neonatal period and is characterized by a sideroblastic
macrocytic anemia and, occasionally, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. There are vacuolated erythroblasts and myeloblasts in the
bone marrow (Fig. 498.1). PS is considered a unique variant of congenital sideroblastic anemia because the marrow also contains ringed
sideroblasts. The hemoglobin F level is elevated. There is multiorgan
involvement manifested by failure to thrive and symptoms of exocrine
pancreas dysfunction, liver and renal tubular defects, malabsorption,
and myopathy. Endocrine dysfunction (type 1 diabetes, adrenal insufficiency, hypoparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism) has also been
reported. Children that survive early childhood typically develop
Kearns-­Sayre syndrome, an early-­onset, mitochondrial disorder with
lactic acidosis, progressive external ophthalmoplegia (impaired eye
movement and ptosis), pigmentary retinitis, deafness, cerebellar ataxia,
and heart block. Pearson syndrome is caused by a large heteroplasmic
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletion (see Chapter 108) that predominates in the hematopoietic lineage. Subsequently, there is heterogeneity in different tissues and between patients, accounting for the
variable clinical picture. The proportion of deleted mtDNA in the bone
marrow correlates with the severity of the hematologic disease, and a
reduction in the percentage of deleted mtDNA over time may be associated with spontaneous improvement of red blood cell hypoproliferation. PS may be misdiagnosed as Diamond-­Blackfan anemia (DBA)
based on the overlapping features, including severe anemia starting at a
young age. Evaluation for mtDNA deletion differentiates PS from DBA
(see Chapter 497).
Therapy for the hematologic manifestations of the disease includes
red cell transfusions to correct anemia and granulocyte colony-­
stimulating factor in the setting of severe neutropenia. The hematologic manifestations may spontaneously resolve within the first few
years of life and stem cell transplantation may be considered for persistent cytopenias.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

PROGNOSIS

DBA has been identified as a cancer predisposition syndrome
because of the higher risk of myelodysplastic syndrome, acute
myeloid leukemia, colon carcinoma, osteogenic sarcoma, and
female genital cancers. Patients are at risk for iron overload-­related
endocrine abnormalities (diabetes, hypogonadism), especially if
transfused. Patients who have undergone HSCT are at risk of associated late effects (see Chapters 179, 180, and 181). The overall
actuarial survival of all patients with DBA is approximately 75%
at age 40 years, with approximately 87% for those maintained on
corticosteroids and approximately 57% for transfusion-­dependent
patients. Of reported deaths, 67% were treatment related and 22%
were DBA related (malignancy and severe aplastic anemia).
Treatment outcome and survival data are collected through the
Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia Registry (https://www.dbar.org).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 498.1 Bone marrow morphology in Pearson syndrome. Left,

Vacuoles in myeloid precursor. Center, Vacuoles in erythroid precursor.
Right, Ringed sideroblast. (From Shimamura A, Alter BP. Pathophysiology and management of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes.
Blood Rev 2010;24:101–122; Fig 14.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 498 u Pearson Syndrome 2933
then be doubled, used on alternate days, and tapered still further
while maintaining the hemoglobin level at ≥9 g/dL. The target maintenance dose should not exceed 0.5 mg/kg/day or 1 mg/kg every
other day. In some patients, very small amounts of prednisone, as
low as 2.5 mg twice a week, may be sufficient to sustain adequate
erythropoiesis. Scheduled surveillance examinations and testing for
corticosteroid side effects should be pursued in all patients, regardless of dose. Appropriate Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis should
be considered after the first month of high-­dose steroids and continued until the patient is on low-­dose alternate-­day therapy. In the
setting of illness, stress steroids should be considered for children
on chronic corticosteroids. Many children with DBA stop taking
corticosteroids, usually because of unacceptable side effects (i.e.,
cushingoid features, pathologic fractures, cataracts) or the evolution of corticosteroid refractoriness.
Chronic red cell transfusions are required in approximately
35% of patients, including patients who are never steroid responsive (30%), are steroid refractory (15%), or cannot be weaned to
acceptable low dose (50%). Transfusions are given at intervals of
3-­5 weeks to maintain a hemoglobin level >8 g/dL. Some younger
children may require hemoglobin >9 g/dL to sustain normal growth
and activities. Appropriate screening and ultimately the initiation of chelation therapy are required for transfusion-­related iron
overload.
L-­leucine (700 mg/m2 orally three times per day) has been evaluated in a phase I/II trial patients with DBA 2 years of age and
older. In 43 evaluable patients, 16% had erythroid response, 36%
had increase in weight, and 44% had an increase in linear growth
velocity.
Spontaneous remission of anemia with independence from steroid or red cell transfusion therapy has been reported. The likelihood of remission is 25% by age 25 years, with most of these
patients experiencing remission during the first decade. Mild macrocytic anemia and increased erythrocyte ADA levels persist in
these circumstances.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) can be curative. Indications for HSCT include steroid resistance or unacceptable toxicity and transfusion dependence as well as significant
complications of chronic red cell transfusions including iron overload and alloimmunizations. HLA-­matched sibling HSCT is recommended for transfusion-­dependent children with DBA. One
recommendation is for HSCT between ages 3 and 9 years, and some
advocate HSCT at a younger age to avoid iron overload and allosensitization from chronic red cell transfusions. It is important that
sibling donors be carefully screened, including genotype if known,
to ensure that the donor does not carry the pathologic genetic variant. Overall, outcomes are improving for matched-­sibling and alternative donor HSCT.

Chapter 498

Pearson Syndrome
Courtney D. Thornburg
Pearson syndrome (PS) is a rare multisystem mitochondrial disorder
that presents with a hypoplastic anemia that may be initially confused
with Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome (anemia) or transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (see Chapter 499). The marrow failure usually
appears in the neonatal period and is characterized by a sideroblastic
macrocytic anemia and, occasionally, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. There are vacuolated erythroblasts and myeloblasts in the
bone marrow (Fig. 498.1). PS is considered a unique variant of congenital sideroblastic anemia because the marrow also contains ringed
sideroblasts. The hemoglobin F level is elevated. There is multiorgan
involvement manifested by failure to thrive and symptoms of exocrine
pancreas dysfunction, liver and renal tubular defects, malabsorption,
and myopathy. Endocrine dysfunction (type 1 diabetes, adrenal insufficiency, hypoparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism) has also been
reported. Children that survive early childhood typically develop
Kearns-­Sayre syndrome, an early-­onset, mitochondrial disorder with
lactic acidosis, progressive external ophthalmoplegia (impaired eye
movement and ptosis), pigmentary retinitis, deafness, cerebellar ataxia,
and heart block. Pearson syndrome is caused by a large heteroplasmic
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletion (see Chapter 108) that predominates in the hematopoietic lineage. Subsequently, there is heterogeneity in different tissues and between patients, accounting for the
variable clinical picture. The proportion of deleted mtDNA in the bone
marrow correlates with the severity of the hematologic disease, and a
reduction in the percentage of deleted mtDNA over time may be associated with spontaneous improvement of red blood cell hypoproliferation. PS may be misdiagnosed as Diamond-­Blackfan anemia (DBA)
based on the overlapping features, including severe anemia starting at a
young age. Evaluation for mtDNA deletion differentiates PS from DBA
(see Chapter 497).
Therapy for the hematologic manifestations of the disease includes
red cell transfusions to correct anemia and granulocyte colony-­
stimulating factor in the setting of severe neutropenia. The hematologic manifestations may spontaneously resolve within the first few
years of life and stem cell transplantation may be considered for persistent cytopenias.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

PROGNOSIS

DBA has been identified as a cancer predisposition syndrome
because of the higher risk of myelodysplastic syndrome, acute
myeloid leukemia, colon carcinoma, osteogenic sarcoma, and
female genital cancers. Patients are at risk for iron overload-­related
endocrine abnormalities (diabetes, hypogonadism), especially if
transfused. Patients who have undergone HSCT are at risk of associated late effects (see Chapters 179, 180, and 181). The overall
actuarial survival of all patients with DBA is approximately 75%
at age 40 years, with approximately 87% for those maintained on
corticosteroids and approximately 57% for transfusion-­dependent
patients. Of reported deaths, 67% were treatment related and 22%
were DBA related (malignancy and severe aplastic anemia).
Treatment outcome and survival data are collected through the
Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia Registry (https://www.dbar.org).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 498.1 Bone marrow morphology in Pearson syndrome. Left,

Vacuoles in myeloid precursor. Center, Vacuoles in erythroid precursor.
Right, Ringed sideroblast. (From Shimamura A, Alter BP. Pathophysiology and management of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes.
Blood Rev 2010;24:101–122; Fig 14.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2934 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 499

Acquired Pure Red Blood
Cell Anemia
Courtney D. Thornburg

be seen under light microscopy in bone marrow specimens. The
virus does not cause significant anemia in immunocompetent individuals with a normal RBC life span.
Because parvovirus infection usually lasts less than 2 weeks, anemia may not develop or be appreciated in otherwise normal children whose peripheral RBC life span is 100-­120 days. The RBC life
span is much shorter in patients with chronic hemolysis secondary
to conditions such as hereditary spherocytosis, immune hemolytic
anemia, or sickle cell disease. In these children, a brief cessation of
erythropoiesis can cause severe anemia, known as aplastic crisis.
When a definitive diagnosis is required, the workup should include

TRANSIENT ERYTHROBLASTOPENIA OF
CHILDHOOD

Transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC) is the most common acquired red cell aplasia occurring in children. It is more
prevalent than congenital hypoplastic anemia (Diamond-­Blackfan
anemia [DBA]). This syndrome of severe transient hypoplastic anemia occurs mainly in previously healthy children between 6 months
and 3 years of age. Most children are older than 12 months at onset.
Only 10% of affected patients are more than 3 years of age. The
annual incidence is estimated to be 4.3 cases per 100,000 children,
although it is likely higher, because TEC often resolves spontaneously with many cases undiagnosed. The suppression of erythropoiesis has been linked to IgG, IgM, and cell-­mediated mechanisms.
Familial cases have been reported, suggesting a hereditary component. TEC often follows a viral illness, although no specific virus
has been consistently implicated.
The temporary suppression of erythropoiesis results in reticulocytopenia and moderate to severe normocytic anemia. Some degree
of neutropenia occurs in up to 20% of cases. Platelet numbers are
normal or elevated. Like the situation observed in iron-­deficiency
anemia and other red blood cell (RBC) hypoplasias, thrombocytosis is presumably caused by increased erythropoietin (EPO), which
has homology to thrombopoietin (TPO). Mean corpuscular volume
(MCV) is characteristically normal for age, and fetal hemoglobin
(HbF) levels are normal before the recovery phase. RBC adenosine deaminase levels are normal in TEC, thus contrasting with the
elevation noted in most cases of congenital hypoplastic anemia
(Table 499.1). Differentiation from DBA is sometimes difficult, but
differences in age at onset and in age-­related MCV, HbF, and adenosine deaminase are usually helpful. The peak occurrence of TEC
coincides with that of iron-­deficiency anemia in infants receiving
milk as their main caloric source; differences in MCV should help
to distinguish between TEC and DBA.
Virtually all children recover within 1-­2 months. RBC transfusions may be necessary for severe anemia in the absence of signs of
early recovery. The anemia develops slowly, and significant symptoms usually develop only with severe anemia. Corticosteroid therapy is of no value in this disorder. Any child with presumed TEC
who requires more than one transfusion should be reevaluated for
another possible diagnosis. In rare instances, a prolonged case of
apparent TEC may be caused by parvovirus-­induced RBC aplasia, occurring in children with hemolytic anemia or congenital or
acquired immunodeficiencies.

RED CELL APLASIA ASSOCIATED WITH
­PARVOVIRUS B19 INFECTION

Parvovirus B19 is a common infectious agent that causes erythema
infectiosum (fifth disease) (see Chapter 298). It is also the most
clearly documented viral cause of RBC aplasia in patients with
chronic hemolytic anemia or an immunocompromised state. This
single-­stranded virus is cytotoxic to marrow erythroid progenitor
cells, interacting specifically by binding to the red cell P antigen. In
addition to decreased or absent erythroid precursors, characteristic
nuclear inclusions in erythroblasts and giant pronormoblasts may

Table 499.1  Comparison of Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia and
Transient Erythroblastopenia of Childhood
DBA

TEC

Male:female

FEATURE

1:1

1:3

AGE AT DIAGNOSIS, MALE (MO)
Mean

10

26

Median

2

23

Range

0-­408

1-­120

14

26

Median

3

23

AGE AT DIAGNOSIS, FEMALE (MO)
Mean

Range

0-­768

1-­192

Males >1 yr

9%

82%

Females >1 yr

12%

80%

Etiology

Genetic

Acquired,
possibly
familial

Antecedent history

None

Viral illness

Physical examination abnormal
(congenital anomalies present)

25%

0%

LABORATORY
Hemoglobin (g/dL)

1.2-­14.8

2.2-­12.5

WBCs <5,000/μL

15%

20%

Platelets >400,000/μL

20%

45%

Adenosine deaminase

Increased

Normal

MCV increased at diagnosis

80%

5%

MCV increased during recovery

100%

90%

MCV increased in remission

100%

0%

HbF increased at diagnosis

100%

20%

HbF increased during recovery

100%

100%

HbF increased in remission

85%

0%

i Antigen increased

100%

20%

i Antigen increased during recovery

100%

60%

i Antigen increased in remission

90%

0%

DBA, Diamond-­Blackfan anemia; HbF, fetal hemoglobin; MCV, mean cell volume; TEC,
transient erythroblastopenia of childhood; WBC, white blood cell.
From Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology
of Infancy and Childhood. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003, p. 329. Adapted from
Alter BP. The bone marrow failure syndromes. In: Nathan DG, Oski FA, eds. Hematology of Infancy and Childhood. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1987. p 159; and Link
MP, Alter BP. Fetal erythropoiesis during recovery from transient erythroblastopenia of
childhood (TEC). Pediatr Res 1981;15:1036–1039.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 500 u Anemia of Chronic Disease and Renal Disease
serum parvovirus IgM and IgG titers. In young infants, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay should be used since serologic
testing may be inaccurate. Recovery from moderate to severe anemia is usually spontaneous, heralded by the appearance of nucleated RBCs and subsequent reticulocytosis in the peripheral blood.
Nonetheless the parvovirus PCR may remain positive for months
after recovery. An RBC transfusion may be necessary if the anemia
is associated with significant symptoms. Parvovirus-­induced aplastic crisis usually occurs only once in children with chronic hemolysis. In families with more than one child with a hemolytic disorder,
parents should be warned that a similar aplastic episode can occur
in the other children if they have not been previously infected. During the episode of aplastic crisis, the child is potentially contagious
and should be isolated from at-­risk patients.
Persistent parvovirus infection may occur in children with congenital immunodeficiency diseases, lymphoproliferative disorders,
those being treated with immunosuppressive agents, and those with
HIV/AIDS, because these children may be unable to mount an adequate antibody response. The resultant pure RBC aplasia may be
severe, and affected children may be thought to have TEC. This type
of RBC aplasia differs from TEC in that there is no spontaneous
recovery, and more than one transfusion is often needed. The diagnosis of parvovirus infection is made by PCR of peripheral blood or
bone marrow DNA because the usual serologic responses, reflected
by parvovirus serum IgM or IgG titers, are impaired in immunodeficient children. In chronically infected patients, the disease may
be treated with high doses of intravenous immunoglobulin, which
contains neutralizing antibody to parvovirus and is effective in the
short term.
Parvovirus infection and destruction of erythroid precursors can
also occur in utero. Such events are associated with increased rates
of fetal loss in the first and second trimesters. Infants may be born
with hydrops fetalis and anemia (see Chapter 138). The presence
of persistent congenital parvovirus infection is detected by PCR of
peripheral blood and/or bone marrow DNA because immunologic
tolerance to the virus can prevent the usual development of specific
antibodies.

OTHER RED CELL APLASIAS IN CHILDREN

Acquired red cell aplasia in adults is usually mediated by a chronic
antibody and often associated with disorders such as chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, lymphoma, thymoma, lymphoproliferative disorders, and systemic lupus erythematosus. This chronic
antibody-­mediated type of RBC aplasia, often responsive to immunosuppressive therapy, is quite rare in childhood. Cases of acquired
pure RBC aplasia attributable to T-­cell suppression have also been
described.
Infections other than parvovirus, such as cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-­Barr virus, and human herpes virus-­6, may cause pure RBC
aplasia. Certain drugs, such as chloramphenicol, also can inhibit
erythropoiesis in a dose-­
dependent manner. Reticulocytopenia,
erythroid hypoplasia, and vacuolated pronormoblasts in the bone
marrow are reversible effects of this drug. These effects are distinct
from the idiosyncratic and rare development of severe aplastic anemia in chloramphenicol recipients. Acquired antibody-­mediated
(to erythropoietin) pure RBC aplasia is a rare complication in
chronic kidney disease patients treated with erythropoietin. In
addition to discontinuing erythropoiesis-­
stimulating agents,
therapy and addressing anemia with red cell transfusions, further
treatment may require immunosuppression and eventually renal
transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2935

Chapter 500

Anemia of Chronic
Disease and Renal
Disease
500.1 Anemia of Chronic Disease
Courtney D. Thornburg
The anemia of chronic disease (ACD), also referred to as anemia of
inflammation, is found in conditions where there is ongoing immune
activation. It occurs in a wide range of disorders, including infections,
malignancies, chronic disease, autoimmunity, and graft-­versus-­host
disease. A similar anemia is associated with chronic kidney disease.
ACD is typically a mild to moderate normocytic, normochromic,
hypoproliferative anemia associated with a decreased serum iron and
low transferrin saturation.

ETIOLOGY

Decreased red cell life span, impaired erythropoiesis, and an increased
uptake of iron in the reticuloendothelial system are important mechanisms contributing to ACD.
ACD-­associated alterations in iron recycling are characterized
by an accumulation of iron in reticuloendothelial macrophages
despite low levels of serum iron. The diversion of iron from the
circulation into the reticuloendothelial system results in functional iron deficiency, which causes the impaired heme synthesis and iron-­restricted erythropoiesis that contribute to anemia.
These alterations in iron metabolism have been attributed to
inflammation-­associated excess synthesis of hepcidin, a key regulatory protein that controls intestinal iron absorption and tissue distribution. Hepcidin, although mainly synthesized by hepatocytes, is
expressed in other cells, including monocytes and macrophages. It
functions by binding to and initiating the degradation of the iron
exporter, ferroportin (Fig. 500.1).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although the important symptoms and signs associated with ACD are
those of the underlying disease, the mild to moderate anemia can affect
the patient’s quality of life.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Hemoglobin concentrations are generally 6-­9 g/dL. The anemia is
usually normochromic and normocytic, although some patients have
modest hypochromia and microcytosis, particularly if there is concomitant iron deficiency. Absolute reticulocyte counts are normal or
low, and leukocytosis is common. The serum iron level is low, without the increase in serum transferrin (the iron transport protein) that
occurs in iron deficiency. This pattern of low serum iron and low-­to-­
normal serum transferrin is a valuable diagnostic feature. However,
note that the serum ferritin level may be elevated secondary to inflammation. Soluble transferrin receptor (sTfR) is a useful diagnostic test
to distinguish ACD from iron-­deficiency anemia (IDA) because sTfR
levels are high in IDA and normal in ACD. A bone marrow biopsy typically shows normal cellularity with decreased or adequate red blood
cell precursors; marrow hemosiderin may be increased and granulocytic hyperplasia may be present.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 500 u Anemia of Chronic Disease and Renal Disease
serum parvovirus IgM and IgG titers. In young infants, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay should be used since serologic
testing may be inaccurate. Recovery from moderate to severe anemia is usually spontaneous, heralded by the appearance of nucleated RBCs and subsequent reticulocytosis in the peripheral blood.
Nonetheless the parvovirus PCR may remain positive for months
after recovery. An RBC transfusion may be necessary if the anemia
is associated with significant symptoms. Parvovirus-­induced aplastic crisis usually occurs only once in children with chronic hemolysis. In families with more than one child with a hemolytic disorder,
parents should be warned that a similar aplastic episode can occur
in the other children if they have not been previously infected. During the episode of aplastic crisis, the child is potentially contagious
and should be isolated from at-­risk patients.
Persistent parvovirus infection may occur in children with congenital immunodeficiency diseases, lymphoproliferative disorders,
those being treated with immunosuppressive agents, and those with
HIV/AIDS, because these children may be unable to mount an adequate antibody response. The resultant pure RBC aplasia may be
severe, and affected children may be thought to have TEC. This type
of RBC aplasia differs from TEC in that there is no spontaneous
recovery, and more than one transfusion is often needed. The diagnosis of parvovirus infection is made by PCR of peripheral blood or
bone marrow DNA because the usual serologic responses, reflected
by parvovirus serum IgM or IgG titers, are impaired in immunodeficient children. In chronically infected patients, the disease may
be treated with high doses of intravenous immunoglobulin, which
contains neutralizing antibody to parvovirus and is effective in the
short term.
Parvovirus infection and destruction of erythroid precursors can
also occur in utero. Such events are associated with increased rates
of fetal loss in the first and second trimesters. Infants may be born
with hydrops fetalis and anemia (see Chapter 138). The presence
of persistent congenital parvovirus infection is detected by PCR of
peripheral blood and/or bone marrow DNA because immunologic
tolerance to the virus can prevent the usual development of specific
antibodies.

OTHER RED CELL APLASIAS IN CHILDREN

Acquired red cell aplasia in adults is usually mediated by a chronic
antibody and often associated with disorders such as chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, lymphoma, thymoma, lymphoproliferative disorders, and systemic lupus erythematosus. This chronic
antibody-­mediated type of RBC aplasia, often responsive to immunosuppressive therapy, is quite rare in childhood. Cases of acquired
pure RBC aplasia attributable to T-­cell suppression have also been
described.
Infections other than parvovirus, such as cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-­Barr virus, and human herpes virus-­6, may cause pure RBC
aplasia. Certain drugs, such as chloramphenicol, also can inhibit
erythropoiesis in a dose-­
dependent manner. Reticulocytopenia,
erythroid hypoplasia, and vacuolated pronormoblasts in the bone
marrow are reversible effects of this drug. These effects are distinct
from the idiosyncratic and rare development of severe aplastic anemia in chloramphenicol recipients. Acquired antibody-­mediated
(to erythropoietin) pure RBC aplasia is a rare complication in
chronic kidney disease patients treated with erythropoietin. In
addition to discontinuing erythropoiesis-­
stimulating agents,
therapy and addressing anemia with red cell transfusions, further
treatment may require immunosuppression and eventually renal
transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2935

Chapter 500

Anemia of Chronic
Disease and Renal
Disease
500.1 Anemia of Chronic Disease
Courtney D. Thornburg
The anemia of chronic disease (ACD), also referred to as anemia of
inflammation, is found in conditions where there is ongoing immune
activation. It occurs in a wide range of disorders, including infections,
malignancies, chronic disease, autoimmunity, and graft-­versus-­host
disease. A similar anemia is associated with chronic kidney disease.
ACD is typically a mild to moderate normocytic, normochromic,
hypoproliferative anemia associated with a decreased serum iron and
low transferrin saturation.

ETIOLOGY

Decreased red cell life span, impaired erythropoiesis, and an increased
uptake of iron in the reticuloendothelial system are important mechanisms contributing to ACD.
ACD-­associated alterations in iron recycling are characterized
by an accumulation of iron in reticuloendothelial macrophages
despite low levels of serum iron. The diversion of iron from the
circulation into the reticuloendothelial system results in functional iron deficiency, which causes the impaired heme synthesis and iron-­restricted erythropoiesis that contribute to anemia.
These alterations in iron metabolism have been attributed to
inflammation-­associated excess synthesis of hepcidin, a key regulatory protein that controls intestinal iron absorption and tissue distribution. Hepcidin, although mainly synthesized by hepatocytes, is
expressed in other cells, including monocytes and macrophages. It
functions by binding to and initiating the degradation of the iron
exporter, ferroportin (Fig. 500.1).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although the important symptoms and signs associated with ACD are
those of the underlying disease, the mild to moderate anemia can affect
the patient’s quality of life.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Hemoglobin concentrations are generally 6-­9 g/dL. The anemia is
usually normochromic and normocytic, although some patients have
modest hypochromia and microcytosis, particularly if there is concomitant iron deficiency. Absolute reticulocyte counts are normal or
low, and leukocytosis is common. The serum iron level is low, without the increase in serum transferrin (the iron transport protein) that
occurs in iron deficiency. This pattern of low serum iron and low-­to-­
normal serum transferrin is a valuable diagnostic feature. However,
note that the serum ferritin level may be elevated secondary to inflammation. Soluble transferrin receptor (sTfR) is a useful diagnostic test
to distinguish ACD from iron-­deficiency anemia (IDA) because sTfR
levels are high in IDA and normal in ACD. A bone marrow biopsy typically shows normal cellularity with decreased or adequate red blood
cell precursors; marrow hemosiderin may be increased and granulocytic hyperplasia may be present.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2936 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Macrophage

Enterocyte
Ferroportin
Fe

Red cell

Fe
Heme
Lysosome
Lysosome

Ferroportin
Transferrin-bound Fe

HEPCIDIN

Ferroportin
Hepatocyte

Iron uptake
Diferric transferrin
NTBI
Hb-haptoglobin
Hb-hemopexin

HAMP mRNA
Fe
HAMP
Lysosome

Modulators of hepcidin transcription
- Fe deficiency
Ineffective erythropoiesis
Hypoxia/anemia
+ Fe stores
Inflammation

TREATMENT

Where possible, the best approach to ACD is the treatment of the underlying disorder. If the associated systemic disease can be controlled, the
anemia typically improves or resolves. Transfusions raise the hemoglobin concentration temporarily but are rarely indicated. Erythropoiesis-­
stimulating agents (ESAs), such as recombinant human erythropoietin
(EPO) or related extended half-­life formulations, increase the hemoglobin level and improve activity and the sense of well-­being. When
using ESAs, treatment with iron is usually necessary to produce optimal
effect. Response to these agents is highly variable, and poorly responsive patients may require high doses to reach target hemoglobin levels.
In adults, high doses are associated with a higher incidence of adverse
events, such as stroke, cardiovascular events, cancer progression,
and death, leading the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to
require a “black box” warning on labels.
ACD does not respond to iron alone unless there is concomitant
deficiency. Unfortunately, it is a common clinical challenge to identify
iron deficiency in patients with an inflammatory disease (see Chapters
496 and 504). In this circumstance, a trial of iron therapy might be
helpful, although there may be no response because persistent inflammation impairs iron absorption and utilization; intravenous iron may
further increase hepcidin production.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

500.2 Anemia of Renal Disease
Courtney D. Thornburg
Anemia is common in children with chronic kidney disease (CKD).
The anemia is usually normocytic, and the absolute reticulocyte count
is normal or low. Although most patients with end-­stage renal disease

Fig. 500.1 Central role of hepcidin in iron metabolism.
Hepcidin, produced by hepatocytes, downregulates iron
export to circulating transferrin from iron “donor” cells
(hepatocytes, macrophages, and duodenal enterocytes)
by promoting the internalization and lysosomal degradation of ferroportin. Hepatocytes take up iron in several
forms, whereas enterocytes obtain their iron predominantly from the gut lumen, and macrophages are specialized to deal with the high throughput of iron from
senescent red cells. (From Pippard M. Iron deficiency
anemia, anemia of chronic disorders and iron overload.
In Porwit A, McCullough J, Erber WN, eds. Blood and
Bone Marrow Pathology, 2nd ed. London: Elsevier, 2011;
Fig 11-­5.)

(ESRD) are anemic, earlier stages of CKD are also associated with a
lower prevalence of anemia. In adults, a lower glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) has been correlated with lower hemoglobin concentration, and
hemoglobin has been reported to decline below a GFR threshold of 40-­
60 mL/min/1.73 m2. In children with CKD, hemoglobin levels decline
as the GFR decreases below 43 mL/min/1.73 m2.
Decreased hemoglobin values are linked to increased incidence of
left ventricular hypertrophy, impaired physical activity, and a reduced
quality of life in pediatric patients with CKD. In those with ESRD on
dialysis, anemia is also associated with increased risk of hospitalization
and mortality.

ETIOLOGY

Although the anemia of CKD shares many features with anemia of
chronic disease, its predominant cause is decreased erythropoietin
(EPO) production by diseased kidneys. Other important causes include
absolute and/or functional iron deficiency because of chronic blood
loss (from blood sampling, surgeries, and dialysis) and disturbances
in iron metabolism. Higher hepcidin levels have also been implicated
in the anemia of CKD. Hepcidin is filtered by the glomerulus and
excreted by the kidney; serum concentrations are increased in patients
with decreased GFR. Inflammation may also be a contributing factor in
pediatric dialysis patients who have elevated levels of proinflammatory
cytokines. Hyperparathyroidism and deficiencies of vitamin B12, folate,
and carnitine may also have a role in anemia of CKD.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Anemia in children with CKD is defined by age: hemoglobin <11.0
g/dL (0.5-­5 years), <11.5 g/dL (5-­12 years), <12 g/dL (12-­15 years),
<13.0 g/dL (males >15 years), and <12.0 g/dL (females >15 years).
The anemia of CKD is hypoproliferative and usually normocytic and
normochromic, unless there is concomitant iron deficiency or vitamin
deficiency. The EPO level and absolute reticulocyte count are usually

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 501 u Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemias

2937

low. White cell and platelet counts are generally normal. Ferritin will
be low if there is accompanying iron deficiency and high if there is
associated inflammation.

also cause CDA I. Proteins encoded by CDAN1 and CDIN1 likely
contribute to DNA repair and/or chromatin reassembly after DNA
replication.

TREATMENT

Clinical Manifestations

Oral iron therapy is recommended for all pediatric CKD patients with
anemia. Intravenous (IV) iron therapy may be considered for those
receiving maintenance hemodialysis and those who to do not respond
to oral iron. Current IV iron preparations (iron-­
gluconate, iron-­
sucrose, iron-­carboxymaltose, iron-­isomaltoside, ferumoxytol) have
iron as a core within a carbohydrate stabilizer shell, thus preventing the
uncontrolled release of free iron and thus reducing serious side effects.
Erythropoiesis-­stimulating agents (ESAs) are the mainstay of therapy and, particularly for children with ESRD, have greatly reduced the
need for frequent transfusions, decreasing the incidence of associated
iron overload and alloimmunization.
Hemoglobin levels at which ESAs are initiated may be guided by
individual patient characteristics, with a goal of 11-­12 g/dL for children on maintenance ESA therapy. Dosing varies with age and dialysis
modality. Darbepoetin, a synthetic form of EPO, appears to be equally
effective as recombinant human EPO and has the benefit of less frequent dosing because of a longer half-­life. Iron therapy should be prescribed when using ESAs because treatment demands additional iron
for erythropoiesis. Infants and children require higher doses of ESAs.
In the rare case in which anti-­EPO antibody-­mediated pure red cell
aplasia develops, ESA therapy should be stopped, and immunomodulatory therapy may be indicated to suppress the antibody response.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

CDA I may be diagnosed at any age, although most cases are recognized during childhood or adolescence in the setting of moderate to
severe macrocytic anemia with relative reticulocytopenia. CDA I is
rarely diagnosed in utero with severe anemia resulting in hydrops fetalis. Neonates with CDA 1 may have neonatal jaundice or pulmonary
hypertension related to anemia. Type I CDA has been associated with
dysmorphic features in 4–25% of patients, primarily involving the
digits (syndactyly, absence of nails or curved toenails, supernumerary
toes, skin pigmentation, café-­au-­lait spots, macrocephaly, dolichocephaly, spinal fusion, scoliosis, and short stature). Patients have progressive
iron overload even in the absence of transfusions.

Laboratory Findings

Hemoglobin concentrations generally range between 7-­11 g/dL. The
anemia is usually macrocytic (mean corpuscular volume: 100-­120
fL), but normocytic indices may be seen during childhood. Anisopoikilocytosis is appreciated on the peripheral blood smear. In some
cases, normoblasts and basophilic stippling of RBCs may be seen. The
reticulocyte count is inadequate for the degree of anemia (reticulocytopenia). Elevated serum ferritin secondary to iron overload may
be present. The bone marrow aspirate shows erythroid hyperplasia. Binucleate erythroblasts make up 2.5–10% of late erythroblasts.
Incompletely divided cells with thin chromatin bridges between nuclei
of pairs of erythrocytes are highly specific for type I CDA. Electron
microscopy is the gold standard for clinical diagnosis, revealing erythroblasts with a characteristic “Swiss cheese” heterochromatin pattern.

Treatment

Chapter 501

Congenital
Dyserythropoietic
Anemias
Courtney D. Thornburg
The congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) are a heterogeneous
class of inherited disorders resulting from abnormalities of late erythropoiesis. These rare conditions are characterized by variable degrees
of anemia, ineffective erythropoiesis, hyperbilirubinemia, gallstones,
splenomegaly, and secondary hemochromatosis (iron overload). They
may be misdiagnosed as other congenital anemias, such as hereditary
spherocytosis or thalassemia. Dyserythropoiesis is the major cause of
anemia but a shortened half-­life of circulating red blood cells (RBCs)
may also contribute. The CDAs have been classified into four major
types (I, II, III, and IV) and variants based on distinctive bone marrow morphology, clinical features, and genetic mutations. Genetic testing is now the key method for achieving a timely accurate diagnosis
(Fig. 501.1).

CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA TYPE I
Pathogenesis

Type I CDA (CDA I) is an autosomal recessive disorder. It is caused by
pathogenic variants in CDAN1, the first gene to be implicated, which
encodes Codanin-­1, a cell-­cycle regulated protein. Pathogenic variants in CDIN1 (CDAN1-­interacting nuclease 1, previously C15orf41)

Treatment of this disorder includes transfusions, especially in the neonatal period and early childhood and in association with co-­inherited
disorders, such as thalassemia or RBC enzymopathy. However, adolescents and adults may require episodic transfusions only during
aplastic crises, infection, or pregnancy. For patients with CDAN1
mutations, treatment with PEGylated interferon-­α2 can reduce transfusion requirements. Because of potential side effects of spastic diplegia and peripheral neuropathy, treatment initiation may be reserved
for patients beyond early childhood requiring frequent transfusions.
Patients do not respond to erythropoietin; splenectomy is generally not
recommended. Cholecystectomy is often required for management of
pigmented gallstones. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation may also be
considered for severe cases.
The most important long-­term complication is progressive iron
overload, caused by increased intestinal absorption of iron and ineffective erythropoiesis and transfusion therapy. Regular phlebotomies
is a treatment option as long as there is not significant anemia. If this
approach is untenable, chelation therapy should be employed when
repeated ferritin levels exceed 1,000 μg/L or liver iron is elevated as
determined by hepatic magnetic resonance imaging T2*.

CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA
TYPE II
Pathogenesis

CDA type II (CDA II), the most common type of CDA, is an autosomal
recessive disorder caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in SEC23B.
This gene encodes a component of the cytoplasmic coat protein II
(COPII) complex that is involved in endoplasmic reticulum vesicle
trafficking.

Clinical Manifestations

CDA II presents with varying degrees of normocytic anemia and no
or mild reticulocytosis. Approximately 20% of patients are transfusion
dependent. CDA II may be initially misdiagnosed as hereditary spherocytosis due to overlapping symptoms of anemia, jaundice, splenomegaly, or hepatomegaly. Extramedullary hematopoiesis may result in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 501 u Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemias

2937

low. White cell and platelet counts are generally normal. Ferritin will
be low if there is accompanying iron deficiency and high if there is
associated inflammation.

also cause CDA I. Proteins encoded by CDAN1 and CDIN1 likely
contribute to DNA repair and/or chromatin reassembly after DNA
replication.

TREATMENT

Clinical Manifestations

Oral iron therapy is recommended for all pediatric CKD patients with
anemia. Intravenous (IV) iron therapy may be considered for those
receiving maintenance hemodialysis and those who to do not respond
to oral iron. Current IV iron preparations (iron-­
gluconate, iron-­
sucrose, iron-­carboxymaltose, iron-­isomaltoside, ferumoxytol) have
iron as a core within a carbohydrate stabilizer shell, thus preventing the
uncontrolled release of free iron and thus reducing serious side effects.
Erythropoiesis-­stimulating agents (ESAs) are the mainstay of therapy and, particularly for children with ESRD, have greatly reduced the
need for frequent transfusions, decreasing the incidence of associated
iron overload and alloimmunization.
Hemoglobin levels at which ESAs are initiated may be guided by
individual patient characteristics, with a goal of 11-­12 g/dL for children on maintenance ESA therapy. Dosing varies with age and dialysis
modality. Darbepoetin, a synthetic form of EPO, appears to be equally
effective as recombinant human EPO and has the benefit of less frequent dosing because of a longer half-­life. Iron therapy should be prescribed when using ESAs because treatment demands additional iron
for erythropoiesis. Infants and children require higher doses of ESAs.
In the rare case in which anti-­EPO antibody-­mediated pure red cell
aplasia develops, ESA therapy should be stopped, and immunomodulatory therapy may be indicated to suppress the antibody response.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

CDA I may be diagnosed at any age, although most cases are recognized during childhood or adolescence in the setting of moderate to
severe macrocytic anemia with relative reticulocytopenia. CDA I is
rarely diagnosed in utero with severe anemia resulting in hydrops fetalis. Neonates with CDA 1 may have neonatal jaundice or pulmonary
hypertension related to anemia. Type I CDA has been associated with
dysmorphic features in 4–25% of patients, primarily involving the
digits (syndactyly, absence of nails or curved toenails, supernumerary
toes, skin pigmentation, café-­au-­lait spots, macrocephaly, dolichocephaly, spinal fusion, scoliosis, and short stature). Patients have progressive
iron overload even in the absence of transfusions.

Laboratory Findings

Hemoglobin concentrations generally range between 7-­11 g/dL. The
anemia is usually macrocytic (mean corpuscular volume: 100-­120
fL), but normocytic indices may be seen during childhood. Anisopoikilocytosis is appreciated on the peripheral blood smear. In some
cases, normoblasts and basophilic stippling of RBCs may be seen. The
reticulocyte count is inadequate for the degree of anemia (reticulocytopenia). Elevated serum ferritin secondary to iron overload may
be present. The bone marrow aspirate shows erythroid hyperplasia. Binucleate erythroblasts make up 2.5–10% of late erythroblasts.
Incompletely divided cells with thin chromatin bridges between nuclei
of pairs of erythrocytes are highly specific for type I CDA. Electron
microscopy is the gold standard for clinical diagnosis, revealing erythroblasts with a characteristic “Swiss cheese” heterochromatin pattern.

Treatment

Chapter 501

Congenital
Dyserythropoietic
Anemias
Courtney D. Thornburg
The congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) are a heterogeneous
class of inherited disorders resulting from abnormalities of late erythropoiesis. These rare conditions are characterized by variable degrees
of anemia, ineffective erythropoiesis, hyperbilirubinemia, gallstones,
splenomegaly, and secondary hemochromatosis (iron overload). They
may be misdiagnosed as other congenital anemias, such as hereditary
spherocytosis or thalassemia. Dyserythropoiesis is the major cause of
anemia but a shortened half-­life of circulating red blood cells (RBCs)
may also contribute. The CDAs have been classified into four major
types (I, II, III, and IV) and variants based on distinctive bone marrow morphology, clinical features, and genetic mutations. Genetic testing is now the key method for achieving a timely accurate diagnosis
(Fig. 501.1).

CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA TYPE I
Pathogenesis

Type I CDA (CDA I) is an autosomal recessive disorder. It is caused by
pathogenic variants in CDAN1, the first gene to be implicated, which
encodes Codanin-­1, a cell-­cycle regulated protein. Pathogenic variants in CDIN1 (CDAN1-­interacting nuclease 1, previously C15orf41)

Treatment of this disorder includes transfusions, especially in the neonatal period and early childhood and in association with co-­inherited
disorders, such as thalassemia or RBC enzymopathy. However, adolescents and adults may require episodic transfusions only during
aplastic crises, infection, or pregnancy. For patients with CDAN1
mutations, treatment with PEGylated interferon-­α2 can reduce transfusion requirements. Because of potential side effects of spastic diplegia and peripheral neuropathy, treatment initiation may be reserved
for patients beyond early childhood requiring frequent transfusions.
Patients do not respond to erythropoietin; splenectomy is generally not
recommended. Cholecystectomy is often required for management of
pigmented gallstones. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation may also be
considered for severe cases.
The most important long-­term complication is progressive iron
overload, caused by increased intestinal absorption of iron and ineffective erythropoiesis and transfusion therapy. Regular phlebotomies
is a treatment option as long as there is not significant anemia. If this
approach is untenable, chelation therapy should be employed when
repeated ferritin levels exceed 1,000 μg/L or liver iron is elevated as
determined by hepatic magnetic resonance imaging T2*.

CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA
TYPE II
Pathogenesis

CDA type II (CDA II), the most common type of CDA, is an autosomal
recessive disorder caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in SEC23B.
This gene encodes a component of the cytoplasmic coat protein II
(COPII) complex that is involved in endoplasmic reticulum vesicle
trafficking.

Clinical Manifestations

CDA II presents with varying degrees of normocytic anemia and no
or mild reticulocytosis. Approximately 20% of patients are transfusion
dependent. CDA II may be initially misdiagnosed as hereditary spherocytosis due to overlapping symptoms of anemia, jaundice, splenomegaly, or hepatomegaly. Extramedullary hematopoiesis may result in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2938 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Erythroid hyperplasia

CDA type I

CDA type II

CDA type III

CDA type IV

CAD-deficiency

A
14.0
CDAII
SEC23B
58.7 %

Rank pathogenicity

Undiagnosed
17.3 %

Other HA
14.8 %
CDAla
CDAN1
3.3 %

B

Acquired
dyserythropoiesis
2.2 %
Syndromic CDA
0.4 %

CDAIV
KLF1
0.4 %

CAD
1.4 %

12.0

GATA1-related
cytopenias
1.8 %

10.0
GATA1
3.4 %

8.0

CDAN1
12.1 %

KLF1
1.4 %

6.0
4.0

SEC23B
77.9 %

C15orf41
4.0 %

2.0
0.0

CDAlb
C15orf41
1.1 %

0

C

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

Coding sequence length (nt)

Fig. 501.1 Morphologic and molecular features of patients with congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDA). A, Light microscopy analysis of the

bone marrow from patients with different CDA subtypes. CDA patients generally show erythroid hyperplasia. Red arrows indicate typical findings
for each CDA subtype: CDAI, internuclear chromatin bridging; CDAII, binucleate erythroid precursors; CDAIII, giant multinucleated erythroblasts;
CDAIV, multinucleate erythroblasts; and CAD deficiency, binucleate CDAII-­like precursors. B, Pie chart showing the frequencies of the different CDA
subtypes diagnosed after genetic testing in patients clinically suspected of having CDA. The frequency of each condition was calculated as the ratio
between the number of patients in each CDA subtype and the overall count of patients tested (n = 218 patients [those included in our international
registry of CDAs from 1995 to 2019]). Six patients originally suspected of CDA showed conclusive diagnosis of acquired dyserythropoiesis: two
patients with liver failure, two with iron-­deficiency anemia, one with erythrophagocytosis, and one with transient erythroblastopenia. Syndromic
CDA refers to one patient with a mutation in the CAD gene. GATA1-­related cytopenias include: X-­linked thrombocytopenia with or without dyserythropoietic anemia; congenital erythropoietic porphyria; and idiopathic cytopenias of undetermined significance. Other hereditary anemias (HA)
include: hereditary spherocytosis; hereditary dehydrated stomatocytosis; red cell enzymatic defects; and sideroblastic anemia. The undiagnosed
cases were evaluated by analysis of the CDA gene panel, by extended targeted next-­generation sequencing for hereditary anemias, or by whole-­
exome sequencing. C, Bubble chart defining the lengths of the coding sequences of each CDA-­causative gene and their relative pathogenicity
scores. These scores were calculated by combining the constraint metrics of each gene available at the ExAC database (http://exac.broadinstitute.o
rg/). High pathogenicity scores identify increased constraints (intolerance to variation). The more intolerant to variation a gene is, the less likely it is
to be mutated. The size of each bubble represents the frequency of the mutations in each gene, as calculated by the ratio of the number of mutated
alleles for each gene and the overall count of disease alleles (n = 149, from 78 patients included in our international registry of CDAs from 2008 to
2019). (From Iolascon A, Andolfo I, Russo R. Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias. Blood. 2020;136:1274–1281; Fig. 1.)

posterior mediastinal or paravertebral masses. Iron overload occurs in
both transfusion dependent and independent patients.

Laboratory Findings

The anemia is normocytic and is generally mild with inappropriately low
reticulocytes. Hemoglobin levels are lower in children than adults and
range from 8-­11 g/dL. The peripheral blood smear shows anisopoikilocytosis, occasional basophilic stippling, as well as a few, sometimes binucleate, mature erythroblasts. The bone marrow aspirate is normoblastic but
hypercellular, with erythroid hyperplasia. Binucleated and multinucleated
erythroblasts with equal nuclei size (10–35%) and karyorrhexis (fragmentation of the nuclei) in >2% are ­characteristic. Electron micrographs
demonstrate vesicles laden with endoplasmic reticulum proteins running beneath the plasma membrane (double membranes). Ninety-­five
percent of patients with CDA II have hypoglycosylated band 3, which
has faster migration on the gel, and the diagnosis may be made by analyzing red blood cell membrane proteins with sodium dodecyl sulfate-­
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS PAGE).

Treatment

Most patients can lead a normal life and have a normal life expectancy if complications and consequences are managed appropriately.
Approximately 10% of patients will require red cell transfusions in
infancy and childhood but rarely during adulthood. Splenectomy may
provide hematologic improvement and is currently recommended
for patients with severe anemia and/or symptomatic splenomegaly.

Splenectomy does not prevent further iron overloading, even in those
patients whose hemoglobin is normalized, presumably because of persistent ineffective erythropoiesis in the bone marrow. Secondary iron
overload is the most prominent long-­term complication and should be
approached as previously outlined.
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation may also be considered for
severe cases.

CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA
TYPE III

CDA type III (CDA III) is an extremely rare, poorly defined entity
characterized by mild to moderate macrocytic anemia. It is inherited in
an autosomal dominant or de novo fashion, although there have been
cases that might represent other inheritance patterns. CDA III is caused
by pathogenic variants in KIF23, which encodes a ubiquitous protein,
mitotic kinesin-­like protein 1, which regulates daughter cell separation
during mitosis. Iron overload is not clinically significant (likely due to
hemolysis being predominantly intravascular), and spleen size is generally normal. Patients can present with angioid streaks with macular
degeneration. An association with monoclonal gammopathy and multiple myeloma is also reported. The blood smear shows macrocytes,
anisopoikilocytosis, and occasional basophilic stippling. The bone
marrow is notable for giant erythroid precursors that are often multinucleated, containing up to 12 nuclei per cell. Such multinucleated
erythroblasts can also be seen in myelodysplasia and erythroleukemia.
Transfusions are usually not required.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 502 u Physiologic Anemia of Infancy
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR–RELATED CDA

Transcription factor–related CDA includes CDA type IV (CDA IV) and
X-­linked thrombocytopenia with or without dyserythropoietic anemia
(XLTDA). CDA IV has an autosomal dominant inheritance due to pathogenic variants in KLF1, which encodes an erythroid transcription factor
that regulates fetal hemoglobin switching and is necessary for terminal
erythroid differentiation. Patients have severe hemolytic anemia with no
or mild reticulocytosis and very high fetal hemoglobin. Bone marrow
morphology consists of hypercellularity and binucleate or multinucleate
erythroblasts. Electron micrographs show immature red cell progenitors
that have atypical inclusions within the cytoplasm, nuclear membrane
invaginations, and heterochromatin.
XLTDA is an X-­linked condition due to pathogenic variants in
GATA1, a DNA-­binding protein with two zinc fingers and a transactivation domain that plays a key role in development and maintenance
of red cell and platelet lineages. The laboratory features of this condition include mild to severe anemia and macrothrombocytopenia with
poorly granulated platelets. Bone marrow morphology shows dyserythropoiesis and megakaryocytes that are abnormal and reduced in
number. Patients present with bleeding and anemia, and management
includes transfusion and supportive care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 502

Physiologic Anemia of
Infancy
Courtney D. Thornburg
At birth, normal full-­term infants have higher hemoglobin (Hb) levels
and larger red blood cells (RBCs) than do older children and adults.
However, within the first week of life, a progressive decline in Hb level
begins and then persists for 6-­8 weeks. The resulting anemia is known
as the physiologic anemia of infancy.
With the onset of respiration at birth, considerably more oxygen
becomes available for binding to Hb, and as a result the Hb-­oxygen
saturation increases from 50–95% or more. There is also a gradual, normal developmental switch from fetal to adult Hb synthesis after birth
that results in the replacement of high-­oxygen-­affinity fetal Hb with
lower-­affinity adult Hb, capable of delivering more oxygen to tissues.
The increase in blood oxygen content and delivery results in the downregulation of erythropoietin (EPO) production, leading to suppression of erythropoiesis. Because there is no erythropoiesis, aged RBCs
that are removed from the circulation are not replaced, and the Hb
level decreases. The Hb concentration continues to decline until tissue oxygen needs become greater than oxygen delivery. Normally, this
point is reached between 8-­12 weeks of age, when the Hb concentration
is about 11 g/dL. In healthy term infants, the nadir rarely falls below
10 g/dL. At this juncture, EPO production increases and erythropoiesis
resumes. The supply of stored reticuloendothelial iron, derived from previously degraded RBCs, remains sufficient for this renewed Hb synthesis,
even in the absence of dietary iron intake, until approximately 20 weeks
of age. In all, this “anemia” should be viewed as a physiologic adaptation
to extrauterine life, reflecting the excess oxygen delivery relative to tissue
oxygen requirements. There is no hematologic problem, and no therapy
is required unless physiologic anemia of infancy is exacerbated by other
ongoing processes including nutritional deficiency and blood loss. The
degree of anemia at birth is correlated with maternal hemoglobin.
A late hyporegenerative anemia, with reticulocytopenia, can occur in
infants with hemolytic disease of the newborn. The persistence of maternally derived anti-­RBC antibodies in the infant’s circulation can lead to an

2939

ongoing low-­grade hemolytic anemia that can exaggerate the physiologic
anemia. Lower-­than-­expected Hb at the “physiologic” nadir has also been
seen in infants after intrauterine or neonatal RBC transfusions. When
infants are transfused with adult blood containing HbA, the associated shift
of the oxygen dissociation curve facilitates oxygen delivery to the tissues.
Accordingly, the definition of anemia and the need for transfusion should
be based not only on the infant’s Hb level, but also on oxygen requirements
and the ability of circulating RBCs to release oxygen to the tissues.
Premature infants also develop a physiologic anemia, known as
anemia of prematurity. The Hb decline is both more extreme and
more rapid. Hb levels of 7-­9 g/dL usually are reached by 3-­6 weeks
of age, and levels may be even lower in very small premature infants (see
Chapter 139). The same physiologic factors at play in term infants are
exaggerated in preterm infants. In premature infants, the physiologic
Hb decline may be intensified by blood loss from repeated phlebotomies
obtained to monitor ill neonates. Demands on erythropoiesis are further
heightened by the premature infant’s presumed shortened RBC life span
(40-­60 days) and the accelerated expansion of RBC mass that accompanies
the premature baby’s rapid rate of growth. Nonetheless, plasma EPO levels
are lower than would be expected for the degree of anemia, resulting in a
suboptimal erythropoietic response. The reason for diminished EPO levels
is not fully understood. During fetal life, EPO synthesis is handled primarily by the liver, and the liver’s oxygen sensor is less sensitive to hypoxia
compared with that of the kidney. The developmental switch from liver
to kidney EPO production is not accelerated by early birth, and thus the
preterm infant must rely on the liver as the primary site for synthesis, leading to diminished responsiveness to anemia. An additional mechanism
thought to contribute to diminished EPO levels may be accelerated EPO
metabolism. Because the pronounced decline in Hb that occurs in many
very low birthweight infants may be associated with abnormal clinical
signs, this “anemia of prematurity” is not considered benign and usually
requires transfusions when symptomatic.
­

TREATMENT

In the full-­term infant, physiologic anemia requires no therapy beyond
ensuring that the infant’s diet contains essential nutrients for normal
hematopoiesis. For infants who are exclusively breastfed, iron supplementation is indicated beginning at 4 months of age and continued until
oral iron intake via food is sufficient. In premature infants, an optimal
Hb has not been established and is usually dictated by the infant’s overall
clinical condition. Transfusions may be needed to maintain the Hb at what
is considered safe for that child. Premature infants who are feeding well
and growing normally rarely need transfusion unless iatrogenic blood loss
has been significant. Although factors such as poor weight gain, respiratory difficulties, and abnormal heart rate have prompted transfusion, the
beneficial effect has not been documented. Laboratory tests such as blood
lactate, EPO, and mixed venous oxygen saturation have poor predictive
value. A restrictive strategy does not increase infant morbidity or mortality. Long-­term neurodevelopmental outcomes have been found to be
poorer in liberally transfused neonates. Exposure to packed RBCs may be
related to the development of necrotizing enterocolitis, and early transfusions may be associated with the risk of intraventricular hemorrhage. Iron
supplementation is indicated starting at 2 to 6 weeks of age until 6 to 12
months of age; dosing depends on birth weight and infants with smaller
birth weights require higher doses.
Strategies to decrease anemia include delayed cord clamping, avoiding
unnecessary phlebotomy, and providing adequate iron supplementation.
Delayed cord clamping at birth results in fewer transfusions and a reduction in both intraventricular hemorrhage and necrotizing enterocolitis in
preterm infants. Given the impact of phlebotomy losses during monitoring in the neonatal intensive care unit, attention to reducing unnecessary
blood draws also has been advocated. Iron therapy is indicated for all neonates with anemia of prematurity starting at 1 month of age and continuing until about 1 year of age. Iron is prescribed as mg of elemental iron per
kg/day and depends on birthweight.
When transfusions are necessary, an RBC volume of 10-­15 mL/kg is
recommended. It is good practice to split units derived from a single donor
to minimize donor exposure if sequential transfusions are indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 502 u Physiologic Anemia of Infancy
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR–RELATED CDA

Transcription factor–related CDA includes CDA type IV (CDA IV) and
X-­linked thrombocytopenia with or without dyserythropoietic anemia
(XLTDA). CDA IV has an autosomal dominant inheritance due to pathogenic variants in KLF1, which encodes an erythroid transcription factor
that regulates fetal hemoglobin switching and is necessary for terminal
erythroid differentiation. Patients have severe hemolytic anemia with no
or mild reticulocytosis and very high fetal hemoglobin. Bone marrow
morphology consists of hypercellularity and binucleate or multinucleate
erythroblasts. Electron micrographs show immature red cell progenitors
that have atypical inclusions within the cytoplasm, nuclear membrane
invaginations, and heterochromatin.
XLTDA is an X-­linked condition due to pathogenic variants in
GATA1, a DNA-­binding protein with two zinc fingers and a transactivation domain that plays a key role in development and maintenance
of red cell and platelet lineages. The laboratory features of this condition include mild to severe anemia and macrothrombocytopenia with
poorly granulated platelets. Bone marrow morphology shows dyserythropoiesis and megakaryocytes that are abnormal and reduced in
number. Patients present with bleeding and anemia, and management
includes transfusion and supportive care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 502

Physiologic Anemia of
Infancy
Courtney D. Thornburg
At birth, normal full-­term infants have higher hemoglobin (Hb) levels
and larger red blood cells (RBCs) than do older children and adults.
However, within the first week of life, a progressive decline in Hb level
begins and then persists for 6-­8 weeks. The resulting anemia is known
as the physiologic anemia of infancy.
With the onset of respiration at birth, considerably more oxygen
becomes available for binding to Hb, and as a result the Hb-­oxygen
saturation increases from 50–95% or more. There is also a gradual, normal developmental switch from fetal to adult Hb synthesis after birth
that results in the replacement of high-­oxygen-­affinity fetal Hb with
lower-­affinity adult Hb, capable of delivering more oxygen to tissues.
The increase in blood oxygen content and delivery results in the downregulation of erythropoietin (EPO) production, leading to suppression of erythropoiesis. Because there is no erythropoiesis, aged RBCs
that are removed from the circulation are not replaced, and the Hb
level decreases. The Hb concentration continues to decline until tissue oxygen needs become greater than oxygen delivery. Normally, this
point is reached between 8-­12 weeks of age, when the Hb concentration
is about 11 g/dL. In healthy term infants, the nadir rarely falls below
10 g/dL. At this juncture, EPO production increases and erythropoiesis
resumes. The supply of stored reticuloendothelial iron, derived from previously degraded RBCs, remains sufficient for this renewed Hb synthesis,
even in the absence of dietary iron intake, until approximately 20 weeks
of age. In all, this “anemia” should be viewed as a physiologic adaptation
to extrauterine life, reflecting the excess oxygen delivery relative to tissue
oxygen requirements. There is no hematologic problem, and no therapy
is required unless physiologic anemia of infancy is exacerbated by other
ongoing processes including nutritional deficiency and blood loss. The
degree of anemia at birth is correlated with maternal hemoglobin.
A late hyporegenerative anemia, with reticulocytopenia, can occur in
infants with hemolytic disease of the newborn. The persistence of maternally derived anti-­RBC antibodies in the infant’s circulation can lead to an

2939

ongoing low-­grade hemolytic anemia that can exaggerate the physiologic
anemia. Lower-­than-­expected Hb at the “physiologic” nadir has also been
seen in infants after intrauterine or neonatal RBC transfusions. When
infants are transfused with adult blood containing HbA, the associated shift
of the oxygen dissociation curve facilitates oxygen delivery to the tissues.
Accordingly, the definition of anemia and the need for transfusion should
be based not only on the infant’s Hb level, but also on oxygen requirements
and the ability of circulating RBCs to release oxygen to the tissues.
Premature infants also develop a physiologic anemia, known as
anemia of prematurity. The Hb decline is both more extreme and
more rapid. Hb levels of 7-­9 g/dL usually are reached by 3-­6 weeks
of age, and levels may be even lower in very small premature infants (see
Chapter 139). The same physiologic factors at play in term infants are
exaggerated in preterm infants. In premature infants, the physiologic
Hb decline may be intensified by blood loss from repeated phlebotomies
obtained to monitor ill neonates. Demands on erythropoiesis are further
heightened by the premature infant’s presumed shortened RBC life span
(40-­60 days) and the accelerated expansion of RBC mass that accompanies
the premature baby’s rapid rate of growth. Nonetheless, plasma EPO levels
are lower than would be expected for the degree of anemia, resulting in a
suboptimal erythropoietic response. The reason for diminished EPO levels
is not fully understood. During fetal life, EPO synthesis is handled primarily by the liver, and the liver’s oxygen sensor is less sensitive to hypoxia
compared with that of the kidney. The developmental switch from liver
to kidney EPO production is not accelerated by early birth, and thus the
preterm infant must rely on the liver as the primary site for synthesis, leading to diminished responsiveness to anemia. An additional mechanism
thought to contribute to diminished EPO levels may be accelerated EPO
metabolism. Because the pronounced decline in Hb that occurs in many
very low birthweight infants may be associated with abnormal clinical
signs, this “anemia of prematurity” is not considered benign and usually
requires transfusions when symptomatic.
­

TREATMENT

In the full-­term infant, physiologic anemia requires no therapy beyond
ensuring that the infant’s diet contains essential nutrients for normal
hematopoiesis. For infants who are exclusively breastfed, iron supplementation is indicated beginning at 4 months of age and continued until
oral iron intake via food is sufficient. In premature infants, an optimal
Hb has not been established and is usually dictated by the infant’s overall
clinical condition. Transfusions may be needed to maintain the Hb at what
is considered safe for that child. Premature infants who are feeding well
and growing normally rarely need transfusion unless iatrogenic blood loss
has been significant. Although factors such as poor weight gain, respiratory difficulties, and abnormal heart rate have prompted transfusion, the
beneficial effect has not been documented. Laboratory tests such as blood
lactate, EPO, and mixed venous oxygen saturation have poor predictive
value. A restrictive strategy does not increase infant morbidity or mortality. Long-­term neurodevelopmental outcomes have been found to be
poorer in liberally transfused neonates. Exposure to packed RBCs may be
related to the development of necrotizing enterocolitis, and early transfusions may be associated with the risk of intraventricular hemorrhage. Iron
supplementation is indicated starting at 2 to 6 weeks of age until 6 to 12
months of age; dosing depends on birth weight and infants with smaller
birth weights require higher doses.
Strategies to decrease anemia include delayed cord clamping, avoiding
unnecessary phlebotomy, and providing adequate iron supplementation.
Delayed cord clamping at birth results in fewer transfusions and a reduction in both intraventricular hemorrhage and necrotizing enterocolitis in
preterm infants. Given the impact of phlebotomy losses during monitoring in the neonatal intensive care unit, attention to reducing unnecessary
blood draws also has been advocated. Iron therapy is indicated for all neonates with anemia of prematurity starting at 1 month of age and continuing until about 1 year of age. Iron is prescribed as mg of elemental iron per
kg/day and depends on birthweight.
When transfusions are necessary, an RBC volume of 10-­15 mL/kg is
recommended. It is good practice to split units derived from a single donor
to minimize donor exposure if sequential transfusions are indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2940 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 503

Megaloblastic Anemias
Courtney D. Thornburg
Megaloblastic anemia describes a group of disorders that are caused
by impaired DNA synthesis. Red blood cells (RBCs) are larger than
normal at every developmental stage, and there is maturational asynchrony between the nucleus and cytoplasm of erythrocytes. The
delayed nuclear development becomes increasingly evident as cell divisions proceed. Myeloid and platelet precursors are also affected, and
giant metamyelocytes and neutrophil bands are often present in the
bone marrow. There is often an associated thrombocytopenia and leukopenia. The peripheral blood smear is notable for large, often oval RBCs
with increased mean corpuscular volume (Fig. 503.1). Neutrophils are
characteristically hypersegmented, with many having more than five
lobes (see Fig. 503.1). Most cases of childhood megaloblastic anemia
result from a deficiency of folic acid or vitamin B12 (cobalamin), vitamins essential for DNA synthesis (Table 503.1). Rarely, these anemias
may be caused by inborn errors of metabolism. Megaloblastic anemias
resulting from malnutrition are relatively uncommon in the United
States but are important worldwide (see Chapters 62, 64, and 496).

503.1 Folic Acid Deficiency
Courtney D. Thornburg
Folates are essential for DNA replication and cellular proliferation.
Humans cannot synthesize folate and must depend on dietary sources,
including green vegetables, fruits, and animal organs (e.g., liver, kidney). Folates are heat labile and water soluble; consequently, boiling
or heating folate sources leads to decreased amounts of the vitamin.
Naturally occurring folates are in a polyglutamated form that is less
efficiently absorbed than the monoglutamate species (i.e., folic acid).
Dietary folate polyglutamates are hydrolyzed to simple folates that
are absorbed primarily in the proximal small intestine by a specific
carrier-­mediated system. Folates travel in the bloodstream and are
taken up in cells, primarily in the form of unconjugated methyltetrahydrofolate, which is subsequently reconjugated (polyglutamated) in
the cell. There is an active enterohepatic circulation. Although rare,

megaloblastic anemia because of folate deficiency has its peak incidence at 4-­7 months of age, somewhat earlier than iron-­deficiency anemia, although both conditions may be present concomitantly in infants
with poor nutrition.

ETIOLOGY

Folic acid deficiency can result from inadequate folate intake, decreased
folate absorption, or acquired and congenital disorders of folate metabolism or transport (Table 503.2).

Inadequate Folate Intake

In the United States, anemia caused by insufficient folate intake usually occurs in the context of increased vitamin requirements associated
with pregnancy, periods of accelerated growth, and chronic hemolysis (see Chapter 67.6). Folate requirements greatly increase during
pregnancy, in part to meet fetal needs, and deficiencies are common
in mothers, particularly those who are poor or malnourished. Folate
supplementation is recommended from the start of pregnancy to prevent neural tube defects and to meet the needs of the developing fetus.
Folate-­deficient mothers generally do not give birth to infants with
clinical folate deficiency because there is selective transfer of folate
Table 503.1  Causes of Red Blood Cell Macrocytosis
CAUSATIVE CONDITIONS
MEGALOBLASTIC ANEMIA
Cobalamin (vitamin B12)
deficiency
Folate deficiency
Antifolate drugs (e.g.,
methotrexate)
Cytotoxic drugs (e.g.,
hydroxyurea, 5-­FU)
Immunosuppressive drugs (e.g.,
azathioprine)
Thiamine-­responsive anemia
Hereditary orotic aciduria

DRUGS AND TOXINS
Alcohol abuse
Some antiviral drugs (e.g.,
nucleoside RT inhibitors)
Some anticonvulsant drugs

(green arrowheads), macrocytes (blue arrowheads), and a teardrop-­
shaped red blood cell (red arrowhead). (From Bawaskar HS, Bawaskar
P, Bawaskar PH, Parekh PB. Tropical megaloblastic anemia. Lancet
2019;393:2261–2262.)

Megaloblastic changes,
including hypersegmented
neutrophils
Macrocytosis can become severe
Mild reticulocytopenia
Pancytopenia (when the megaloblastic process is severe)

DISORDERS OF ERYTHROID PRODUCTION
Aplastic anemia, PRCA, Blackfan-­ Nonmegaloblastic
Diamond anemia
Some disorders feature
Some sideroblastic anemias
dyserythropoiesis and
CDA, non-­CDA dyserythropoiesis,
sometimes hyposegmented
Fanconi anemia
neutrophils
Myelodysplasia, myeloproliferative Macrocytosis can often be severe
diseases
(e.g., aplastic processes)
Reticulocytopenia (often severe)
RETICULOCYTOSIS
Chronic hemolytic anemia

Fig. 503.1 Peripheral blood film shows hypersegmented neutrophils

ACCOMPANYING
HEMATOLOGIC FEATURES

Nonmegaloblastic; no hypersegmented neutrophils
Mechanism of macrocytosis is
often unknown
No hypersegmented neutrophils

NONHEMATOLOGIC DISEASES
Chronic liver diseases
Hypothyroidism
Copper deficiency

Nonmegaloblastic; no hypersegmented neutrophils
Macrocytes are rarely oval

ARTIFACTS
RBC clumping by cold
agglutinins; some warm RBC
antibodies
Severe hyperglycemia
Hyponatremia

Nonmegaloblastic; no hypersegmented neutrophils
Disparity between high MCV and
normal morphologic examination

CDA, Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; PRCA, pure
red cell aplasia; RBC, red blood cell; RT, reverse transcriptase; 5-­FU, 5-­fluorouracil.
From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and
Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015; Table 10-­3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 503 u Megaloblastic Anemias
Table 503.2  Causes of Folate Deficiency* in Adults and
Children
INADEQUATE NUTRITION
Poor diet†
Poor food preparation methods
Exclusive feeding with goat’s milk
DEFECTS IN ABSORPTION
Gastric achlorhydria§
Diseases of the upper small intestine
Tropical sprue
Celiac disease
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Oral pancreatic replacement therapy§
Hereditary folate malabsorption
INCREASED REQUIREMENTS OR LOSSES
Pregnancy
Lactation§
Prematurity§,‖
Chronic hemolytic anemia§
Dialysis
Hyperthyroidism§
Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome
DISORDERS OF TRANSPORT
Cerebral folate deficiency (genetic or acquired)¶
DISORDERS OF CELLULAR METABOLISM
Drugs inhibiting folate metabolism
Antifolates (e.g., methotrexate)
Pyrimethamine§; trimethoprim§
Sulfasalazine§
Valproic acid§,#
Inherited defects
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency
Disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism
Dihydrofolate reductase deficiency
Methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase, cyclohydrolase, and
formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase 1 (MTHFD1) deficiency
Others
MULTIFACTORIAL OR UNCERTAIN MECHANISMS
Alcohol use disorder‡
Anticonvulsants§
Oral contraceptives§
*Folate deficiency is often multifactorial.
†Relative dietary insufficiency (i.e., intake that is adequate under usual circumstances) is

a particularly important cofactor that can convert borderline folate deficiency to clinically overt deficiency when other conditions coexist, such as increased requirements
for folate or mild malabsorption.
§Megaloblastic anemia rarely results unless other limitations of folate status coexist.
‖Neonatal stores are low in premature infants.
¶Cerebral folate deficiency can occur on a genetic basis or an autoimmune basis;
megaloblastic anemia does not occur because folate deficiency appears not to exist
outside the central nervous system.
#Disrupts mitochondrial folate metabolism in utero.
‡Poor intake is often associated with alcoholism in adults.
From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and
Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015; Box 10-­2.

to the fetus via placental folate receptors. Rapid growth after birth
increases demands for folic acid, and infants who are premature or ill
and those with certain hemolytic disorders will have particularly high
folate requirements. Human breast milk, infant formulas, and pasteurized cow’s milk provide adequate amounts of folic acid. Goat’s milk is

2941

folate deficient, and supplementation must be given when it is the child’s
main food source. Unless supplemented, powdered milk may also be a
poor source of folic acid.
Malnutrition is the most common cause of folate deficiency in older
children. In addition, children with chronic hemolytic anemias, infections, or malabsorption are at increased risk due to increased demand.
Because body stores of folate are limited, deficiency can develop quickly
in malnourished individuals. On a folate-­free diet, megaloblastic anemia will occur after 2-­3 months.

Decreased Folate Absorption

Malabsorption caused by chronic diarrheal states or diffuse inflammatory disease can lead to folate deficiency. In both situations, some of
the decreased folate absorption may be caused by impaired folate conjugase activity. Chronic diarrhea also interferes with the enterohepatic
circulation of folate, thereby enhancing folate losses because of rapid
intestinal passage. Megaloblastic anemia caused by folic acid deficiency
can occur in celiac disease or chronic infectious enteritis and in association with enteroenteric fistulas. Previous intestinal surgery is another
potential cause of decreased folate absorption.
Certain anticonvulsant drugs (e.g., phenytoin, phenobarbital) can
impair folic acid absorption, and many patients treated with these
drugs have low serum levels. Frank megaloblastic anemia is rare and
readily responds to folic acid therapy, even when administration of the
offending drug is continued. Alcohol overuse also is associated with
folate malabsorption.

Congenital Abnormalities in Folate Transport and
Metabolism

Inborn errors of folate transport or metabolism are rare but can be
life threatening. Those associated with megaloblastic anemia include
hereditary folate malabsorption and certain extremely uncommon
enzyme deficiencies.
Hereditary folate malabsorption (HFM) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the
SLC46A1 gene encoding the protein-­coupled folate transporter. HFM
is associated with an inability to absorb folic acid, 5-­tetrahydrofolate,
5-­
methyltetrahydrofolate, or 5-­
formyltetrahydrofolate (folinic acid).
It can become apparent at 2-­6 months of age with megaloblastic anemia and other deficits, including infections and diarrhea. Neurologic
abnormalities attributable to folate deficiency in the central nervous
system (CNS) include seizures, developmental delay, and intellectual
disability. Folate transport is impaired both in the intestine and at the
brain’s choroid plexus. Serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) folate levels
are very low, with a loss of the normal 3:1 ratio of CSF to serum folate.
Treatment for HFM involves parenteral (intramuscular) folate or
high-­dose oral 5-­formyltetrahydrofolate (5-­formylTHF), folinic acid,
leucovorin, or the active isomer of 5-­formylTHF (Isovorin or Fusilev)
targeting normal or near normal trough levels in the CSF to ameliorate
both the megaloblastic anemia and neurologic complications of folate
deficiency.
Functional methionine synthase deficiency may result from pathologic genetic variants affecting the function of methionine synthase
reductase or methionine synthase. These disorders are autosomal recessive and characterized not only by megaloblastic anemia but also by
cerebral atrophy, nystagmus, blindness, and altered muscle tone. Both
respond to hydroxocobalamin (OHCbl) plus betaine with variable clinical success. Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) deficiency is extremely
rare and is associated with homozygous pathologic genetic variants
in the DHFR gene. Clinical symptoms include megaloblastic anemia
and neurologic manifestations. Although methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase (MTHFR) deficiency is the most common inborn error of
folate metabolism, and severe cases can produce several neurologic and
vascular complications, there is no associated megaloblastic anemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2942 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Drug-­Induced Abnormalities in Folate Metabolism

Several drugs have anti–folic acid activity as their primary pharmacologic effect and regularly produce megaloblastic anemia. Methotrexate
binds to dihydrofolate reductase and prevents formation of tetrahydrofolate, the active form of folate. Pyrimethamine, used in the therapy of
toxoplasmosis, and trimethoprim, used for treatment of various infections, can induce folic acid deficiency and occasionally megaloblastic
anemia. Therapy with folinic acid (5-­formyltetrahydrofolate) is usually
beneficial.

products and by-­products of these enzymatic reactions are critical to
DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis.
Cobalamin (Cbl) is synthesized exclusively by microorganisms,
and humans must rely on dietary sources (animal products, including
meat, eggs, fish, and milk) for their needs (see Chapter 67.7). Unlike
folate, older children and adults have sufficient vitamin B12 stores to
last 3-­5 years. In young infants born to mothers with low vitamin B12
stores, clinical signs of Cbl deficiency can become apparent in the first
6-­18 months of life.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

METABOLISM

In addition to the clinical features associated with anemia, folate-­
deficient infants and children may manifest irritability, chronic diarrhea, and poor weight gain. Hemorrhages from thrombocytopenia
may occur in advanced cases. HFM and other rare etiologies of folate
deficiency may be further associated with hypogammaglobulinemia,
severe infections, failure to thrive, neurologic abnormalities, and cognitive delays.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The anemia is macrocytic (mean corpuscular volume >100 fL). Variations in RBC shape and size are common (see Chapter 496, Fig. 496.4B).
The reticulocyte count is low, and nucleated RBCs with megaloblastic
morphology are often seen in the peripheral blood. Neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia may be present, particularly in patients with long-­
standing and severe deficiencies. The neutrophils are large, some with
hypersegmented nuclei (see Fig. 503.1). The bone marrow is hypercellular because of erythroid hyperplasia, and megaloblastic changes are
prominent. Large, abnormal neutrophilic forms (giant metamyelocytes) with cytoplasmic vacuolation are also seen.
Levels of RBC folate are a better indicator of chronic deficiency than
serum folic acid levels. The normal RBC folate level is 150-­600 ng/mL
of packed cells. Levels of iron and vitamin B12 in serum usually are
normal or elevated. Serum activity of lactate dehydrogenase, a marker
of ineffective erythropoiesis, is markedly elevated.

TREATMENT

When the diagnosis of folate deficiency is established, folic acid may
be administered orally or parenterally at 0.5-­1.0 mg/day. If the specific
diagnosis is in doubt, smaller doses of folate (0.1 mg/day) may be used
for 1 week as a diagnostic test because a hematologic response can be
expected within 72 hours. Doses of folate >0.1 mg can correct the anemia of vitamin B12 deficiency but might aggravate any associated neurologic abnormalities. In most medical settings in developed countries,
this therapeutic trial to distinguish the different causes of megaloblastic
anemia is rarely necessary because vitamin B12 and folate blood levels
are usually readily available. Folic acid therapy (0.5-­1.0 mg/day) should
be continued for 3-­4 weeks until a definite hematologic response has
occurred. Maintenance therapy with a multivitamin (containing 0.2
mg of folate) is adequate. Parenteral or high doses of specific folate formulations are required in the setting of HFM. Transfusions are indicated only when the anemia is severe, or the child is very ill.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

503.2 Vitamin B12 (Cobalamin) Deficiency
Courtney D. Thornburg
Vitamin B12, a generic term encompassing all biologically active cobalamins, is a water-­soluble vitamin with a central, functional cobalt atom
and a planar corrin ring. Methylcobalamin and adenosyl cobalamin are
the metabolically active derivatives, serving as cofactors in two essential
metabolic reactions: methylation of homocysteine to methionine (via
methionine synthase) and conversion of methyl-­malonyl-­coenzyme
A (CoA) to succinyl CoA (via l-­methyl-­malonyl-­CoA mutase). The

Under normal circumstances, cobalamin is released from food protein in
the stomach through peptic digestion. Cbl then binds to haptocorrin (HC),
a salivary glycoprotein. This complex moves into the duodenum, where
HC is digested by pancreatic proteases and Cbl is liberated. Cbl then binds
to intrinsic factor (IF), another glycoprotein that is produced by gastric
parietal cells. The Cbl-­IF complex subsequently enters mucosal cells of the
distal ileum by receptor-­mediated endocytosis. Through a complex series
of protein interactions, Cbl is taken up into the blood stream and taken
up into cells. Cobalamins are processed in the cytoplasm to a common
intermediate that can be allocated to the methylcobalamin and adenosylcobalamin synthesis pathways to meet cellular needs.

ETIOLOGY

Vitamin B12 deficiency can result from inadequate dietary intake of
Cbl, lack of IF, impaired intestinal absorption of IF-­Cbl, inactivation,
or absence of vitamin B12 transport protein (see Table 503.1).

Inadequate Vitamin B12 Intake

Vitamin B12 deficiency in infants is most often nutritional, resulting
from low Cbl levels in the breast milk of B12-­deficient mothers. Associated megaloblastic anemia often appears during the first year of life.
Maternal deficiency may be caused by pernicious anemia or gastrointestinal disorders such as Helicobacter pylori infection, celiac disease,
Crohn disease, or pancreatic insufficiency. Previous gastric bypass surgery, treatment with proton pump inhibitors, and inadequate intake
from a strict unsupplemented vegetarian diet have also been implicated. Fortunately, because of active placental Cbl transport in utero,
most children of B12-­deficient mothers maintain Cbl levels sufficient
to support adequate prenatal development. Such infants are born with
low B12 stores, the depletion of which is associated with a gradual
onset of clinical manifestations. Vitamin B12 replacement often results
in rapid improvement, but the longer the deficient period, the greater
the likelihood of permanent disabilities. Neonatal screening programs
may detect maternal-­neonatal nutritional B12 deficiency because of an
increase in propionyl carnitine, but there is higher sensitivity using
a measurement of methylmalonic acid. In high-­income countries,
dietary deficiency during childhood or adolescence is infrequent but
can result from strict vegetarian or vegan diet. Daily requirements
range from 0.4-­2.4 μg.

Impaired Vitamin B12 Absorption

Gastric surgery or medications that impair gastric acid secretion may
result in IF deficiency, leading to decreased vitamin B12 absorption.
Pancreatic insufficiency can also lead to Cbl deficiency because of
impaired cleavage and IF complex formation. Patients with neonatal
necrotizing enterocolitis, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease,
or surgical removal of the terminal ileum may also have impaired
absorption of vitamin B12. An overgrowth of intestinal bacteria within
diverticula or duplications of the small intestine can cause vitamin B12
deficiency by consumption of (or competition for) the vitamin or by
splitting of its complex with IF. In these cases, hematologic response can
follow appropriate antibiotic therapy. In endemic areas, when the fish
tapeworm Diphyllobothrium latum infests the upper small intestine,
similar mechanisms may be operative. When megaloblastic anemia
occurs in such situations, the serum vitamin B12 level is low, and the
gastric fluid contains IF.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 503 u Megaloblastic Anemias

2943

Hereditary intrinsic factor deficiency (HIFD) is a rare autosomal
recessive disorder caused by a variety of pathologic genetic variants in
the IF gene that produce a lack of gastric IF or a functionally abnormal
IF. HIFD differs from typical adult pernicious anemia in that gastric
acid is secreted normally and the stomach is histologically normal. It
is not associated with antibodies or endocrine abnormalities. Unlike
Imerslund-­Grasbeck syndrome, described next, HIFD is only occasionally associated with proteinuria. Symptoms become prominent at
an early age (6-­24 months), consistent with exhaustion of vitamin B12
stores acquired in utero. As the anemia becomes severe, weakness, irritability, anorexia, and listlessness occur. The tongue is smooth, red, and
painful. Neurologic manifestations include ataxia, paresthesias, hyporeflexia, Babinski responses, and clonus. Oral vitamin B12 is usually
ineffective, and lifelong intramuscular (IM) or intranasal Cbl should
be used to bypass the absorption defect. The natural form, OHCbl, is
believed to be more effective than the synthetic form, cyanocobalamin
(CNCbl).
Imerslund-­Grasbeck syndrome is a rare, recessively inherited pediatric disorder resulting in selective vitamin B12 malabsorption in the
ileum and consequent vitamin B12 deficiency. It usually becomes clinically apparent within the first 6 years of life. In addition to megaloblastic
anemia, the patient may also have neurologic defects (e.g., hypotonia,
developmental delay, brain atrophy, movement disorders, dementia)
and/or proteinuria. Patients carry pathologic variants in genes CUBN
or AMN, which encode proteins that form the cubam receptor for the
ileal IF-­Cbl complex. Because CUBN is also a key receptor for protein
reabsorption in the kidney, impaired expression at this site results in
associated proteinuria. The disease can be fatal if it remains untreated.
Early diagnosis and treatment with IM or intranasal Cbl will reverse
the hematologic and neurologic abnormalities. Proteinuria does not
respond to therapy.
Classic pernicious anemia (autoimmune gastritis) usually occurs in
older adults but can rarely affect children. This disorder (juvenile pernicious anemia) usually presents during adolescence. In such cases,
the disease is associated with various detectable antibodies, including
those against IF and the hydrogen-­potassium adenosine triphosphatase proton pump in gastric parietal cells. These children can have
additional immunologic abnormalities, cutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and other endocrine deficiencies; atrophy of the gastric mucosa and achlorhydria may occur. IM or intranasal vitamin B12
should be administered regularly.

disorders present at a range of ages starting in utero and have a variable
clinical presentation including complications of methylmalonic acidemia, homocystinuria, and megaloblastic anemia. Patients require care
with a metabolic specialist to guide treatment with OHCbl, avoidance
of agents that can cause metabolic decompensation, and surveillance
for complications.
Vitamin B12 deficiency may develop by inactivation of vitamin B12.
This most often occurs in adolescents who chronically use “Whippets,”
which contain nitrous oxide, as a recreational agent to get high. Conversely, patients with underlying vitamin B12 deficiency may have an
exacerbation after nitrous oxide anesthesia.

Absence of Vitamin B12 Transport Protein
Transcobalamin

A comprehensive medical history is essential to the clinical recognition
of possible Cbl deficiency. Information regarding clinical symptoms,
dietary history, diseases, surgeries, or medications and drugs is likely to
provide important clues. The physical examination may reveal relevant
findings such as irritability, pallor, pigmentation or specific neurologic
symptoms. Screening laboratory findings offer important information, but more focused testing will be required to confirm a diagnosis
of vitamin B12 deficiency and its cause. Cbl deficiency is usually identified by measuring total or TC-­bound vitamin B12 in the blood. Although
an extremely low level is generally diagnostic, this may not be the case
because false negatives and false positives are reportedly common using
currently available assays. As a result, it is wise not to discount vitamin
B12 deficiency, particularly in the face of clinical symptoms, macrocytic
anemia, an abnormal blood smear, and a normal folate level. In untreated
patients, methylmalonic acid and total homocysteine levels are often helpful because they are greatly elevated in the majority of those with clinical
signs of B12 deficiency. Excessive urinary methylmalonic acid excretion
is also a sensitive test of B12 deficiency. Although modest increases occur
with renal failure, elevated methylmalonic acid is otherwise quite specific
for B12 deficiency. Notably, however, serum homocysteine is also elevated
in folate deficiency, homocystinuria, and renal failure.
If vitamin B12 deficiency has been confirmed and there is no evidence of inadequate dietary intake or, in the case of an infant, inadequate maternal B12, malabsorption should be investigated. Anti-­IF
antibodies and anti–parietal cell antibodies are useful for the diagnosis
of pernicious anemia. Measurement of IF and testing from more specialized laboratories may be required for less common disorders.

Transcobalamin (TC) deficiency is a rare cause of megaloblastic anemia. A congenital deficiency is inherited as an autosomal recessive
condition resulting in a failure to absorb and transport vitamin B12.
Most patients lack TC, but some have functionally defective forms.
This disorder usually manifests in the first weeks of life. Characteristically, there is failure to thrive, diarrhea, vomiting, glossitis, neurologic abnormalities, and megaloblastic anemia. The diagnosis can be
difficult given that total serum vitamin B12 levels are often normal
because approximately 80% of serum Cbl is bound to HC. The diagnosis is suggested by the presence of severe megaloblastic anemia in the
face of normal folate levels and no evidence of another inborn error
of metabolism. Plasma homocysteine and methylmalonic acid levels
are elevated. A definitive diagnosis is made by measuring plasma TC.
The serum vitamin B12 levels must be kept high to force enough Cbl
into cells and allow normal function using high-­dose oral supplementation or IM or intranasal treatment. Symptoms and laboratory studies
should be monitored, and doses adjusted as needed.

Disorders of Intracellular Cobalamin Metabolism

Disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism are associated with
pathologic genetic variants in genes associated with lettered complementation groups. These include MMACHC (cblC), MMADHC (cblD-­
combined and cblD homocystinuria), MTRR (cblE), LMBRD1 (cblF),
MTR (cblG), ABCD4 (cblJ), THAP11 (cblX-­like), ZNF143 (cblX-­like),
or HCFC1 (cblX, which can show a cblC complementation class). The

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Children with Cbl deficiency often present with nonspecific manifestations such as weakness, lethargy, feeding difficulties, failure to thrive,
and irritability. Other common findings include pallor, glossitis, vomiting, diarrhea, and icterus. Hyperpigmentation is another feature that
may mimic Addison disease. Neurologic symptoms can include paresthesia, sensory deficits, hypotonia, seizures, developmental delay,
developmental regression, neuropsychiatric changes, and brain/spine
MRI changes. Neurologic problems from vitamin B12 deficiency may
occur in the absence of any hematologic abnormalities. Thrombotic
microangiopathy is a rare manifestation.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The hematologic manifestations of folate and Cbl deficiency are identical. The anemia resulting from Cbl deficiency is macrocytic, with prominent macro-­ovalocytosis of the RBCs (see Chapter 496, Fig. 496.2, and
Fig. 503.1). The neutrophils may be large and hypersegmented (see
Fig. 503.1). In advanced cases, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia
can occur, simulating aplastic anemia or leukemia. Macrocytosis may
not always be present. Serum vitamin B12 levels are low, and the serum
concentrations of methylmalonic acid and homocysteine are elevated.
Concentrations of serum iron and serum folic acid are normal or elevated. Serum lactate dehydrogenase activity is markedly increased, a
reflection of ineffective erythropoiesis. Moderate elevations of serum
bilirubin levels (2-­3 mg/dL) also may be found. Excessive excretion of
methylmalonic acid in the urine (normal: 0-­3.5 mg/24 hr) is a reliable
and sensitive index of vitamin B12 deficiency and is especially helpful
when the serum vitamin B12 level is in the low-­normal range.

DIAGNOSIS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2944 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
TREATMENT

Treatment regimens in children have not been well studied. The cause
of vitamin B12 deficiency should ultimately dictate treatment dosage
and route of administration as well as the duration of therapy. Cyanocobalamin is available as a nasal spray as an alternative to parenteral
injection. Dose adjustments should be made in response to clinical
status and laboratory values. The physiologic requirement for vitamin
B12 is about 1-­3 μg/day. Hematologic responses have been observed
with small doses, indicating that a mini-­dose may be administered as
a therapeutic test when the diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency is in
doubt or in circumstances where the anemia is severe and higher initial
doses might result in severe metabolic disturbances.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A full-­term newborn infant contains about 0.5 grams of iron, compared with 5 grams of iron in adults. This change in quantity of iron
from birth to adulthood means that an average of 0.8 mg of iron must
be absorbed each day during the first 15 years of life. A small additional
amount is necessary to balance normal losses of iron by shedding of cells.
It is therefore necessary to absorb approximately 1 mg daily to maintain
positive iron balance in childhood. Because <10% of dietary iron is usually absorbed, a dietary intake of 8-­10 mg of iron daily is necessary to
maintain iron levels. During infancy, when growth is most rapid, the 1
mg/L of iron in cow’s and breast milk makes it difficult to maintain body
iron. Although breastfed infants have an advantage because they absorb
iron 2-­3 times more efficiently than infants fed cow’s milk, breastfed
infants nonetheless are at risk of developing iron deficiency without
regular intake of iron-­fortified foods by 6 months of age.

ETIOLOGY

503.3 Other Rare Megaloblastic Anemias
Courtney D. Thornburg
Orotic aciduria is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that usually appears
in the first year of life and is characterized by growth failure, developmental delay, megaloblastic anemia, and increased urinary excretion of orotic
acid (see Chapter 110). Rarely, orotic aciduria occurs without megaloblastic anemia. This defect is the most common metabolic error in the de
novo synthesis of pyrimidines and therefore affects nucleic acid synthesis. The usual form of hereditary orotic aciduria is caused by a deficiency
(in all body tissues) of orotic phosphoribosyl transferase and orotidine-­
5-­phosphate decarboxylase, two sequential enzymatic steps in pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis. The diagnosis is suggested by the presence of
severe megaloblastic anemia with normal serum B12 and folate levels and
no evidence of TC deficiency. A presumptive diagnosis is made by finding increased urinary orotic acid. However, confirmation of the diagnosis
requires assay of the transferase and decarboxylase enzymes in the patient’s
erythrocytes. Failure to thrive and intellectual disability often accompany
this condition. The anemia is refractory to vitamin B12 or folic acid, but the
anemia responds promptly to administration of uridine.
Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic anemia (Rogers syndrome) is
a very rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by megaloblastic
anemia, sensorineural deafness, and diabetes mellitus. Congenital heart
defects, arrhythmias, visual problems, short stature, trilineage myelodysplasia, and strokes are also described. Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic
anemia usually presents in infancy but may occasionally develop in childhood and adolescence and occurs in several ethnically distinct populations. The bone marrow is characterized not only by megaloblastic changes
but also by ringed sideroblasts. The defect is caused by biallelic pathologic
genetic variants in SCL19A2, which encodes a high-­affinity plasma membrane thiamine transporter. Continuous thiamine supplementation usually reverses the anemia and diabetes, but not existing hearing defects.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 504

Iron-­Deficiency Anemia
Jennifer A. Rothman
Iron deficiency is the most widespread and common nutritional disorder in the world. It is estimated that 30–50% of the global population
has iron-­deficiency anemia, and most of these individuals live in developing countries. In the United States, 8–14% of children ages 12-­36
months are iron deficient, and 30% of this group progresses to iron-­
deficiency anemia.

Most iron in neonates resides in circulating hemoglobin. As the relatively high hemoglobin concentration of the newborn infant falls during the first 2-­3 months of life, considerable iron is recycled. These
iron stores are usually sufficient for blood formation in the first 6-­9
months of life in term infants. Stores are depleted sooner in premature
infants, low birthweight infants, or infants with perinatal blood loss,
because their iron stores are smaller. Delayed (1-­3 minute) clamping
of the umbilical cord can improve iron status and reduce the risk of
iron deficiency, whereas early clamping (<30 seconds) puts the infant
at risk for iron deficiency. Dietary sources of iron are especially important in these infants. In term infants, anemia caused solely by inadequate dietary iron usually occurs at 9-­24 months of age and is less
common thereafter. The usual dietary pattern observed in infants and
toddlers with nutritional iron-­deficiency anemia in developed countries is excessive consumption of cow’s milk (low iron content, blood
loss from milk protein colitis) in a child who is often overweight or
bottle feeding beyond 12 months of age. Worldwide, undernutrition is
usually responsible for iron deficiency (Table 504.1).
Blood loss must be considered as a possible cause in every case of
iron-­deficiency anemia. Sources of blood loss, particularly in older
children and adolescents, include menstrual losses, recurrent nosebleeds, or intravascular hemolysis with hemoglobinuria, as seen in diseases such as malaria or endurance athletics such as triathletes. Chronic
iron-­deficiency anemia from occult bleeding may be caused by a lesion
of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, such as peptic ulcer, Meckel diverticulum, polyp, hemangioma, or inflammatory bowel disease. Infants
can have chronic intestinal blood loss induced by exposure to cow’s
milk protein. Involved infants characteristically develop anemia that
is more severe and occurs earlier than would be expected simply from
an inadequate intake of iron. The ongoing loss of blood in the stools
can be prevented either by breastfeeding or by delaying the introduction of whole cow’s milk in the first years of life and then limiting the
quantity to <24 oz/24 hours. Infants and toddlers who have excessive
raw milk intake with no iron supplementation and limited iron containing foods are at high risk of iron deficiency. Unrecognized blood loss also
can be associated with chronic diarrhea and, rarely, with pulmonary
hemosiderosis. In developing countries, infections with hookworm,
Trichuris trichiura, and Plasmodium often contribute to iron deficiency.
Since iron is absorbed in the proximal duodenum with the assistance
of gastric acid, gastric bypass procedures or Helicobacter pylori infection may interfere with iron absorption. Similarly, inflammation of the
bowel from celiac disease and giardiasis may also interfere with iron
absorption.
Approximately 2% of adolescent females have iron-­deficiency anemia, largely as a result of their adolescent growth spurt and menstrual
blood loss. The highest risk of iron-­deficiency anemia (>30%) is among
teenagers who are or have been pregnant.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most children with iron-­deficiency anemia are asymptomatic and are
identified by routine laboratory screening at 9-­12 months of age. Normal hemoglobin values vary according to age, gender, ethnicity, and
method of testing, such as capillary versus venous blood. Pallor is the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2944 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
TREATMENT

Treatment regimens in children have not been well studied. The cause
of vitamin B12 deficiency should ultimately dictate treatment dosage
and route of administration as well as the duration of therapy. Cyanocobalamin is available as a nasal spray as an alternative to parenteral
injection. Dose adjustments should be made in response to clinical
status and laboratory values. The physiologic requirement for vitamin
B12 is about 1-­3 μg/day. Hematologic responses have been observed
with small doses, indicating that a mini-­dose may be administered as
a therapeutic test when the diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency is in
doubt or in circumstances where the anemia is severe and higher initial
doses might result in severe metabolic disturbances.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A full-­term newborn infant contains about 0.5 grams of iron, compared with 5 grams of iron in adults. This change in quantity of iron
from birth to adulthood means that an average of 0.8 mg of iron must
be absorbed each day during the first 15 years of life. A small additional
amount is necessary to balance normal losses of iron by shedding of cells.
It is therefore necessary to absorb approximately 1 mg daily to maintain
positive iron balance in childhood. Because <10% of dietary iron is usually absorbed, a dietary intake of 8-­10 mg of iron daily is necessary to
maintain iron levels. During infancy, when growth is most rapid, the 1
mg/L of iron in cow’s and breast milk makes it difficult to maintain body
iron. Although breastfed infants have an advantage because they absorb
iron 2-­3 times more efficiently than infants fed cow’s milk, breastfed
infants nonetheless are at risk of developing iron deficiency without
regular intake of iron-­fortified foods by 6 months of age.

ETIOLOGY

503.3 Other Rare Megaloblastic Anemias
Courtney D. Thornburg
Orotic aciduria is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that usually appears
in the first year of life and is characterized by growth failure, developmental delay, megaloblastic anemia, and increased urinary excretion of orotic
acid (see Chapter 110). Rarely, orotic aciduria occurs without megaloblastic anemia. This defect is the most common metabolic error in the de
novo synthesis of pyrimidines and therefore affects nucleic acid synthesis. The usual form of hereditary orotic aciduria is caused by a deficiency
(in all body tissues) of orotic phosphoribosyl transferase and orotidine-­
5-­phosphate decarboxylase, two sequential enzymatic steps in pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis. The diagnosis is suggested by the presence of
severe megaloblastic anemia with normal serum B12 and folate levels and
no evidence of TC deficiency. A presumptive diagnosis is made by finding increased urinary orotic acid. However, confirmation of the diagnosis
requires assay of the transferase and decarboxylase enzymes in the patient’s
erythrocytes. Failure to thrive and intellectual disability often accompany
this condition. The anemia is refractory to vitamin B12 or folic acid, but the
anemia responds promptly to administration of uridine.
Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic anemia (Rogers syndrome) is
a very rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by megaloblastic
anemia, sensorineural deafness, and diabetes mellitus. Congenital heart
defects, arrhythmias, visual problems, short stature, trilineage myelodysplasia, and strokes are also described. Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic
anemia usually presents in infancy but may occasionally develop in childhood and adolescence and occurs in several ethnically distinct populations. The bone marrow is characterized not only by megaloblastic changes
but also by ringed sideroblasts. The defect is caused by biallelic pathologic
genetic variants in SCL19A2, which encodes a high-­affinity plasma membrane thiamine transporter. Continuous thiamine supplementation usually reverses the anemia and diabetes, but not existing hearing defects.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 504

Iron-­Deficiency Anemia
Jennifer A. Rothman
Iron deficiency is the most widespread and common nutritional disorder in the world. It is estimated that 30–50% of the global population
has iron-­deficiency anemia, and most of these individuals live in developing countries. In the United States, 8–14% of children ages 12-­36
months are iron deficient, and 30% of this group progresses to iron-­
deficiency anemia.

Most iron in neonates resides in circulating hemoglobin. As the relatively high hemoglobin concentration of the newborn infant falls during the first 2-­3 months of life, considerable iron is recycled. These
iron stores are usually sufficient for blood formation in the first 6-­9
months of life in term infants. Stores are depleted sooner in premature
infants, low birthweight infants, or infants with perinatal blood loss,
because their iron stores are smaller. Delayed (1-­3 minute) clamping
of the umbilical cord can improve iron status and reduce the risk of
iron deficiency, whereas early clamping (<30 seconds) puts the infant
at risk for iron deficiency. Dietary sources of iron are especially important in these infants. In term infants, anemia caused solely by inadequate dietary iron usually occurs at 9-­24 months of age and is less
common thereafter. The usual dietary pattern observed in infants and
toddlers with nutritional iron-­deficiency anemia in developed countries is excessive consumption of cow’s milk (low iron content, blood
loss from milk protein colitis) in a child who is often overweight or
bottle feeding beyond 12 months of age. Worldwide, undernutrition is
usually responsible for iron deficiency (Table 504.1).
Blood loss must be considered as a possible cause in every case of
iron-­deficiency anemia. Sources of blood loss, particularly in older
children and adolescents, include menstrual losses, recurrent nosebleeds, or intravascular hemolysis with hemoglobinuria, as seen in diseases such as malaria or endurance athletics such as triathletes. Chronic
iron-­deficiency anemia from occult bleeding may be caused by a lesion
of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, such as peptic ulcer, Meckel diverticulum, polyp, hemangioma, or inflammatory bowel disease. Infants
can have chronic intestinal blood loss induced by exposure to cow’s
milk protein. Involved infants characteristically develop anemia that
is more severe and occurs earlier than would be expected simply from
an inadequate intake of iron. The ongoing loss of blood in the stools
can be prevented either by breastfeeding or by delaying the introduction of whole cow’s milk in the first years of life and then limiting the
quantity to <24 oz/24 hours. Infants and toddlers who have excessive
raw milk intake with no iron supplementation and limited iron containing foods are at high risk of iron deficiency. Unrecognized blood loss also
can be associated with chronic diarrhea and, rarely, with pulmonary
hemosiderosis. In developing countries, infections with hookworm,
Trichuris trichiura, and Plasmodium often contribute to iron deficiency.
Since iron is absorbed in the proximal duodenum with the assistance
of gastric acid, gastric bypass procedures or Helicobacter pylori infection may interfere with iron absorption. Similarly, inflammation of the
bowel from celiac disease and giardiasis may also interfere with iron
absorption.
Approximately 2% of adolescent females have iron-­deficiency anemia, largely as a result of their adolescent growth spurt and menstrual
blood loss. The highest risk of iron-­deficiency anemia (>30%) is among
teenagers who are or have been pregnant.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most children with iron-­deficiency anemia are asymptomatic and are
identified by routine laboratory screening at 9-­12 months of age. Normal hemoglobin values vary according to age, gender, ethnicity, and
method of testing, such as capillary versus venous blood. Pallor is the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2950 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
serum transferrin levels that are accompanied by the deposition of
non–transferrin-­bound iron in parenchymal tissues. Because hepcidin
production is induced by inflammatory stimuli, hepcidin elevation is
also a feature of the anemia of chronic disease (ACD). However, in
contrast to patients with IRIDA, in whom the hepcidin dysregulation
is congenital, patients with ACD generally retain normal to high iron
stores because of the acquired nature of their hepcidin elevation (see
Chapter 500.1). Rare medical causes that may mimic IRIDA include
vascular malformations of the GI tract, Castleman disease (where IL-­6
overproduction causes hepcidin elevation), autoimmune gastritis, and
pathogenic germline variants in KCNQ1 (which regulates gastric acid
secretion).

TREATMENT

Because of the underlying pathophysiology of IRIDA, parenteral iron
supplementation is required to correct the anemia. Although parenteral
iron therapy raises body iron stores, the hematologic response is usually
slow and not completely corrective. This likely results from insufficient
export of the processed iron from macrophages into the circulation,
an expected consequence of hepcidin elevation. Serum ferritin levels
increase with parenteral iron therapy in a dose-­dependent manner
and may raise concerns for iron overload, which would be expected to
exhibit a reticuloendothelial rather than a parenchymal pattern of iron
loading. Given the limited number of IRIDA cases reported to date, the
optimal formulation and dosing of parenteral iron have not yet been
established. Although oral iron supplementation does not appear to
have a significant role in treatment of IRIDA, the addition of ascorbic acid to a ferrous sulfate oral supplement has been associated with
hematologic responses in isolated cases. Treatment with recombinant
erythropoietin has not been found to produce significant clinical benefit in patients with IRIDA.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 505

Other Microcytic Anemias
Jennifer A. Rothman
A number of rare microcytic anemias need to be considered
when children with microcytic anemia fail to respond to oral iron
(Table 504.5). These anemias include thalassemia or thalassemia trait
(see ­Chapter 511), infantile poikilocytosis and hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (Chapter 508), and anemia of chronic disease (Chapter 500.1).
Additionally, rare nutritional disorders and disorders of iron metabolism can cause microcytosis.

INFANTILE POIKILOCYTOSIS AND HEREDITARY
PYROPOIKILOCYTOSIS

Infants with common hereditary elliptocytosis (see Chapter 508)
may initially present with hemolytic anemia characterized by marked
poikilocytosis with budding and fragmentation of the red blood cells
(RBCs). These small RBC fragments reduce the overall mean corpuscular volume (MCV), resulting in microcytosis. By 2 years of age, the
findings become typical of hereditary elliptocytosis. Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis is a much less common variant of hereditary elliptocytosis, in which the hemolytic anemia and RBC changes are more severe.

COPPER DEFICIENCY

Copper deficiency is a rare cause of microcytic anemia and neurologic dysfunction. Copper is absorbed in the stomach and proximal

duodenum. Deficiency is associated with malabsorption; severe malnutrition, often with feeding of milk alone; gastric surgery or feedings that bypass the stomach and duodenum; or parenteral nutrition
with inadvertent omission of supplemental copper. Zinc and copper
are competitively absorbed from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, so zinc
excess may inadvertently lead to copper deficiency. Diagnosis is made
by measuring a serum copper level, serum ceruloplasmin, and possibly
a zinc level. Treatment includes either oral or parenteral supplementation, depending on the underlying cause.

DEFECTS OF IRON METABOLISM

Rare microcytic anemias may be associated with defects in iron trafficking and regulation. Most are inherited and usually identified in
childhood, including defects of iron absorption, transport, utilization, and recycling. A defect of iron absorption is iron-­refractory iron-­
deficiency anemia (see Chapter 504.1). Defects of iron recycling include
aceruloplasminemia and atransferrinemia. Aceruloplasminemia is an
autosomal recessive disorder in the CP gene that encodes ceruloplasmin. Iron cannot be appropriately transported from macrophages to
plasma to be available for RBC production but accumulates instead in
the brain and visceral organs, which can lead to an adult-­onset neurodegenerative disorder. The diagnosis is made by a combination of
absence of serum ceruloplasmin, low serum copper and iron, elevated
ferritin, and increased liver iron concentration. Hypotransferrinemia
or atransferrinemia is also an autosomal recessive disorder caused by
pathogenic variants in the transferrin (TF) gene. Diagnosis is made by
low or absent serum transferrin and liver iron overload. Genetic testing
can confirm the diagnosis for both disorders. Treatment includes iron
chelation therapy, limiting iron supplementation and dietary iron, and
possibly fresh-­frozen plasma to replace ceruloplasmin and/or transferrin. Purified transferrin (apotransferrin) infusions are available.
Defects of mitochondrial iron utilization are a diverse group of
acquired and inherited defects known as sideroblastic anemias
(Table 505.1). Several genes associated with these disorders have been
described. Impaired heme synthesis leads to retention of iron within
the mitochondria of marrow RBCs. The perinuclear distribution of
mitochondria results in a pattern of iron staining surrounding the
nucleus. These are ringed sideroblasts (Fig. 505.1), which are distinct
from the more diffuse cytoplasmic distribution of iron in normal RBC
precursors. The anemia is characterized by hypochromic, microcytic
RBCs mixed with normal RBCs, so the complete blood count indicates a very high RBC distribution width. The serum iron concentration usually is elevated, and the transferrin saturation of iron is
increased.
Congenital sideroblastic anemia (CSA) can be syndromic or
nonsyndromic. The most common type of nonsyndromic CSA is an
X-­linked disorder and is most often a result of pathogenic variants
in ALAS2 that encodes erythrocytic isozyme 5-­aminolevulinic acid
synthetase, the rate-­limiting enzyme reaction in heme synthesis. An
important cofactor for 5-­ALA synthetase is pyridoxal phosphate, with
several pathogenic variants occurring near its binding site. Severe
anemia is recognized in infancy or early childhood, whereas milder
cases might not become apparent until early adulthood or later. Clinical findings include pallor, icterus, and moderate splenomegaly and/
or hepatomegaly. The severity of the anemia varies such that some
patients require no therapy and others need regular RBC transfusions.
A subset of patients with hereditary sideroblastic anemia manifest
a hematologic response to pyridoxine doses of 50-­200 mg/day. Iron
overload, as manifested by elevated serum ferritin, elevated serum
iron, and increased transferrin saturation, is a major complication of
this disorder. Clinical evidence of iron overload (e.g., diabetes mellitus,
liver dysfunction) may be found in some patients who have little or no
anemia, which may require iron chelation therapy. Stem cell transplantation has been used to treat affected children who are dependent on
RBC transfusions.
A unique variant of congenital sideroblastic anemia is Pearson syndrome (see Chapter 498), but the anemia is usually macrocytic and
not microcytic. Another rare variant of sideroblastic anemia is caused
by pathogenic variants in TRNT1 and manifests with developmental

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 505 u Other Microcytic Anemias

2951

Table 505.1  Clinical and Genetic Features of Congenital Sideroblastic Anemias
CATEGORY

DISORDER

INHERITANCE

SYNDROMIC

FREQUENCY

AGE AT
PRESENTATION

ANEMIA
SEVERITY

MCV

ASSOCIATED
ABNORMALITIES

Heme
synthesis
defects

XLSA

X-­linked

No

ALAS2

100s

Infancy to
adulthood

Mild to
severe

↓ males
N/↑
female

Iron overload in the
absence of
transfusions

SLC25A38
deficiency

AR

No

SLC25A38

40

Infancy

Severe

↓

Transfusional iron
overload

EPP

AR/PSD

No

FECH

100s

Childhood

Mild

↓

Acute
photosensitivity

AR

No

GLRX5

2

Adulthood

Mild to
severe

↓

Iron overload

HSPA9
deficiency

AR/PSD

No

HSPA9

12

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↓

Retinitis pigmentosa

HSCB
deficiency

AR

No

HSCB

1

Childhood

Moderate

N

None

XLSA/A

X-­linked

Yes

ABCB7

5

Childhood

Mild to
moderate

↓

Cerebellar ataxia
and hypoplasia,
delayed motor
development

SP/M

Yes

mtDNA

100s

Early childhood

Severe

↑

Lactic acidosis,
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency, failure
to thrive, hepatic/
renal failure

MLASA1

AR

Yes

PUS1

10

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↑

Myopathy, lactic
acidosis, facial
dysmorphism

MLASA2

AR

Yes

YARS2

40

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↑

Myopathy, lactic
acidosis,
cardiomyopathy

LARS2
deficiency

AR

Yes

LARS2

1

Infancy

Severe

↑

Lactic acidosis,
cardiomyopathy,
hepatopathy,
seizures

SIFD

AR

Yes

TRNT1

30

Infancy

Severe

Yes

MT-­ATP6

4

Infancy to early
childhood

Moderate
to severe

N/↑

Lactic acidosis,
myopathy,
neurologic
abnormalities

Yes

NUDFB11

5

Early childhood

Moderate

N

Lactic acidosis,
myopathy

Yes

SLC19A2

50

Early childhood

Mild to
severe

↑

Sensorineural
deafness, non-­type
1 diabetes mellitus,
optic atrophy,
strokelike episodes

Fe-­S
GLRX5
biogenesis
deficiency
defects

Mitochondrial PMPS
protein
synthesis
defects

Mitochondrial MT-­ATP6-­SA SP/M
respiratory
protein
mutations
NDUFB11-­SA

X-­linked

Multifactorial AR
TRMA

GENE

Immunodeficiency
(B.T), aseptic
febrile episodes,
developmental
delay, seizures,
cardiomyopathy,
retinitis
pigmentosa, other

↑, increased; ↓, decreased; AR, autosomal recessive; EPP, erythropoietic protoporphyria; MCV, mean red blood cell volume; MLASA, mitochondrial myopathy lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anemia;. mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; N, normal; PMPS, Pearson marrow pancreas syndrome; PSD, Pseudodominant; SIFD, sideroblastic anemia, immunodeficiency (B cell),
periodic fevers, and developmental delay; SP/M, sporadic/mitochondrial; TRMA, thiamine responsive megaloblastic anemia; XLSA, X-­linked sideroblastic anemia.
Adapted from Ducamp S and Fleming D. The molecular genetics of sideroblastic anemia. Blood 2019:133(1):59–69.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2952 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
MATURATION TIME - DAYS

45

3.5

Percent

Hematocrit

Marrow
normoblasts and
reticulocytes

Fig. 505.1 Ring sideroblast in myelodysplastic syndrome (refractory

anemia with ring sideroblasts)—iron stain. (From Ryan DH, Cohen HJ.
Bone marrow examination. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Shattil SJ, et al.,
eds. Hematology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone, 2005.)

delay, periodic fevers, and B-­cell immunodeficiency in addition to sideroblastic anemia.
Acquired sideroblastic anemias can be triggered by copper deficiency
or drugs and toxins that disturb mitochondrial iron metabolism,
including lead, chloramphenicol, penicillamine, ethanol, and isoniazid. The acquired neoplastic sideroblastic syndromes (myelodysplasias) seen in adults are very rare in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Blood
reticulocytes
1.0

35

3.0

25

2.5

15

1.5

1.5
2.0
2.5

Fig. 506.1 Number of days for maturation of reticulocytes to mature

erythrocytes in the marrow and blood. The duration of maturation as
blood reticulocytes is taken as μ, which is used in the correction equation in this chapter. (Modified from Hillman RS, Finch CA. Red cell manual. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1983.)

RED CELL DESTRUCTION
Red

Extravascular
(liver and spleen)

Intravascular

cell

Macrophage

Hb tetramer (n)
Globin

Hb

Amino
acid
pool

Globin
Fe

Heme

Methemoglobin

CO

Hb dimer

Hemopexin (p) Metheme
Unconjugated (n)
bilirubin
Transferrin

(p) Haptoglobin

Hepatocytes
Heme
Fe

Bilirubin

Methemalbumin (n)

Conjugation

Section 3

Hb-Haptoglobin
complex

Hemolytic Anemias

Fecal
urobilinogen (n)

Chapter 506

Urine
Urobilinogen (n)

Definitions and
Classification of
Hemolytic Anemias

Fig. 506.2 Red cell destruction and catabolism of hemoglobin (Hb) based
on the description by Hillman and Finch. Fe, Iron; CO, carbon monoxide.
(From Hillman RS, Finch CA. Red cell manual. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1983.)

Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
Hemolysis is defined as the premature destruction of red blood cells
(RBCs). Anemia results when the rate of destruction exceeds the
capacity of the marrow to produce additional RBCs. Normal RBC survival time is 110-­120 days (half-­life: 55-­60 days), and thus, approximately 0.85% of the most senescent RBCs are removed and replaced
each day. During hemolysis, RBC survival is shortened, the RBC count
falls, erythropoietin is increased, and marrow erythropoietic activity
is stimulated. This leads to compensatory erythroid hyperplasia with
increased RBC production, reflected by an increase in the reticulocyte
count. The marrow can increase its output twofold to threefold acutely,
with a maximum of sixfold to eightfold in chronic hemolysis. The
reticulocyte percentage can be corrected to measure the magnitude of
marrow production in response to hemolysis as follows:
Reticulocyte index = reticulocyte % ×

Observed hematocrit
Normal hematocrit

Urine hemosiderin
Urine Hb

×

1
μ

where μ is a maturation factor of 1-­3 related to the severity of the
anemia (Fig. 506.1). The normal reticulocyte index is 1.0; therefore the
index measures the fold increase in erythropoiesis (e.g., twofold, threefold). Because the reticulocyte index is essentially a measure of RBC
production per day, the maturation factor μ provides this correction
(see Fig. 506.1).
When hemolysis is chronic, compensatory erythroid hyperplasia may lead to significant expansion of the medullary spaces at the
expense of cortical bone. This is particularly prominent in children
with severe chronic hemolytic anemia such as thalassemia. These
changes may be evident on physical examination or on radiographs of
the skull and long bones. In severe cases, there is increased propensity
for long bone fracture. Hemolysis also leads to increased degradation
of hemoglobin. This process can result in indirect hyperbilirubinemia,
increased biliary excretion of heme pigment derivatives, and formation
of bilirubinate gallstones.
During hemolysis (Fig. 506.2), heme-­binding proteins in the plasma
are altered. Hemoglobin binds to haptoglobin and hemopexin, both of
which are cleared more rapidly as heme-­bound complexes. Oxidized
heme binds to albumin to form methemalbumin, which is increased
in the plasma during hemolysis. When the capacity of these heme-­
binding molecules is exceeded, free hemoglobin appears in the plasma.
Free hemoglobin in the plasma is considered prima facie evidence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2950 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
serum transferrin levels that are accompanied by the deposition of
non–transferrin-­bound iron in parenchymal tissues. Because hepcidin
production is induced by inflammatory stimuli, hepcidin elevation is
also a feature of the anemia of chronic disease (ACD). However, in
contrast to patients with IRIDA, in whom the hepcidin dysregulation
is congenital, patients with ACD generally retain normal to high iron
stores because of the acquired nature of their hepcidin elevation (see
Chapter 500.1). Rare medical causes that may mimic IRIDA include
vascular malformations of the GI tract, Castleman disease (where IL-­6
overproduction causes hepcidin elevation), autoimmune gastritis, and
pathogenic germline variants in KCNQ1 (which regulates gastric acid
secretion).

TREATMENT

Because of the underlying pathophysiology of IRIDA, parenteral iron
supplementation is required to correct the anemia. Although parenteral
iron therapy raises body iron stores, the hematologic response is usually
slow and not completely corrective. This likely results from insufficient
export of the processed iron from macrophages into the circulation,
an expected consequence of hepcidin elevation. Serum ferritin levels
increase with parenteral iron therapy in a dose-­dependent manner
and may raise concerns for iron overload, which would be expected to
exhibit a reticuloendothelial rather than a parenchymal pattern of iron
loading. Given the limited number of IRIDA cases reported to date, the
optimal formulation and dosing of parenteral iron have not yet been
established. Although oral iron supplementation does not appear to
have a significant role in treatment of IRIDA, the addition of ascorbic acid to a ferrous sulfate oral supplement has been associated with
hematologic responses in isolated cases. Treatment with recombinant
erythropoietin has not been found to produce significant clinical benefit in patients with IRIDA.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 505

Other Microcytic Anemias
Jennifer A. Rothman
A number of rare microcytic anemias need to be considered
when children with microcytic anemia fail to respond to oral iron
(Table 504.5). These anemias include thalassemia or thalassemia trait
(see ­Chapter 511), infantile poikilocytosis and hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (Chapter 508), and anemia of chronic disease (Chapter 500.1).
Additionally, rare nutritional disorders and disorders of iron metabolism can cause microcytosis.

INFANTILE POIKILOCYTOSIS AND HEREDITARY
PYROPOIKILOCYTOSIS

Infants with common hereditary elliptocytosis (see Chapter 508)
may initially present with hemolytic anemia characterized by marked
poikilocytosis with budding and fragmentation of the red blood cells
(RBCs). These small RBC fragments reduce the overall mean corpuscular volume (MCV), resulting in microcytosis. By 2 years of age, the
findings become typical of hereditary elliptocytosis. Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis is a much less common variant of hereditary elliptocytosis, in which the hemolytic anemia and RBC changes are more severe.

COPPER DEFICIENCY

Copper deficiency is a rare cause of microcytic anemia and neurologic dysfunction. Copper is absorbed in the stomach and proximal

duodenum. Deficiency is associated with malabsorption; severe malnutrition, often with feeding of milk alone; gastric surgery or feedings that bypass the stomach and duodenum; or parenteral nutrition
with inadvertent omission of supplemental copper. Zinc and copper
are competitively absorbed from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, so zinc
excess may inadvertently lead to copper deficiency. Diagnosis is made
by measuring a serum copper level, serum ceruloplasmin, and possibly
a zinc level. Treatment includes either oral or parenteral supplementation, depending on the underlying cause.

DEFECTS OF IRON METABOLISM

Rare microcytic anemias may be associated with defects in iron trafficking and regulation. Most are inherited and usually identified in
childhood, including defects of iron absorption, transport, utilization, and recycling. A defect of iron absorption is iron-­refractory iron-­
deficiency anemia (see Chapter 504.1). Defects of iron recycling include
aceruloplasminemia and atransferrinemia. Aceruloplasminemia is an
autosomal recessive disorder in the CP gene that encodes ceruloplasmin. Iron cannot be appropriately transported from macrophages to
plasma to be available for RBC production but accumulates instead in
the brain and visceral organs, which can lead to an adult-­onset neurodegenerative disorder. The diagnosis is made by a combination of
absence of serum ceruloplasmin, low serum copper and iron, elevated
ferritin, and increased liver iron concentration. Hypotransferrinemia
or atransferrinemia is also an autosomal recessive disorder caused by
pathogenic variants in the transferrin (TF) gene. Diagnosis is made by
low or absent serum transferrin and liver iron overload. Genetic testing
can confirm the diagnosis for both disorders. Treatment includes iron
chelation therapy, limiting iron supplementation and dietary iron, and
possibly fresh-­frozen plasma to replace ceruloplasmin and/or transferrin. Purified transferrin (apotransferrin) infusions are available.
Defects of mitochondrial iron utilization are a diverse group of
acquired and inherited defects known as sideroblastic anemias
(Table 505.1). Several genes associated with these disorders have been
described. Impaired heme synthesis leads to retention of iron within
the mitochondria of marrow RBCs. The perinuclear distribution of
mitochondria results in a pattern of iron staining surrounding the
nucleus. These are ringed sideroblasts (Fig. 505.1), which are distinct
from the more diffuse cytoplasmic distribution of iron in normal RBC
precursors. The anemia is characterized by hypochromic, microcytic
RBCs mixed with normal RBCs, so the complete blood count indicates a very high RBC distribution width. The serum iron concentration usually is elevated, and the transferrin saturation of iron is
increased.
Congenital sideroblastic anemia (CSA) can be syndromic or
nonsyndromic. The most common type of nonsyndromic CSA is an
X-­linked disorder and is most often a result of pathogenic variants
in ALAS2 that encodes erythrocytic isozyme 5-­aminolevulinic acid
synthetase, the rate-­limiting enzyme reaction in heme synthesis. An
important cofactor for 5-­ALA synthetase is pyridoxal phosphate, with
several pathogenic variants occurring near its binding site. Severe
anemia is recognized in infancy or early childhood, whereas milder
cases might not become apparent until early adulthood or later. Clinical findings include pallor, icterus, and moderate splenomegaly and/
or hepatomegaly. The severity of the anemia varies such that some
patients require no therapy and others need regular RBC transfusions.
A subset of patients with hereditary sideroblastic anemia manifest
a hematologic response to pyridoxine doses of 50-­200 mg/day. Iron
overload, as manifested by elevated serum ferritin, elevated serum
iron, and increased transferrin saturation, is a major complication of
this disorder. Clinical evidence of iron overload (e.g., diabetes mellitus,
liver dysfunction) may be found in some patients who have little or no
anemia, which may require iron chelation therapy. Stem cell transplantation has been used to treat affected children who are dependent on
RBC transfusions.
A unique variant of congenital sideroblastic anemia is Pearson syndrome (see Chapter 498), but the anemia is usually macrocytic and
not microcytic. Another rare variant of sideroblastic anemia is caused
by pathogenic variants in TRNT1 and manifests with developmental

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 505 u Other Microcytic Anemias

2951

Table 505.1  Clinical and Genetic Features of Congenital Sideroblastic Anemias
CATEGORY

DISORDER

INHERITANCE

SYNDROMIC

FREQUENCY

AGE AT
PRESENTATION

ANEMIA
SEVERITY

MCV

ASSOCIATED
ABNORMALITIES

Heme
synthesis
defects

XLSA

X-­linked

No

ALAS2

100s

Infancy to
adulthood

Mild to
severe

↓ males
N/↑
female

Iron overload in the
absence of
transfusions

SLC25A38
deficiency

AR

No

SLC25A38

40

Infancy

Severe

↓

Transfusional iron
overload

EPP

AR/PSD

No

FECH

100s

Childhood

Mild

↓

Acute
photosensitivity

AR

No

GLRX5

2

Adulthood

Mild to
severe

↓

Iron overload

HSPA9
deficiency

AR/PSD

No

HSPA9

12

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↓

Retinitis pigmentosa

HSCB
deficiency

AR

No

HSCB

1

Childhood

Moderate

N

None

XLSA/A

X-­linked

Yes

ABCB7

5

Childhood

Mild to
moderate

↓

Cerebellar ataxia
and hypoplasia,
delayed motor
development

SP/M

Yes

mtDNA

100s

Early childhood

Severe

↑

Lactic acidosis,
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency, failure
to thrive, hepatic/
renal failure

MLASA1

AR

Yes

PUS1

10

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↑

Myopathy, lactic
acidosis, facial
dysmorphism

MLASA2

AR

Yes

YARS2

40

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↑

Myopathy, lactic
acidosis,
cardiomyopathy

LARS2
deficiency

AR

Yes

LARS2

1

Infancy

Severe

↑

Lactic acidosis,
cardiomyopathy,
hepatopathy,
seizures

SIFD

AR

Yes

TRNT1

30

Infancy

Severe

Yes

MT-­ATP6

4

Infancy to early
childhood

Moderate
to severe

N/↑

Lactic acidosis,
myopathy,
neurologic
abnormalities

Yes

NUDFB11

5

Early childhood

Moderate

N

Lactic acidosis,
myopathy

Yes

SLC19A2

50

Early childhood

Mild to
severe

↑

Sensorineural
deafness, non-­type
1 diabetes mellitus,
optic atrophy,
strokelike episodes

Fe-­S
GLRX5
biogenesis
deficiency
defects

Mitochondrial PMPS
protein
synthesis
defects

Mitochondrial MT-­ATP6-­SA SP/M
respiratory
protein
mutations
NDUFB11-­SA

X-­linked

Multifactorial AR
TRMA

GENE

Immunodeficiency
(B.T), aseptic
febrile episodes,
developmental
delay, seizures,
cardiomyopathy,
retinitis
pigmentosa, other

↑, increased; ↓, decreased; AR, autosomal recessive; EPP, erythropoietic protoporphyria; MCV, mean red blood cell volume; MLASA, mitochondrial myopathy lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anemia;. mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; N, normal; PMPS, Pearson marrow pancreas syndrome; PSD, Pseudodominant; SIFD, sideroblastic anemia, immunodeficiency (B cell),
periodic fevers, and developmental delay; SP/M, sporadic/mitochondrial; TRMA, thiamine responsive megaloblastic anemia; XLSA, X-­linked sideroblastic anemia.
Adapted from Ducamp S and Fleming D. The molecular genetics of sideroblastic anemia. Blood 2019:133(1):59–69.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2952 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
MATURATION TIME - DAYS

45

3.5

Percent

Hematocrit

Marrow
normoblasts and
reticulocytes

Fig. 505.1 Ring sideroblast in myelodysplastic syndrome (refractory

anemia with ring sideroblasts)—iron stain. (From Ryan DH, Cohen HJ.
Bone marrow examination. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Shattil SJ, et al.,
eds. Hematology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone, 2005.)

delay, periodic fevers, and B-­cell immunodeficiency in addition to sideroblastic anemia.
Acquired sideroblastic anemias can be triggered by copper deficiency
or drugs and toxins that disturb mitochondrial iron metabolism,
including lead, chloramphenicol, penicillamine, ethanol, and isoniazid. The acquired neoplastic sideroblastic syndromes (myelodysplasias) seen in adults are very rare in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Blood
reticulocytes
1.0

35

3.0

25

2.5

15

1.5

1.5
2.0
2.5

Fig. 506.1 Number of days for maturation of reticulocytes to mature

erythrocytes in the marrow and blood. The duration of maturation as
blood reticulocytes is taken as μ, which is used in the correction equation in this chapter. (Modified from Hillman RS, Finch CA. Red cell manual. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1983.)

RED CELL DESTRUCTION
Red

Extravascular
(liver and spleen)

Intravascular

cell

Macrophage

Hb tetramer (n)
Globin

Hb

Amino
acid
pool

Globin
Fe

Heme

Methemoglobin

CO

Hb dimer

Hemopexin (p) Metheme
Unconjugated (n)
bilirubin
Transferrin

(p) Haptoglobin

Hepatocytes
Heme
Fe

Bilirubin

Methemalbumin (n)

Conjugation

Section 3

Hb-Haptoglobin
complex

Hemolytic Anemias

Fecal
urobilinogen (n)

Chapter 506

Urine
Urobilinogen (n)

Definitions and
Classification of
Hemolytic Anemias

Fig. 506.2 Red cell destruction and catabolism of hemoglobin (Hb) based
on the description by Hillman and Finch. Fe, Iron; CO, carbon monoxide.
(From Hillman RS, Finch CA. Red cell manual. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1983.)

Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
Hemolysis is defined as the premature destruction of red blood cells
(RBCs). Anemia results when the rate of destruction exceeds the
capacity of the marrow to produce additional RBCs. Normal RBC survival time is 110-­120 days (half-­life: 55-­60 days), and thus, approximately 0.85% of the most senescent RBCs are removed and replaced
each day. During hemolysis, RBC survival is shortened, the RBC count
falls, erythropoietin is increased, and marrow erythropoietic activity
is stimulated. This leads to compensatory erythroid hyperplasia with
increased RBC production, reflected by an increase in the reticulocyte
count. The marrow can increase its output twofold to threefold acutely,
with a maximum of sixfold to eightfold in chronic hemolysis. The
reticulocyte percentage can be corrected to measure the magnitude of
marrow production in response to hemolysis as follows:
Reticulocyte index = reticulocyte % ×

Observed hematocrit
Normal hematocrit

Urine hemosiderin
Urine Hb

×

1
μ

where μ is a maturation factor of 1-­3 related to the severity of the
anemia (Fig. 506.1). The normal reticulocyte index is 1.0; therefore the
index measures the fold increase in erythropoiesis (e.g., twofold, threefold). Because the reticulocyte index is essentially a measure of RBC
production per day, the maturation factor μ provides this correction
(see Fig. 506.1).
When hemolysis is chronic, compensatory erythroid hyperplasia may lead to significant expansion of the medullary spaces at the
expense of cortical bone. This is particularly prominent in children
with severe chronic hemolytic anemia such as thalassemia. These
changes may be evident on physical examination or on radiographs of
the skull and long bones. In severe cases, there is increased propensity
for long bone fracture. Hemolysis also leads to increased degradation
of hemoglobin. This process can result in indirect hyperbilirubinemia,
increased biliary excretion of heme pigment derivatives, and formation
of bilirubinate gallstones.
During hemolysis (Fig. 506.2), heme-­binding proteins in the plasma
are altered. Hemoglobin binds to haptoglobin and hemopexin, both of
which are cleared more rapidly as heme-­bound complexes. Oxidized
heme binds to albumin to form methemalbumin, which is increased
in the plasma during hemolysis. When the capacity of these heme-­
binding molecules is exceeded, free hemoglobin appears in the plasma.
Free hemoglobin in the plasma is considered prima facie evidence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 507 u Hereditary Spherocytosis

2955

Table 506.3  Clinical and Laboratory Features Suggestive of Hemolytic Anemia
Pallor
Icterus
Splenomegaly
Gallstones
History of neonatal icterus
Positive family history of anemia, splenectomy, cholecystectomy
↑ Reticulocyte count

↑ RDW (caused by ↑ reticulocyte count)
Abnormal RBC morphology
↑ Indirect bilirubin (normal direct bilirubin)
↓ Serum haptoglobin level
↑ Urinary urobilinogen level
Hemoglobinuria (+ dipstick test result for blood; no RBCs in urine)
↑ LDH level

LDH, Lactate dehydrogenase; RBC, red blood cell; RDW, red cell distribution width.
From Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2018: 674; Table 37.12.

Table 506.4  Hemolytic Anemias: Diagnostic Clues Based
on Red Blood Cell Shape
Sickle cells: sickle cell disease
Target cells: hemoglobinopathies (HbC, HbS, thalassemia), liver
disease
Schistocytes/burr cells/helmet cells/RBC fragments: microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia (DIC, HUS, TTP)
Spherocytes: hereditary spherocytosis, autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Cigar-­shaped cells: hereditary elliptocytosis
“Bite” cells: G6PD deficiency
Poikilocytosis, microcytosis, fragmented erythrocytes, elliptocytes:
hereditary pyropoikilocytosis
DIC, Disseminated intravascular coagulation; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; HbC, hemoglobin C; HbS, sickle hemoglobin; HUS, hemolytic-­uremic
syndrome; RBC, red blood cell; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura.
From Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2018: 674; Table 37.13.

Chapter 507

Hereditary Spherocytosis
Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) is a common cause of inherited
hemolytic anemia, with a prevalence of approximately 1 in 2,000-­
5,000 persons. Described in patients of all ethnic groups, it is the
most common inherited abnormality of the erythrocyte associated
with inherited hemolytic anemia in persons of Northern European
origin. HS is marked by wide variability in the associated clinical,
laboratory, and genetic manifestations. Symptomatology ranges
from asymptomatic patients with well-­
compensated anemia to
severely affected patients with hemolytic anemia requiring regular
blood transfusions.

ETIOLOGY

The pathophysiology underlying HS is twofold: an intrinsic defect
of the erythrocyte membrane and an intact spleen that selectively
retains, damages, and removes abnormal HS erythrocytes. Qualitative or quantitative defects of key membrane proteins lead to
a multistep process of accelerated HS erythrocyte destruction.

Abnormalities of ankyrin or spectrin are the most common molecular defects (Table 507.1). Defects in these membrane proteins
result in uncoupling of the “vertical” interactions of the lipid bilayer
with the underlying membrane skeleton with subsequent release of
membrane microvesicles. The loss of membrane surface area without a proportional loss of cell volume causes decreased erythrocyte
deformability. This impairs cell passage from the splenic cords to
the splenic sinuses, leading to the trapping and premature destruction of HS erythrocytes by the spleen (Figs. 507.1 and 507.2).
Splenectomy markedly improves erythrocyte life span and may be
indicated in some patients with HS.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Hereditary spherocytosis is usually transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. However, as many as 25% of patients have no previous family history, representing either recessive inheritance or de novo gene
variants.
In the neonatal period, HS is a significant cause of hemolysis and
can manifest as anemia and/or hyperbilirubinemia severe enough
to require phototherapy, transfusion, or exchange transfusions.
Hemolysis may be more prominent in the newborn because hemoglobin F binds 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate poorly, and the increased
level of free 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate destabilizes interactions among
spectrin, actin, and protein 4.1 in the red blood cell (RBC) membrane (see Fig. 507.1). The need for transfusions in infancy is not
indicative of more severe disease later in life because infants are
typically slow to mount an adequate reticulocyte response for the
first few months after birth.
Disease severity varies and can be used to clinically classify HS
(Table 507.2). Mild cases (20–30% of all HS) are asymptomatic into
adulthood and have well-­compensated mild anemia where reticulocyte
production and erythrocyte destruction are essentially balanced. Cases
of moderate or “typical” HS (60–70%) have partially compensated
hemolytic anemia with reticulocytosis, frequently with symptoms of
fatigue, pallor, and intermittent jaundice. Splenomegaly is common
after infancy, and it is present in almost all HS patients by young adulthood. Severe cases of HS (3–5%) have life-­threatening anemia and are
transfusion dependent.
Bilirubin gallstone formation is a function of age; they can form as
early as 4-­5 years of age and are present in most adult HS patients.
HS patients are susceptible to aplastic crises primarily as a result
of parvovirus B19 infection, hypoplastic crises associated with other
infections, and megaloblastic crises due to folate deficiency (Fig. 507.3).
During these crises, high RBC turnover in the setting of erythroid marrow failure can result in profound anemia (hematocrit <10%), high-­
output heart failure, cardiovascular collapse, and death. Leukocyte and
platelet counts may also fall.
Rare complications associated with HS include splenic sequestration crisis, gout, cardiomyopathy, priapism, leg ulcers, and
neurologic or muscular abnormalities, including spinocerebellar
degeneration.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2956 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 507.1  	 Common Gene Pathogenic Variants in Hereditary Spherocytosis
COMMON PATHOGENIC VARIANTS

PROTEIN

GENE

Ankyrin-­1

ANK1

Frameshift
Nonsense
Splicing
Missense
Insertion/deletion
Promoter region

PREVALENCE
50–67%
5–10% in Japan

INHERITANCE
Mostly dominant,
rare recessive

Mild to moderate

DISEASE SEVERITY

Band 3

AE1 (SLC4A1)

Missense
Nonsense

15–20%

Dominant

Mild to moderate

β-­Spectrin

SPTB

Nonsense
Missense
Insertion/deletion

15–20%

Dominant

Mild to moderate

α-­Spectrin

SPTA1

Splicing
Nonsense
Missense

<5%

Recessive

Severe

Protein 4.2

EPB42

Missense
Nonsense
Splicing
Deletion

<5%
45–50% in Japan

Recessive

Mild to moderate

Modified from Bolton-­Maggs PHB, Langer JC, Iolascon A, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of hereditary spherocytosis–2011 update. Br J Haematol. 2011;156:37–
49.

Glycophorin A

Glycophorin B

Glycophorin A

Band 3
Band 3

Glycophorin C/D

Band 3

Band 3
Rh RhAG LW

p55

CD47

Fig. 507.1 A simplified cross-­section

of the red blood cell (erythrocyte)
membrane. The lipid bilayer forms
the equator of the cross-­section with
its polar heads (small circles) turned
outward. 4.1R, protein; 4.2, protein
4.2; LW, Landsteiner-­Wiener glycoprotein; Rh, Rhesus polypeptide; RhAG,
Rh-­associated glycoprotein. (From
Perrotta S, Gallagher PG, Mohandas
N. Hereditary spherocytosis. Lancet
2008;372:1411–1426.)

DIAGNOSIS

Ankyrin-1

Dematin

4.2

4.1R
Actin
 spectrin

Typically, there is evidence of hemolytic anemia with reticulocytosis and indirect hyperbilirubinemia. The mean corpuscular volume
(MCV) of HS erythrocytes is low normal or even slightly decreased
and the mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) is
usually increased (>35 g/dL). An MCHC > 35.4 g/dL combined
with an RBC distribution width (RDW) <14% has been suggested
as a screening test for HS. Erythroid cells on peripheral blood
smear vary in size and include spherocytes and polychromatophilic

Adducin
4.1R

 spectrin

Tropomyosin
Tropomodulin

reticulocytes. Spherocytes are smaller in diameter, hyperchromic
due to elevated hemoglobin concentration from cellular dehydration, and lacking in central pallor (Fig. 507.4). Numbers of spherocytes are variable, with increased numbers likely reflecting the
severity of disease. Other markers of hemolysis include decreased
haptoglobin and elevated lactic dehydrogenase.
The diagnosis of HS can be established from a positive family
history and the presence of typical clinical and laboratory features
of the disease: splenomegaly, spherocytes on the blood smear,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 507 u Hereditary Spherocytosis

Spectrin, ankyrin, or
protein 4.2 deficiency

2957

Low pH
High macrophage
contact
Release of microvesicles

Erythrostasis

Reduced
surface-to-volume ratio

Reduced cellular Splenic
trapping
deformability

Low glucose
concentration
High oxidants
concentration

Hemolysis

Splenic
conditioning

Further loss
of membrane

Release of microvesicles

Fig. 507.2 Pathophysiologic effects

of hereditary spherocytosis. (From
Perrotta S, Gallagher PG, Mohandas
N. Hereditary spherocytosis. Lancet
2008;372:1411–1426.)

Lipid bilayer
Spectrin
Ankyrin
Band 3

reticulocytosis, and an elevated MCHC. If these are present, no
additional testing is necessary to confirm the diagnosis clinically.
If the diagnosis is less certain, additional testing can be performed.
Binding of fluorescently labeled eosin-­
5-­
maleimide (EMA) to
band 3 and other membrane proteins is decreased in HS erythrocytes. This flow cytometry–based screening test is easy to perform
and has good diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. In the classic
incubated osmotic fragility test, HS erythrocytes are incubated in
progressive dilutions of sodium chloride causing the cells to swell
and lyse, with spherocytes lysing at a lower dilution due to their
lower surface area to volume ratio. This test detects the presence
of spherocytes in the blood, but it is not specific to HS and may be
abnormal in other anemias with prominent spherocytosis. Osmotic
fragility testing has poor sensitivity and may miss cases of mild HS
where the numbers of spherocytes are few. Other assays such as the
cryohemolysis test, the acidified glycerol lysis test, and the osmotic
gradient ektacytometry have been used for diagnosis of HS, but they
are not available in many laboratories. Genetic diagnosis is widely
available on a commercial basis. The precise role of molecular
testing in HS diagnosis and management is evolving. Some experts
suggest molecular testing before splenectomy to verify the diagnosis of HS.
Diagnosis in the neonatal period requires a high index of suspicion as the disease presents differently than in older children,
particularly in de novo and recessively inherited cases where family history is not available for guidance. Jaundice is frequently
observed, and kernicterus can occur. Hemolytic anemia may be
severe enough to require blood transfusion. In fact, HS is the leading cause of Coombs-­negative hemolytic anemia, requiring transfusion in the first months of life. Splenomegaly is uncommon in
neonates.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Tail of osmotic
fragility curve

Band-3 deficiency

The differential diagnosis for spherocytosis on peripheral blood
smear includes isoimmune and autoimmune hemolysis. Isoimmune
hemolytic disease of the newborn, particularly when there is a
result of ABO incompatibility, closely mimics the appearance of HS.
The detection of antibody on an infant's RBCs using a direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test should establish the diagnosis of immune
hemolysis. Autoimmune hemolytic anemias also are characterized
by spherocytosis, but there will typically be evidence of previously

normal values for hemoglobin, hematocrit, and reticulocyte count.
Rare causes of spherocytosis include thermal injury, hemolytic
transfusion reaction, clostridial sepsis, severe hypophosphatemia,
Wilson disease, and snake, bee, or wasp envenomation, which all
may manifest as transient spherocytic hemolytic anemia.

TREATMENT
General Supportive Care

Infants born to a parent with known HS should be monitored carefully because hyperbilirubinemia may peak several days after birth.
Parents should be advised of the risk of neonatal anemia and jaundice and the potential need for transfusion, phototherapy, and/or
exchange transfusion to treat anemia or hyperbilirubinemia. A subset of infants will be transfusion-­dependent until development of
adequate erythropoiesis to compensate for the ongoing hemolysis,
usually between 6-­12 months of age. Transfusion dependence after
this time is rare and is most likely due to recessive HS.
Once the baseline level of disease severity is reached, an annual
visit to the hematologist usually is sufficient follow-­up. Growth
should be monitored, and exercise tolerance and spleen size documented. Vaccinations should be up to date. Screening for gallbladder disease should begin at ∼4 years of age, repeated every 3-­5
years, or as indicated clinically. Documentation of parvovirus B19
susceptibility or immunity should be obtained in newly diagnosed
patients. Similarly, HIV and hepatitis serology should be documented in patients who have received transfusions. Folic acid supplementation is recommended in cases of moderate and severe HS
due to the demands of brisk erythropoiesis. Parents should receive
anticipatory guidance regarding the risk of aplastic crisis secondary
to parvovirus infection and hypoplastic crises with other infections.
Parents and patients should be informed of an increased risk for
gallstone development.

Guidelines for Splenectomy

Because spherocytes are destroyed almost exclusively in the spleen,
splenectomy is curative in most patients because hemolysis, anemia,
hyperbilirubinemia, and the incidence of gallstones are significantly
lessened, if not completely eradicated, after splenectomy. Thus splenectomy became routine in the care of HS patients. However, splenectomy is associated with short-­term risks, related to the operative
procedure itself, and long-­term risks, particularly increased lifelong

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2958 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 507.2  	 Clinical and Laboratory Classification of Hereditary Spherocytosis

NORMAL

MILD
SPHEROCYTOSIS

MODERATE
SPHEROCYTOSIS

MODERATELY
SEVERE
SPHEROCYTOSIS

Inheritance

—

Autosomal dominant

Autosomal dominant,
de novo variant

Autosomal dominant,
de novo variant

Autosomal recessive

Proportion of hereditary spherocytosis
cases

—

~20–30%

~60–70%

~10%

<5%

Hemoglobin (Hb, g/
dL)†

11.5-­16‡

10.5-­15

8-­12

6-­8

<6

Reticulocytes (%)†

0.5-­1.5

1.5-­6

≥6

≥10

≥10

Bilirubin (mg/dL)†,||

0-­1

0.5-­2

≥2

≥2

≥3

Peripheral smear*

Normal

Mild spherocytosis

Spherocytosis

Spherocytosis

Spherocytosis ±
poikilocytosis

Osmotic fragility
(fresh)

Normal

Normal or slightly
increased

Increased

Increased

Greatly increased

Osmotic fragility
(incubated)

Normal

Usually increased

Increased

Increased

Greatly increased

MCHC (g/dL)§

32-­36

34-­37

34-­38

35-­39

RDW (%)§

11-­14

12-­19

16-­23

20-­30

Hb/MCHC*

0.38-­0.41

0.35-­0.40

0.29-­0.33

0.18-­0.28

Hb/RDW§

0.95-­1.05

0.7-­1.0

0.48-­0.74

0.16-­0.35

Serum transferrin
receptor (nmol/L)§

18-­25

30-­65

80-­125

100-­150

Erythropoietin (mlU/
mL)§

7-­16

9-­30

25-­90

30-­300

Membrane protein
patterns (SDS-­
PAGE)¶

—

“Normal”#
Slight ↓ spectrin
Slight ↓ spectrin and
ankyrin
Slight ↓ band 3 and
4.2
Absent protein 4.2
and ↓ CD47

↓ Spectrin
↓ Spectrin and ankyrin
↓ Band 3 and protein
4.2
Absent protein 4.2
and ↓ CD47

↓ Spectrin
↓ Spectrin and ankyrin
↓ Band 3 and protein
4.2

↓↓ Spectrin
↓↓ Spectrin and
ankyrin
↓↓ Band 3 and protein
4.2**

Transfusions

—

No

Sometimes required
in infancy or with
aplastic crisis

Occasionally with
crises

Regular*

Splenectomy

—

Rarely, partial splenectomy††

Sometimes; consider
partial splenectomy

Usually (6-­9 yr)

Yes (>3 yr)

SEVERE
SPHEROCYTOSIS*

*Patients with severe disease are transfusion dependent by definition. Values are in untransfused patients or at nadir before transfusion.
†Data modified from Eber SW, Armbrust R, Schröter W. Variable clinical severity of hereditary spherocytosis: relation to erythrocytic spectrin concentration, osmotic fragility and
autohemolysis. J Pediatr. 1990;177:409–416.
‡Varies with age.
§Ranges shown encompass the majority of individuals in each category. From Rocha S, Costa E, Rocha-­Pereira P, et al. Complementary markers for the clinical severity classification of
hereditary spherocytosis in unsplenectomized patients. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2011;46:166–170.
||Multiply by 17.1 to convert to μmol/L.
¶Indicates common patterns observed on SDS gels. Decreased spectrin alone is seen in α-­spectrin or β-­spectrin defects. Decreased spectrin and ankyrin arc observed with ankyrin
defects. Decreased band 3 and protein 4.2 occur with band 3 defects. Absent protein 4.2 and decreased CD47 occur with protein 4.2 defects.
#Patients with mild spherocytosis who appear normal probably have small deficits (10–15%) that cannot be distinguished from normal findings on SDS gels.
**Rare patients with severe spherocytosis who are homozygous or compound heterozygous for band 3 defects.
††Consider in adolescents and adults who require a cholecystectomy or have disfiguring chronic jaundice.
CD, cluster of differentiation; MCHC, Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; RDW, red cell distribution width (measure of variation in shape); SDS-­PAGE, sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; ↓, decreased.
From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015:518; Table 16.3.

risk for sepsis, often caused by encapsulated bacteria. This risk is
not eliminated but reduced with the requisite preoperative and
postoperative vaccination against pneumococcus, meningococcus,
and Haemophilus influenzae type b. In addition, there are increasing

concerns regarding the emergence of penicillin-­resistant pneumococci, as well as increased risk for cardiovascular diseases including
thrombosis, pulmonary hypertension, and atherosclerosis, which
have tempered the practice of routine splenectomy in HS.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2959

Hemoglobin

Reticulocytes

WBC  103

Platelets  103

Chapter 507 u Hereditary Spherocytosis

30
10
Hemoglobin
400 20

A

B

C

D

E

F

20
Platelets
5

200 10 10

Retics
WBC

0 0

0 0
0

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

Days After Onset of Crisis

induced aplastic crisis. Progression of the
Fig. 507.3 Parvovirus-­

changes in blood count is shown for a patient with hereditary spherocytosis and infection with parvovirus. Note that the fall in baseline reticulocytosis is associated with a rapid fall in hemoglobin. White blood cells
(WBC) and platelets are also affected; Retics, reticulocytes. (Adapted
from Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Hematology of
Infancy and Childhood, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003.)

When considering splenectomy, the patient and the parents,
together with their healthcare providers, should review and consider
the risks and benefits. Individual-­specific factors may confer additional
risk after a splenectomy; time and distance from medical care in case
of febrile illness and residence in or travel to areas where parasitic diseases such as malaria or babesiosis occur should be considered.
Most experts recommend splenectomy for patients with severe HS
and believe it should be strongly considered for patients with moderate HS and frequent hypoplastic or aplastic crises, poor growth, or
cardiomegaly. It is generally not recommended for patients with mild
HS. When splenectomy is indicated, it should be performed after the
age of 6 years, if possible, to avoid the heightened risk of postsplenectomy sepsis in younger children. The laparoscopic approach has less
surgical morbidity and has become the technique of choice. Partial or
subtotal splenectomy (removal of 85–95% of spleen volume) has been
shown to decrease the hemolytic rate while preserving some splenic
phagocytic function, although the decrease in hemolysis is less than
that achievable with total splenectomy. Partial splenectomy is most
attractive in children with severe HS requiring frequent transfusion
early in childhood.
In children undergoing splenectomy, a concomitant cholecystectomy should be performed if there are gallstones. It is controversial
whether to perform a concomitant splenectomy in less-­severely ill
patients who are undergoing cholecystectomy for gallstone disease. Postsplenectomy thrombocytosis is commonly observed but
requires no treatment and usually resolves spontaneously. The

Fig. 507.4 Morphology of abnormal red cells. A, Hereditary spherocytosis. B, Hereditary elliptocytosis. C, Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis.
D, Hereditary stomatocytosis. E, Acanthocytosis. F, Fragmentation hemolysis.

patient should remain current on their vaccinations, as should
household and frequent contacts. Prophylactic antibiotics are
typically prescribed at least until the patient is 5 years of age or at
least 2 years postsplenectomy. Folate supplementation should be
continued if the hemoglobin level and reticulocyte count do not
normalize.
Splenectomy failure may occur in cases of accessory spleen, accidental autotransplantation of splenic tissue into peritoneum at time of
surgery, inaccurate diagnosis, or another co-­inherited hemolytic anemia. Clues include return of hemolysis and disappearance of Howell-­
Jolly bodies on peripheral blood smear. The diagnosis can be made by
radionucleotide studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2960 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 508

Hereditary Elliptocytosis,
Hereditary
Pyropoikilocytosis, and
Related Disorders
Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
Hereditary elliptocytosis (HE), hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (HPP),
and related disorders are characterized by the finding of elliptocytes on
peripheral blood smear (Table 508.1). Whereas hereditary spherocytosis is thought of as a disorder of the vertical interactions coupling the

erythrocyte membrane skeleton to the lipid bilayer, the HE syndromes
interfere with the horizontal interactions that link spectrin molecules
to each other and to membrane skeleton junctional complexes (see
Chapter 507, Fig. 507.1), leaving the cell vulnerable to shear stress.
HE is the prototypical member of the group, in which abnormal
shear stress over time results in elliptical deformation of the cell. It is
much more common than hereditary spherocytosis, but it is much less
likely to cause significant clinical symptomatology. The severity of HE
varies markedly, with most patients experiencing little or no symptomatology beyond the finding of elliptocytes on peripheral blood smear.
About 10% of patients have hemolytic HE with ongoing hemolysis
and anemia. HE is often worse during infancy, with hemolytic anemia
and hyperbilirubinemia that evolves to a well-­compensated state with
anemia that is absent, sporadic, or chronic. Hereditary elliptocytosis
occurs worldwide and in all ethnic groups, but it is more common in
patients with ancestry linked to areas of endemic malaria.
HPP is a subtype of HE characterized by severe hemolytic anemia
with findings on peripheral blood smear reminiscent of a thermal burn
(pyro, fire). HE and HPP are seen co-­segregating in the same families
because they involve overlapping pathogenic variants in spectrin. HPP
occurs predominantly in patients of African descent.

Table 508.1  Clinical Subtypes of Hereditary Elliptocytosis and Related Disorders
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
TYPICAL HETEROZYGOUS HE
Asymptomatic
Dominant inheritance: one parent with HE
No splenomegaly
Variants:
Some neonates have moderately severe hemolytic anemia and
HPP-­like smear; converts to typical HE by “1 yr.”
Some patients with typical HE have mild to moderate chronic
hemolysis and some poikilocytosis, caused by co-­inheritance of
the low-­expression variant α-­spectrinLELY , coexistence of chronic
disease producing splenomegaly, or unknown factors.
HOMOZYGOUS HE OR HPP
Moderate to severe hemolytic anemia
Splenomegaly
Intermittent jaundice
Aplastic crises
Recessive inheritance: typically one parent with HE and one
with α-­spectrin mutation, or both parents with HE
Good improvement after splenectomy

LABORATORY MANIFESTATION
Blood smear: elliptocytes, rod forms, few or no poikilocytes
No anemia, little or no hemolysis (reticulocytes, 1–3%)
Normal osmotic fragility
Usually a defect in α-­spectrin or β-­spectrin leading to decreased
spectrin self-­association, or a defect in protein 4.1 leading to partial
deficiency or dysfunction

Blood smear: bizarre poikilocytes, fragments, ± spherocytes, ± elliptocytes
Reticulocytosis
Decreased MCV because of red cell fragmentation
Increased osmotic fragility, positive EMA test
α-­Spectrin defects:
Decreased red cell and spectrin heat stability
Marked defect in spectrin self-­association
In the more severe variants, partial spectrin deficiency (indicated by
more spherocytes on the blood smear)

SPHEROCYTIC HE
Mild to moderate hemolytic anemia
Splenomegaly
Intermittent jaundice
Aplastic crises
Dominant inheritance pattern
Excellent response to splenectomy

SOUTHEAST ASIAN OVALOCYTOSIS
Anemia and jaundice in neonatal period; then asymptomatic
Dominant inheritance
Lowland Aboriginal tribes, especially in Melanesia, Malaysia, and the
Philippines
Very rigid red cells that resist invasion by malarial parasites in vitro and
protect against cerebral malaria in vivo

Blood smear: rounded elliptocytes, ± spherocytes; may see variable
morphology within a kindred
Reticulocytosis
Increased osmotic fragility
Variable molecular defects:
C-­terminal truncation of β-­spectrin
Protein 4.2 deficiency (some patients); variable morphology: spherocytes, ovalocytes, stomatocytes, or spiculated cells, sometimes
resembling spherocytic HE
Glycophorin C deficiency (rare)
Blood smear: rounded elliptocytes, some with a transverse bar that
divides the central clear space (theta cells)
No hemolysis or anemia after neonatal period
Normal osmotic fragility, positive EMA test
Mutant band 3 that lacks anion exchange function and tends to aggregate, leading to a rigid membrane

EMA, Eosin-­5′-­maleimide; HE, hereditary elliptocytosis; HPP, hereditary pyropoikilocytosis; MCV, mean cell volume.
Adapted from Wilensky ID, Narla M, Lux SF. Disorders of the red cell membrane. In: Handin RI, Lux SF, Stossel TP, eds. Blood: Principles and Practice of Hematology. Philadelphia:
Lippincott, 2003.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 509 u Hereditary Stomatocytosis Syndromes
Southeast Asian ovalocytosis (SAO) is a disorder characterized by
the presence of ovalocytes (less elongated and plumper than elliptocytes), some with one or two transverse ridges on peripheral smear.
SAO is found in individuals from New Guinea, Malaysia, Indonesia,
and the Philippines. Unlike HE and HPP, SAO is due to a variant in a
transmembrane protein, band 3, affecting vertical skeletal interactions
and leading to increased red cell rigidity. These changes may lead to
protection from malaria, particularly cerebral malaria.

ETIOLOGY

Various molecular defects have been described in HE. HE is inherited
as an autosomal dominant disorder with occasional de novo cases.
Most commonly, there are missense pathogenic variants of α-­ or β-­
spectrin that interfere with the formation of spectrin heterodimers
into tetramers, the primary structural unit of the membrane skeleton
(see Fig. 507.1). Erythrocytes carrying many of these spectrin pathogenic variants are resistant to malaria in vitro, hypothesized to explain
the increased prevalence of HE in malaria-­endemic areas. Less commonly, elliptocytosis results from pathogenic variants in protein 4.1 or
glycophorin C, proteins of the junctional complex that link spectrin
tetramers to the actin cytoskeleton. These defects in horizontal membrane skeleton protein interactions leave the cell susceptible to shearing forces, leading to the characteristic elliptical deformation of the cell
and potentially membrane fragmentation.
In HPP, two abnormal spectrin alleles are inherited. Frequently, an HPP
patient inherits an abnormal spectrin allele carrying a self-­association
site missense variant from one parent, who has mild or asymptomatic
HE, and a production-­defective allele that leads to quantitative deficiency
of spectrin from the other parent, who is otherwise clinically well.
SAO is an autosomal dominant disorder associated with an in-­
frame, nine amino acid deletion in band 3.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most HE patients do not have clinically significant hemolysis (see Fig.
507.4B). HE may be an incidental finding on a blood film examination for an unrelated indication. The diagnosis of HE is established by
the findings on the peripheral blood smear, the autosomal dominant
inheritance pattern, and the absence of other causes of elliptocytosis.
The differential diagnosis for other causes of elliptocytosis includes
deficiencies of iron, folic acid, and vitamin B12, thalassemia, myelodysplastic syndromes, and pyruvate kinase deficiency.
Interestingly, elliptocytes are not always present on the peripheral blood smear in the first few months of life. Even in hemolytic
HE, which may lead to neonatal jaundice and anemia, the peripheral
blood smear typically shows bizarre poikilocytes and pyknocytes with
rare to no elliptocytes. Hemolysis and anemia are aggravated in the
newborn period because of the increased presence of hemoglobin F,
which binds poorly to 2,3-­
diphosphoglycerate. The increased free
2,3-­diphosphoglycerate tends to destabilize the spectrin–actin–protein
4.1 complex, leading to membrane instability (see Fig. 507.1). The usual
features of a chronic hemolytic process due to hemolytic HE manifest as
anemia, jaundice, and splenomegaly. Cholelithiasis may occur in later
childhood and aplastic crises have been reported. HPP is characterized
by extreme microcytosis (mean corpuscular volume [MCV], 50-­65 fL/
cell), extraordinary variation in cell size and shape, and microspherocytosis with occasional elliptocytosis (see Fig. 507.4C). Hemolysis is
chronic and significant.
SAO is associated with neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, but it is associated with little to no hemolysis later in life.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Examination of the peripheral blood smear is essential to establish the
diagnosis of HE (see Fig. 507.4B). HE elliptocytes are normochromic
and normocytic with varying degrees of elongation. Because some HE
patients may present with relatively low numbers of elliptocytes, there
is no cutoff percentage that is useful diagnostically. In hemolytic HE,
other abnormal RBC shapes may be present, depending on the severity of hemolysis, including spherocytes, pyknocytes, and other poikilocytes. In HPP, microspherocytes, red cell fragments, and occasional

2961

elliptocytes are seen. SAO is suggested when ovalocytes, which in contrast to elliptocytes are less elongated, are observed.
Reticulocyte levels and other markers of hemolysis, such as total
bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, and haptoglobin, are helpful in establishing the severity of hemolysis, if present. In hemolytic HE and HPP,
additional testing may include the eosin-­5-­maleimide (EMA) binding
test, which detects binding to band 3 by flow cytometry, or incubated
osmotic fragility testing. In cases of chronic hemolysis, splenomegaly
and cholelithiasis can be assessed with abdominal ultrasound.

TREATMENT

If the presentation is that of typical HE (i.e., an isolated peripheral blood
smear abnormality without clinically evident hemolysis), no treatment
is necessary. For chronic HE and HPP, red blood cell transfusions are
occasionally required. Splenectomy decreases the hemolysis and should
be considered using criteria similar to that of hereditary spherocytosis.
If hemolysis continues after splenectomy, patients should receive folic
acid to prevent secondary folic acid deficiency. SAO does not require
treatment beyond the newborn period.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 509

Hereditary Stomatocytosis
Syndromes
Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
The hereditary stomatocytosis syndromes are a group of heterogeneous, dominantly inherited disorders in which alterations in red cell
cation permeability lead to alterations in intracellular water content
(Table 509.1). A net increase in sodium and potassium ions allows
water to enter the erythrocyte, creating stomatocytes or hydrocytes,
whereas a net loss of sodium and potassium ions leads to water loss,
creating dehydrated red cells, or xerocytes (Fig. 509.1).

HEREDITARY XEROCYTOSIS
Pathophysiology

Hereditary xerocytosis, the most common type of the hereditary
stomatocytosis syndromes, is a dominant disorder of erythrocyte
dehydration. The underlying defect is most commonly a missense
variant in PIEZO1, a mechanosensory transduction protein, associated with delayed channel inactivation. In a few patients, pathogenic
variants in the Gardos channel, important in erythrocyte dehydration in sickle cell disease, have been observed. Typically, there is
a net loss of intracellular potassium that is not accompanied by a
compensatory increase in sodium. Subsequently, the gradual loss
of intracellular water leads to erythrocyte dehydration. Hereditary
xerocytosis may be associated with a syndrome of hydrops fetalis
with perinatal anemia and ascites. These findings are transient and
remain unexplained.

Clinical Features

Affected patients exhibit a mild compensated macrocytic hemolytic
anemia with variable degrees of splenomegaly and intermittent jaundice. The mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) and
mean cell volume (MCV) are elevated, and erythrocyte osmotic fragility is decreased, as are potassium concentration and total monovalent
cation content. There are small numbers of stomatocytes, target cells,
and contracted red blood cells (RBCs) with hemoglobin puddled to
the side on peripheral blood smear. Treatment is supportive, similar

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 509 u Hereditary Stomatocytosis Syndromes
Southeast Asian ovalocytosis (SAO) is a disorder characterized by
the presence of ovalocytes (less elongated and plumper than elliptocytes), some with one or two transverse ridges on peripheral smear.
SAO is found in individuals from New Guinea, Malaysia, Indonesia,
and the Philippines. Unlike HE and HPP, SAO is due to a variant in a
transmembrane protein, band 3, affecting vertical skeletal interactions
and leading to increased red cell rigidity. These changes may lead to
protection from malaria, particularly cerebral malaria.

ETIOLOGY

Various molecular defects have been described in HE. HE is inherited
as an autosomal dominant disorder with occasional de novo cases.
Most commonly, there are missense pathogenic variants of α-­ or β-­
spectrin that interfere with the formation of spectrin heterodimers
into tetramers, the primary structural unit of the membrane skeleton
(see Fig. 507.1). Erythrocytes carrying many of these spectrin pathogenic variants are resistant to malaria in vitro, hypothesized to explain
the increased prevalence of HE in malaria-­endemic areas. Less commonly, elliptocytosis results from pathogenic variants in protein 4.1 or
glycophorin C, proteins of the junctional complex that link spectrin
tetramers to the actin cytoskeleton. These defects in horizontal membrane skeleton protein interactions leave the cell susceptible to shearing forces, leading to the characteristic elliptical deformation of the cell
and potentially membrane fragmentation.
In HPP, two abnormal spectrin alleles are inherited. Frequently, an HPP
patient inherits an abnormal spectrin allele carrying a self-­association
site missense variant from one parent, who has mild or asymptomatic
HE, and a production-­defective allele that leads to quantitative deficiency
of spectrin from the other parent, who is otherwise clinically well.
SAO is an autosomal dominant disorder associated with an in-­
frame, nine amino acid deletion in band 3.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most HE patients do not have clinically significant hemolysis (see Fig.
507.4B). HE may be an incidental finding on a blood film examination for an unrelated indication. The diagnosis of HE is established by
the findings on the peripheral blood smear, the autosomal dominant
inheritance pattern, and the absence of other causes of elliptocytosis.
The differential diagnosis for other causes of elliptocytosis includes
deficiencies of iron, folic acid, and vitamin B12, thalassemia, myelodysplastic syndromes, and pyruvate kinase deficiency.
Interestingly, elliptocytes are not always present on the peripheral blood smear in the first few months of life. Even in hemolytic
HE, which may lead to neonatal jaundice and anemia, the peripheral
blood smear typically shows bizarre poikilocytes and pyknocytes with
rare to no elliptocytes. Hemolysis and anemia are aggravated in the
newborn period because of the increased presence of hemoglobin F,
which binds poorly to 2,3-­
diphosphoglycerate. The increased free
2,3-­diphosphoglycerate tends to destabilize the spectrin–actin–protein
4.1 complex, leading to membrane instability (see Fig. 507.1). The usual
features of a chronic hemolytic process due to hemolytic HE manifest as
anemia, jaundice, and splenomegaly. Cholelithiasis may occur in later
childhood and aplastic crises have been reported. HPP is characterized
by extreme microcytosis (mean corpuscular volume [MCV], 50-­65 fL/
cell), extraordinary variation in cell size and shape, and microspherocytosis with occasional elliptocytosis (see Fig. 507.4C). Hemolysis is
chronic and significant.
SAO is associated with neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, but it is associated with little to no hemolysis later in life.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Examination of the peripheral blood smear is essential to establish the
diagnosis of HE (see Fig. 507.4B). HE elliptocytes are normochromic
and normocytic with varying degrees of elongation. Because some HE
patients may present with relatively low numbers of elliptocytes, there
is no cutoff percentage that is useful diagnostically. In hemolytic HE,
other abnormal RBC shapes may be present, depending on the severity of hemolysis, including spherocytes, pyknocytes, and other poikilocytes. In HPP, microspherocytes, red cell fragments, and occasional

2961

elliptocytes are seen. SAO is suggested when ovalocytes, which in contrast to elliptocytes are less elongated, are observed.
Reticulocyte levels and other markers of hemolysis, such as total
bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, and haptoglobin, are helpful in establishing the severity of hemolysis, if present. In hemolytic HE and HPP,
additional testing may include the eosin-­5-­maleimide (EMA) binding
test, which detects binding to band 3 by flow cytometry, or incubated
osmotic fragility testing. In cases of chronic hemolysis, splenomegaly
and cholelithiasis can be assessed with abdominal ultrasound.

TREATMENT

If the presentation is that of typical HE (i.e., an isolated peripheral blood
smear abnormality without clinically evident hemolysis), no treatment
is necessary. For chronic HE and HPP, red blood cell transfusions are
occasionally required. Splenectomy decreases the hemolysis and should
be considered using criteria similar to that of hereditary spherocytosis.
If hemolysis continues after splenectomy, patients should receive folic
acid to prevent secondary folic acid deficiency. SAO does not require
treatment beyond the newborn period.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 509

Hereditary Stomatocytosis
Syndromes
Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
The hereditary stomatocytosis syndromes are a group of heterogeneous, dominantly inherited disorders in which alterations in red cell
cation permeability lead to alterations in intracellular water content
(Table 509.1). A net increase in sodium and potassium ions allows
water to enter the erythrocyte, creating stomatocytes or hydrocytes,
whereas a net loss of sodium and potassium ions leads to water loss,
creating dehydrated red cells, or xerocytes (Fig. 509.1).

HEREDITARY XEROCYTOSIS
Pathophysiology

Hereditary xerocytosis, the most common type of the hereditary
stomatocytosis syndromes, is a dominant disorder of erythrocyte
dehydration. The underlying defect is most commonly a missense
variant in PIEZO1, a mechanosensory transduction protein, associated with delayed channel inactivation. In a few patients, pathogenic
variants in the Gardos channel, important in erythrocyte dehydration in sickle cell disease, have been observed. Typically, there is
a net loss of intracellular potassium that is not accompanied by a
compensatory increase in sodium. Subsequently, the gradual loss
of intracellular water leads to erythrocyte dehydration. Hereditary
xerocytosis may be associated with a syndrome of hydrops fetalis
with perinatal anemia and ascites. These findings are transient and
remain unexplained.

Clinical Features

Affected patients exhibit a mild compensated macrocytic hemolytic
anemia with variable degrees of splenomegaly and intermittent jaundice. The mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) and
mean cell volume (MCV) are elevated, and erythrocyte osmotic fragility is decreased, as are potassium concentration and total monovalent
cation content. There are small numbers of stomatocytes, target cells,
and contracted red blood cells (RBCs) with hemoglobin puddled to
the side on peripheral blood smear. Treatment is supportive, similar

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2962 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 509.1  	 Features of Hereditary Stomatocytosis-­Xerocytosis Syndromes
OTHER HEREDITARY STOMATOCYTOSIS
SYNDROMES
FEATURE
(NORMAL
VALUE)

HEREDITARY XEROCYTOSIS
(DEHYDRATED STOMATOCYTOSIS)

OVERHYDRATED
HEREDITARY
STOMATOCYTOSIS

MILD
HEREDITARY
HEREDITARY
STOMATOCYTOSIS CRYOHYDROCYTOSIS

SOUTHEAST
ASIAN
OVALOCYTOSIS

Hemolysis

Severe

Mild to moderate

Mild to moderate

Mild (neonatal
only)

Moderate

Mild or none

Anemia

Moderate to severe

Mild to moderate

Mild to moderate to
completely
compensated

Mild (neonatal
only)

Mild to
moderate to
completely
compensated

None

Blood smear

Stomatocytes; ±
spherocytes

Stomatocytes; ±
spherocytes

Stomatocytes,
sometimes with
curved or offset
stoma; ±
spherocytes; ± target
cells

Rounded
elliptocytes,
some with a
double central
clearing and
a theta (θ)
shape; ±
stomatocytes

Target cells;
Target cells; few
sometimes
stomatocytes
small
numbers of
echinocytes or
stomatocytes

MCV

Increased

Normal to
increased

Normal to
increased

High normal to
increased

Normal to
increased

MCHC

Decreased

Normal to
decreased

Normal to
increased

Normal to
increased

Normal to
increased

Unincubated
osmotic fragility

Very increased

Variable

Variable

Unknown

Decreased
to very
decreased

Slightly
decreased

RBC Na+
(5-­12 mEq/L)*

60-­150

30-­60

15-­100

Normal

5-­30

10-­30

RBC K+
(90-­105 mEq/L)*

20-­55

40-­85

30-­100

Normal

60-­90

75-­100

RBC Na+ + K+
(95-­110 mEq/L)*

110-­170

115-­145

70-­130

Normal

70-­100

85-­110

RBC passive
membrane
leak*†

20-­40

~3-­10

1-­6

2-­4

2-­4

1-­2

Cold hemolysis

No

TYPICAL

PSEUDO-­
HYPERKALEMIA

Unknown

Yes

Yes

No

No

Pseudohyperkalemia Sometimes

Unknown

Yes

Unknown

Sometimes

Yes

Perinatal ascites

No

Unknown

No

No

Sometimes

No

Stomatin
markedly
decreased

Yes

No

No (type 1)
Yes (type 2)

No

No

No

Effect of
splenectomy
on hemolysis

Some benefit

Some benefit

Minimal or no effect

No significant
hemolysis

No effect

No significant
hemolysis

Thromboembolism
risk after
splenectomy

Yes

Unknown

?Yes

Unknown

Yes

Unknown

Genetics

Autosomal
dominant

Autosomal
dominant

Autosomal
dominant

Autosomal
dominant

Autosomal
dominant

Autosomal
dominant

Defective gene(s)

KHAG

Band 3 (SLC4A1)

Type 1: Band 3
(SLC4A1)
Type 2: Glut 1
(SLC2A1)

Band 3 (SLC4A1)
in-­frame deletion

PIEZO1

PIEZO1, ABCR6

*Based on a relatively small number of measurements reported in the literature.
†Times normal. Defined as the ouabain-­and bumetanide-­resistant 86Rb+ influx at 37°C, and expressed as the ratio of patient residual leak to normal residual leak (normal: 0.06-­0.10 mmol/L
RBC/hr).
MCHC, Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean cell volume; RBC, red blood cell.
From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015: 561; Table 16.12.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 509 u Hereditary Stomatocytosis Syndromes

2963

INTERMEDIATE SYNDROMES AND OTHER
VARIANTS

A

B
Fig. 509.1 Peripheral blood smears. A, Hereditary xerocytosis.
B, Hereditary hydrocytosis.

to other disorders with congenital hemolytic anemia. Because of the
apparent predisposition to major thromboses postsplenectomy, splenectomy is not recommended in hereditary xerocytosis and related disorders. Another unusual manifestation of hereditary xerocytosis is the
propensity for iron overload, independent of transfusion history. Thus
iron indices should be monitored at regular intervals.

HEREDITARY HYDROCYTOSIS
Pathophysiology

Hereditary hydrocytosis is a very rare, dominant disorder associated
with large, swollen stomatocytic erythrocytes. The principal defect is
an increase in Na+ and K+ permeability, leading to markedly increased
intracellular sodium and water content. The molecular defect is
unknown in most cases. In a subset of cases, missense variants in the
Rh-­associated glycoprotein (RhAG) have been identified.

Clinical Features

Hereditary hydrocytosis is the most clinically severe disorder of altered
erythrocyte volume regulation. It is characterized by moderate to
severe hemolysis and macrocytosis (110-­150 fL), with a low MCHC
(24–30%), elevated erythrocyte sodium concentration, reduced potassium concentration, increased total Na+ and K+ content, and increased
erythrocyte osmotic fragility. There are large numbers (10–30%) of stomatocytes on peripheral blood smear. Patients typically develop jaundice, splenomegaly, and cholelithiasis.
Treatment is supportive. RBC transfusions are occasionally
required. Patients should be followed for evidence of hematologic
decompensation during acute illness. Interval ultrasonography to
detect cholelithiasis should be obtained. When there is significant
hemolysis, folate should be prescribed daily. Similar to hereditary
xerocytosis, significant postsplenectomy major thromboses have
been observed; thus splenectomy is not recommended in hereditary
hydrocytosis.

Hereditary xerocytosis and hereditary hydrocytosis are at the
extremes of disorders with alterations in erythrocyte permeability.
Patients with intermediate defects have been described with varying degrees of hemolysis and anemia. One of these intermediate
syndromes is cryohydrocytosis in which affected patients typically
suffer from mild anemia associated with stomatocytes, spherocytes,
and sphero-­stomatocytes on peripheral blood smear. Cryohydrocytosis erythrocytes are deficient in band 3 and demonstrate a significant cation leak upon cooling to low temperature (kyros = cold).
This disorder is due to missense variants in band 3 that likely convert band 3 from an anion exchanger to a nonselective cation leak
channel.
Rh deficiency syndrome, also known as Rhnull syndrome, is mild
to moderate hemolytic anemia associated with markedly decreased
(Rhmod) or absent (Rhnull) Rh antigens on the erythrocyte membrane.
Rhnull erythrocytes, which lack all Rh antigens, LW, and Fy5 antigens
and have decreased reduced expression of Ss, U, and Duclos antigens,
are dehydrated with decreased cell cation and water content. Findings
on blood smear include reticulocytes, stomatocytes, and spherocytes.
In response to immunization during pregnancy or after blood transfusion, Rhnull patients produce antibodies varying in specificity from
reacting to anti-­e or anti-­C to reacting with all erythrocytes tested, an
antibody called “anti-­total Rh.”
Familial deficiency of high-­density lipoproteins (Tangier disease)
is a rare recessive disorder that results from pathogenic variants in the
cholesterol and phospholipid transport protein ABCA1, which lead to
perturbations of cellular cholesterol transport and result in the accumulation of cholesterol esters in many tissues. Hematologic manifestations include a mild to moderate stomatocytic hemolytic anemia and
thrombocytopenia. Affected patients can also have large orange tonsils,
hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, cloudy corneas, peripheral
neuropathy, and premature atherosclerosis.
Sitosterolemia, also known as phytosterolemia, is a recessive disorder in which the absorption of sterols, both cholesterol and its
plant-­derived relatives (e.g., sitosterol), is unlimited and unselective. Clinical manifestations include early-­onset xanthomatosis, short
stature, and premature coronary artery disease. Hematologic abnormalities include macrothrombocytopenia and stomatocytic hemolytic anemia. The plasma cholesterol may or may not be abnormal, but
mass spectrometry always shows a massive increase in plant sterol levels in the plasma and in the membranes of platelets and erythrocytes.
Pathogenic variants in ABCG5 or ABCG8, transporters that actively
pump plant sterols out of intestinal cells back into the intestine and
out of liver cells into bile ducts, lead to gastrointestinal hyperabsorption and decreased biliary elimination of plant sterols, as well as
altered cholesterol metabolism. Treatment involves dietary restriction
of cholesterol and plant sterols and prescription of ezetimibe, a sterol
absorption inhibitor, and cholestyramine and other related bile acid–
sequestering agents.

OTHER DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH
STOMATOCYTOSIS

Acquired stomatocytosis may be seen with liver disease, alcoholism, malignancy, and cardiovascular disease and after vinca alkaloid
administration. Stomatocytes can be seen as a blood smear–processing
artifact.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2964 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 510

Paroxysmal Nocturnal
Hemoglobinuria and
Acanthocytosis
Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
PAROXYSMAL NOCTURNAL HEMOGLOBINURIA
Etiology

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is an acquired disorder
of the cell membranes of multipotent bone marrow stem cells. The
underlying somatic pathogenic variant propagates into a clonal population of stem cells so that all blood cells derived from these variant
clonal progenitors, especially red blood cells (RBCs), are susceptible
to complement-­
mediated destruction (Fig. 510.1). The pathogenic
variant causes cell membranes to be deficient (either partially or completely) in proteins that impede complement-­mediated lysis via the
constitutively active alternative pathway. These complement regulating proteins include decay-­accelerating factor (CD55), the membrane
inhibitor of reactive lysis (CD59), and the C8 binding protein. The
underlying defect involves the glycolipid anchor that maintains these
protective proteins on the cell surface. Various pathogenic variants in
the PIGA gene that encodes the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor
protein have been identified in patients with PNH.

Clinical Manifestations

PNH is a rare disorder in children. Approximately 60% of pediatric patients have marrow failure, and the remainder have either

Alternative pathway of complement
Eculizumab
C3a
C3 convertase C3

C5a MAC

C5 convertase

C5

C3bBbP

C3bBbC3bP

C5b-9n

CD55

CD55

CD59

Complement activation

Normal red cell

LDH

PNH red cell

Fig. 510.1 Complement-­
mediated lysis in paroxysmal nocturnal

hemoglobinuria (PNH). Red circles are hemoglobin. Blue circles are
decay accelerating factor (CD55). Green circles are membrane inhibitor of reactive lysis (CD59). Bb, activated factor B; C3b, activated
C3; C5b, activated C5; MAC, membrane attack complex (consisting
of C5b, C6, C7, C8, and several molecules of C9 [9n]). (From Parker C. Eculizumab for paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria. Lancet
2009;373:759–767.)

intermittent or chronic anemia, often with prominent intravascular
hemolysis (Tables 510.1 and 510.2). Nocturnal and morning hemoglobinuria is the classic finding in adults, but only a minority of PNH
patients experience this. Most patients experience chronic hemolysis, often with thrombocytopenia and leukopenia. Hemoglobinuria is
rarely seen in children compared with adults with PNH. Thrombosis
and thromboembolic phenomena are serious complications that may
be related to altered glycoproteins on the platelet surface and resultant platelet activation and production of procoagulant microparticles. Abdominal venous thrombosis presents as recurrent episodes
of abdominal pain, Budd-­Chiari syndrome (hepatic veins), or splenomegaly (splenic vein). Released free hemoglobin results in depletion
of nitric oxide, fostering vasoconstriction, thrombosis, and pain. Back
and head pain may also be prominent. Hypoplastic or aplastic pancytopenia can precede or follow the diagnosis of PNH; rarely, PNH may
progress to acute myelogenous leukemia. At the time of presentation,
more than 90% of patients with PNH have some blood abnormality
(including ∼35% with anemia alone, ∼15% with anemia and thrombocytopenia, ∼7% with anemia and neutropenia, and ∼30% with pancytopenia), >10% have abdominal pain, and >5% have thrombosis. The
mortality in PNH is related primarily to the development of aplastic
anemia or thrombotic complications. The predicted survival rate for
children before the development of eculizumab was 80% at 5 years,
60% at 10 years, and 28% at 20 years.

Laboratory Findings

Hemoglobin levels can range from normal to markedly decreased.
Common findings reflect chronic intravascular hemolysis and
include hemosiderinuria, an elevated reticulocyte percentage, a low
serum haptoglobin, and increased lactic dehydrogenase. Initially,
the anemia is normocytic, but if iron deficiency develops, it becomes
microcytic. On the blood smear, poikilocytosis and anisocytosis may
be present. Markedly reduced levels of RBC acetylcholinesterase
activity and decay-­accelerating factor are also found. Flow cytometry
is the diagnostic test of choice for PNH. With the use of anti-­CD59 for
RBCs and anti-­CD55 and anti-­CD59 for granulocytes, flow cytometry is more sensitive than the classic RBC lysis (Ham or sucrose) tests
in detecting these reduced glycolipid-­bound membrane proteins.
Fluorescently labeled aerolysin testing can heighten the sensitivity
of detection by binding selectively to glycosylphosphatidylinositol
anchors.

Treatment

Eculizumab therapy has resulted in sustained survival in the majority of patients. Eculizumab is a monoclonal antibody against complement component C5 that interrupts formation of the membrane attack
complex, blocking downstream complement destruction of RBCs
and activation of platelets. It decreases the rate of hemolysis, stabilizes hemoglobin levels, reduces the number of transfusions, reduces
the risk of thrombosis, and improves quality of life. Eculizumab is an
approved and effective treatment for PNH in adults. A recent phase I/
II trial demonstrated safety and efficacy in patients 11-­17 years of age.
Because of the cost and duration of treatment (i.e., lifelong) required,
particularly in children, it may be most useful in preventing thrombosis, anemia, and other symptoms while stem cell transplant is considered. Survival in adults with PNH treated with eculizumab may not be
different from sex-­and age-­matched control patients from the general
population. However, the medication does not improve the hematopoietic clonal expansion or prevent marrow failure. Before beginning eculizumab, it is recommended to immunize patients with the
meningococcal vaccine if the patient hasn’t already received this vaccine because a very serious risk of complement inhibition is increased
susceptibility to Neisseria infections. If eculizumab therapy is desired
to begin immediately for clinical reasons, the vaccine can be given at
the same time, and prophylactic antibiotics can be given for a 2-­week
bridge. Headache is a common adverse effect after the first few doses
but disappears subsequently. A poor response to eculizumab may
be due to polymorphisms in the C5 gene that produce resistance to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 510 u Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria and Acanthocytosis

2965

Table 510.1  Suggested Criteria as Indications for PNH Testing
CATCH CRITERION

INDICATIONS FOR TESTING

SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Cytopenias

Patients for whom a bone marrow examination is
considered for otherwise unexplained cytopenia(s)

Additional features such as elevated LDH, DAT-­
negative hemolysis, history of unexplained TE,
and hemoglobinuria

AA/MDS

All patients with a diagnosis or suspicion of AA
Testing should be done at diagnosis and monitored at
least q6 months
Low or intermediate-­1 risk MDS, and especially if
hypoplastic

Additional features such as elevated LDH, DAT-­
negative hemolysis, history of unexplained TE,
and hemoglobinuria

Thrombosis

Unprovoked and/or unusual site TE (e.g.,, splenic,
hepatic, CNS), especially if recurrent and/or despite
anticoagulation

Additional features such as elevated LDH,
DAT-­negative hemolysis, otherwise-­unexplained
cytopenias, especially including anemia

Coombs-­negative hemolysis

Hemolysis or hemolytic anemia (i.e., elevated LDH and
indirect bilirubin, reduced haptoglobin, DAT/Coombs
test negative) without other clear cause

Test in all patients unless a clear alternate
explanation exists
Supportive information may be helpful but is not
necessary

Hemoglobinuria

Otherwise-­unexplained hemoglobinuria or cases where
“hematuria” has been identified without evidence of
erythrocytes on microscopy

Test in all patients unless a clear alternate
explanation exists
Supportive information may be helpful but is not
necessary

AA, Aplastic anemia; CNS, central nervous system; DAT, direct antiglobulin test (aka Coombs test); LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MDS, myelodysplastic syndromes; TE, thromboembolic event.
From Patriquin CJ, Kiss T, Caplan S, et al. How we treat paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria: A consensus statement of the Canadian PNH Network and review of the national
registry. Eur J Haematol. 2019;102:36–52: Table 2, p. 39.

Table 510.2  Classification of Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
RATE OF INTRAVASCULAR
HEMOLYSIS*

CATEGORY

BONE MARROW

BENEFIT FROM
ECULIZUMAB

FLOW CYTOMETRY

Classic clinical PNH

Florid (markedly abnormal
LDH, often with episodic
macroscopic
hemoglobinuria)

Cellular marrow caused by Large population (>50%)
erythroid hyperplasia and of GPI-­AP– PMNs§
normal or near-­normal
morphology†

Yes

Clinical PNH in the
setting of another
bone marrow failure
syndrome‡

Mild (often with minimal
abnormalities of
biochemical markers of
hemolysis)

Evidence of a
concomitant bone
marrow failure
syndrome‡

Although variable, the
percentage of
GPl-­AP– PMNs is usually
relatively small (<50%)

Typically no, but some
patients have relatively
large clones and clinically
significant hemolysis and
may benefit from treatment

Subclinical PNH

No clinical or biochemical
evidence of intravascular
hemolysis

Evidence of a
concomitant bone
marrow failure
syndrome‡

Small (<1%) population of
GPI-­AP– PMNs detected
by high-­resolution flow
cytometry

No

*Based on macroscopic hemoglobinuria, serum LDH concentration and reticulocyte count.
†Karyotypic abnormalities are uncommon.
‡Aplastic anemia or low-­risk myelodysplastic syndrome.
§Analysis of PMNs is more informative than analysis of red blood cells because of selective destruction GPI-­AP– RBCs.

GPI-­AP–, Glycosylphosphatidylinositol–anchored protein–deficient; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PMNs, polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
From Parker CJ, Ware RE. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. In: Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015: Table 14-­1.

eculizumab blockades. Patients on eculizumab therapy require regular
monitoring, including complete blood counts with reticulocytes, lactate dehydrogenase, total bilirubin, and repeat flow cytometry every
6-­12 months.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is a key therapeutic consideration if a suitable donor exists, particularly in children.
Severe aplastic anemia is a strong indication for transplant in PNH
(Fig. 510.2). HSCT is the only potentially curative therapy available for
PNH. Nonmyeloablative transplantation (with reduced intensity conditioning regimens) are often used to reduce transplant-­related mortality and morbidity; because eradication of only the PNH clones is
sought, total myeloablation is not necessary.

Glucocorticoids such as prednisone can be used for acute hemolytic
episodes; the dosage should be tapered as soon as the hemolysis abates.
Prolonged anticoagulation (heparin or low molecular weight heparin)
therapy may be of benefit when thromboses occur. Because of chronic
urinary loss of iron as hemosiderin, iron therapy may be necessary.
Androgens (e.g., fluoxymesterone), antithymocyte globulin, cyclosporine, and growth factors (e.g., erythropoietin and granulocyte colony-­
stimulating factor) have been used to treat marrow failure.

ACANTHOCYTOSIS

Acanthocytosis is characterized by RBCs with irregular circumferential pointed projections (also known as spur cells) (see Fig. 507.4E).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2966 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Management of PNH Based on Disease Classification
Classify PNH based on flow cytometric characteristics,
reticulocyte count, serum LDH concentration, bone marrow analysis

Subclinical PNH

PNH/BMF syndrome

Classic PNH

No specific PNH
therapy—focus on
underlying BMF
syndrome*

Focus on BMF†
Patients with large PNH
clones may benefit from
eculizumab

Treat with eculizumab
Inadequate
response
Increase dose/frequency
of eculizumab, BMT,
(steroids, splenectomy),‡
supportive care§

*Some, but not all, studies suggest a favorable response to immunosuppressive therapy (IST).
†
BMT eradicates the PNH clone, and typically, treatment with IST does not affect PNH clone size.
‡
Consider for patients with clinically significant extravascular hemolysis.
§
Transfusion.

with multiple neurologic findings such as limb chorea, tics, and hypotonia. The rare X-­linked McLeod syndrome (marked by absence of the
Kell antigen) presents with mild hemolytic anemia, late-­onset myopathy, peripheral neuropathy, chorea, and splenomegaly. There are usually >3% acanthocytes on peripheral smear and caudate atrophy noted
on MRI. McLeod syndrome is the only neuroacanthocytosis syndrome
likely to present in childhood. Acanthocytes also are seen in pantothenate kinase-­associated neurodegeneration (with dystonia, rigidity, chorea, dysarthria, spasticity, retinopathy) and Huntington disease–like 2.
In contrast to acanthocytes, echinocytes or “burr cells” have a more
regular distribution of projections or serrations along the surface of the
RBCs and will tend to a more spheroidal cell contour as they age. They
are seen often as artifacts (e.g., due to elevated pH, contact with glass,
or blood storage) and infrequently in end-­stage renal disease, liver disease, uremia, pyruvate-­kinase deficiency, long-­distance runners, and
patients with hypomagnesemia and hypophosphatemia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 510.2 Management algorithm for paroxysmal nocturnal hemo-

globinuria (PNH). A management scheme based on classification of
PNH into two categories: subclinical, PNH in the setting of another
bone marrow failure syndrome (PNH/BMF), and classic PNH (see Table 510.2 for characteristics of each category.) LDH, Lactic dehydrogenase; BMF, bone marrow failure (aplastic anemia and low risk MDS);
BMT, bone marrow transplant. (From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D,
et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and
Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015. Fig 14-­9.)

Table 510.3  Hereditary Acanthocytosis Syndromes
SYNDROME

INHERITANCE

GENES

Chorea-­
acanthocytosis

Autosomal recessive

VPS13A

McLeod syndrome

X-­linked recessive

XK

Huntington disease–
like 2

Autosomal dominant

JPH3

Pantothenate kinase-­
associated neurodegeneration

Autosomal recessive

PANK2

Abetalipoproteinemia

Autosomal recessive

MTTP

Hereditary
hypobetalipo­
proteinemia

Autosomal recessive

APOB,
MTP,
PCSK9

Aceruloplasminemia

Autosomal recessive

CP

This morphologic finding results from alterations in the membrane
ratio of cholesterol to phospholipid, with the morphology attributed
to an excess of lipid in the outer layer relative to the inner layer of the
membrane bilayer. In liver disease, acanthocytes develop because of
increased abundance of free cholesterol, as patients develop splenic
congestion, hemolytic anemia, and jaundice. Abetalipoproteinemia
is an inherited autosomal recessive disease in which acanthocytosis is
associated with fat malabsorption, progressive ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa. The fat malabsorption may become apparent in the first year
of life, whereas the ataxia develops at school-­age. The anemia is usually mild. Hypobetalipoproteinemia is a recessive familial disease that
has a similar clinical spectrum, but with milder findings. Aceruloplasminemia leads to anemia, diabetes, ocular problems, tremors, chorea,
ataxia, and facial abnormalities due to increased iron in the brain and
other organs.
There are four genetically diverse neuroacanthocytosis syndromes
(Table 510.3). Chorea-­acanthocytosis is an adult-­onset disease without
anemia, variable numbers of acanthocytes on peripheral blood smear,

Chapter 511

Hemoglobinopathies
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
HEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS

Hemoglobin is a tetramer consisting of two pairs of globin chains. Abnormalities in these proteins are referred to as
hemoglobinopathies.
More than 800 variant hemoglobins have been described. The most
common and useful clinical classification of hemoglobinopathies is
based on nomenclature associated with alteration of the involved globin chain. Two hemoglobin (Hb) gene clusters are involved in Hb production and are located at the end of the short arms of chromosomes
16 and 11. Their control is complex, including an upstream locus control region on each respective chromosome and an X-­linked control
site. On chromosome 16, there are three genes within the alpha (α)
gene cluster: zeta (ζ), alpha 1 (α1), and alpha 2 (α2). On chromosome
11, there are five genes within the beta (β) gene cluster: epsilon (ε),
gamma 1 (γ1), gamma 2 (γ2), delta (δ), and beta (β).
The order of gene expression within each cluster roughly follows
the order of expression during the embryonic period, fetal period,
and eventually childhood. After 8 weeks of fetal life, the embryonic
hemoglobins, Gower-­1 (ζ2ε2), Gower-­2 (α2ε2), and Portland (ζ2γ2), are
formed. At 9 weeks of fetal life, the major hemoglobin is hemoglobin F
(HbF; α2γ2). Hemoglobin A (HbA; α2β2) first appears at approximately
1 month of fetal life but does not become the dominant hemoglobin
until after birth, when HbF levels start to decline. HbA2 (α2δ2) is a
minor hemoglobin that appears shortly before birth and remains at
a low level after birth. The final hemoglobin distribution pattern that
occurs in childhood is not achieved until at least 6 months of age and
sometimes later. The normal hemoglobin pattern is ≥95% HbA, ≤3.5%
HbA2, and <2.5% HbF.

511.1 Sickle Cell Disease
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
Children with sickle cell disease should be followed by experts in the
management of this disease, most often by pediatric hematologists.
Children who receive disease-­specific care that focuses on prevention of infectious complications and end-­organ damage should have a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
higher likelihood of survival to adult age. Medical care provided by a
pediatric hematologist is also associated with a decreased frequency of
emergency department (ED) visits and length of hospitalization compared to patients who were not seen by a hematologist within the last
year.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Hemoglobin S (HbS) is the result of a single base-­pair change, thymine
for adenine, at the 6th codon of the β-­globin gene. This change encodes
valine instead of glutamine in the sixth residue in the β-­globin molecule. Sickle cell anemia (HbSS), homozygous HbSS, occurs when both
β-­globin alleles have the sickle cell pathogenic variant (βs). Sickle cell
disease refers not only to patients with sickle cell anemia but also to
compound heterozygotes where one β-­globin allele includes the sickle
cell pathogenic variant and the second β-­globin allele includes a gene
pathogenic variant other than the sickle cell pathogenic variant, such as
HbC, β-­thalassemia, HbD, and HbOArab. In sickle cell anemia, HbS is
typically as high as 90% of the total hemoglobin, whereas in sickle cell
disease, HbS is >50% of all hemoglobin.
In red blood cells (RBCs), the hemoglobin molecule has a highly
specified conformation allowing for the transport of oxygen in the
body. In the absence of globin-­chain pathogenic variants, hemoglobin molecules do not interact with one another. However, the presence of HbS results in a conformational change in the Hb tetramer,
and in the deoxygenated state, HbS molecules interact with each other,
forming rigid polymers that give the RBC its characteristic “sickled”
shape. Intraerythrocytic changes lead to a shortened RBC life span
and hemolysis. Hemolysis leads to multiple changes, including altered
nitric oxide metabolism and oxidant stress, which contribute to endothelial dysfunction. Intravascular sickling primarily occurs in the postcapillary venules and is a function of both mechanical obstruction by
sickled erythrocytes, platelets, and leukocytes and increased adhesion
between these elements and the vascular endothelium. Sickle cell disease is also an inflammatory disease based on nonspecific markers of
inflammation, including, but not limited to, elevated baseline white
blood cell (WBC) count and cytokines.

DIAGNOSIS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Every state in the United States has instituted a mandatory newborn
screening program for sickle cell disease. Such programs identify newborns with the disease and provide prompt diagnosis and referral to

2967

providers with expertise in sickle cell disease for anticipatory guidance
and the initiation of penicillin prophylaxis before 4 months of age.
The most commonly used procedures for newborn diagnosis
include thin-­layer/isoelectric focusing (IEF) and high-­performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC). Some laboratories perform genetic
testing on specimens demonstrating abnormal hemoglobins. A confirmatory step is recommended, with all patients who have initial abnormal screens being retested during the first clinical visit, which helps to
account for potential administrative errors in specimen handling. In
addition, a complete blood cell count (CBC) and Hb phenotype determination is recommended for both parents to provide an opportunity
for genetic counseling and to better characterize disease genotype in the
affected offspring if necessary. Infants who may have HbS-­hereditary
persistence fetal hemoglobin (HbSHPFH) but do not have full parental studies should have molecular testing for β-­globin genotype before
12 months of age (or sooner if hydroxyurea is initiated). Table 511.1
correlates the initial hemoglobin phenotype at birth with the type of
hemoglobinopathy.
In newborn screening programs, the hemoglobin with the greatest quantity is reported first, followed by other hemoglobins in order
of decreasing quantity. Some states perform IEF initially on newborn
blood samples, then use DNA probes to confirm abnormal hemoglobins found on IEF. In newborns with a hemoglobin analysis result of
HbFS, the pattern supports HbSS, HbSHPFH, or HbSβ0-­thalassemia.
In certain situations, a newborn with a hemoglobin analysis of HbFS
may have HbSβ+-­thalassemia and the hemoglobin A may not be demonstrating on the electrophoresis in quantities high enough for detection. In a newborn with a hemoglobin analysis of FSA, the pattern is
supportive of the diagnosis of HbSβ+-­thalassemia. The diagnosis of
HbSβ+-­thalassemia is confirmed if at least 50% of the hemoglobin is
HbS, HbA is present, and the amount of HbA2 is elevated (typically
>3.5%), although HbA2 is not elevated in the newborn period. In newborns with a hemoglobin analysis of FSC, the pattern supports a diagnosis of HbSC. In newborns with a hemoglobin analysis of FAS, the
pattern supports a diagnosis of HbAS (sickle cell trait); however, in this
circumstance, care must be taken to confirm that the newborn has not
received an RBC transfusion before testing.
A newborn with a hemoglobin analysis of AFS either has been transfused with RBCs before collection of the newborn screen to account
for the greater amount of HbA than HbF, or there has been an error.
The patient may have either sickle cell disease or sickle cell trait and

Table 511.1  Various Newborn Sickle Cell Disease Screening Results with Baseline Hemoglobin
NEWBORN SCREENING RESULTS:
SICKLE CELL DISEASE*

POSSIBLE HEMOGLOBIN PHENOTYPE†

BASELINE HEMOGLOBIN RANGE AFTER
AGE 5 YR

FS

SCD-­SS
SCD-­S β0 thal
SCD-­S β+ thal
SCD-­S δβ− thal
S HPFH

6-­11 g/dL
6-­10 g/dL
9-­12 g/dL
10-­12 g/dL
12-­14 g/dL

FSC

SCD-­SC

10-­15 g/dL

FSA‡

SCD-­S β+ thal

9-­12 g/dL

FS other

SCD-­S β0 thal

6-­10 g/dL

SCD-­SD, SOArab, SCHarlem, SLepore

Variable

SCD-­SS
SCD-­S β+ thal
SCD-­S β0 thal

6-­10 g/dL
6-­9 g/dL
7-­13 g/dL variable

AFS‡§

*Hemoglobins are reported in order of quantity.

†Requires confirmatory hemoglobin analysis after at least 6 mo of age and, if possible, β-­globin gene testing or hemoglobin analysis from both parents for accurate diagnosis of

hemoglobin phenotype.

‡Sickle cell trait is another possible diagnosis.
§Impossible to determine the diagnosis because the infant most likely received a blood transfusion before testing.

A, Normal hemoglobin A; C, hemoglobin C; F, fetal hemoglobin; HPFH, hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin; OArab, hemoglobin OArab; S, sickle hemoglobin; SC, sickle-­
hemoglobin C; SCD, sickle cell disease; SS, homozygous sickle cell disease; thal, thalassemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2968 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
should be started on penicillin prophylaxis until the final diagnosis can
be determined.
Given the implications of a diagnosis of sickle cell disease versus
sickle cell trait in a newborn, the importance of repeating the Hb
identification analysis in the patient and obtaining a Hb identification
analysis and CBC to evaluate the peripheral blood smear and RBC
parameters in the parents cannot be overemphasized. Unintended mistakes do occur in state newborn screening programs. Newborns who
have the initial phenotype of HbFS but whose final true phenotype is
HbSβ+-­thalassemia have been described as one of the more common
errors identified in newborn screening hemoglobinopathy programs.
Determining an accurate phenotype is important for appropriate
genetic counseling for the parents. In addition, distinguishing HbSS
from HbSHPFH in the newborn period usually requires parental or
genetic testing. Infants who maintain HbF percentages above 25% after
12 months of age without evidence of hemolysis should have testing for
β-­globin gene deletions consistent with HPFH. These children have a
much milder clinical course and do not require penicillin prophylaxis
or hydroxyurea therapy.
If the parents are tested for sickle cell trait or hemoglobinopathy
trait, full disclosure to the parent tested should be provided privately,
and in some circumstances, the issue of paternity may be disclosed. For
this reason and because of healthcare privacy, common practice is to
always seek permission for the genetic testing and to report the hemoglobinopathy trait results back to each parent separately.
In the United States, sickle cell disease is the most common genetic
disorder identified through the state-­mandated newborn screening
program, occurring in 1:2,647 births. The sickle hemoglobin gene is
more prevalent in communities of color because descendants of people
where malaria has been endemic are more likely to have been protected
from the severe manifestations of malaria. Regarding ethnicity in the
United States, sickle cell disease occurs in Black persons at a rate of
1:396 births and in Hispanics at a rate of 1:36,000 births. In the United
States, an estimated 100,000 people have sickle cell disease, with an ethnic distribution of 90% Black and 10% Hispanic. The U.S. sickle cell
disease population represents a fraction of the worldwide burden of
the disease, with global estimates of 312,000 neonates born annually
with HbSS disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND TREATMENT OF
SICKLE CELL ANEMIA

For a comprehensive discussion of the clinical management of children
and adolescents with sickle cell disease, refer to the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) 2014 Expert Panel Report on the
Evidence-­Based Management of Sickle Cell Disease (https://www.nhlb
i.nih.gov/sites/www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/sickle-­cell-­disease-­report.pdf).

Fever and Bacteremia

Fever in a child with sickle cell anemia is a medical emergency, requiring prompt medical evaluation and delivery of antibiotics because of
the increased risk of serious bacterial infection and subsequent high
mortality rate. As early as 6 months of age, infants with sickle cell
anemia develop abnormal immune function because of splenic dysfunction. By 5 years of age, most children with sickle cell anemia have
complete functional asplenia. Regardless of age, all patients with sickle
cell anemia are at increased risk of infection and death from bacterial
infection, particularly encapsulated organisms such as Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae type b, and Neisseria meningitidis, as well as Salmonella spp.
Several clinical strategies have been developed to manage children
with sickle cell disease who present with fever. These strategies range
from hospital admission for intravenous (IV) antimicrobial therapy to
administering a third-­generation cephalosporin in an ED or outpatient
setting to patients without established risk factors for occult bacteremia (Table 511.2). Given the observation that the average time for a
positive blood culture is <20 hours in children with sickle cell anemia,
admission for 24 hours is probably the most prudent strategy for children and families who live out of town or who are identified as high
risk for poor follow-­up.

Table 511.2  Clinical Factors Associated with Increased Risk
of Acute Complications in Febrile Children
with Sickle Cell Disease
Seriously ill appearance
Hypotension: systolic blood pressure <70 mm Hg at 1 yr of age or
<70 mm Hg + 2 × age (yr) for older children
Poor perfusion: capillary refill time >4 sec
Temperature >40.0°C (104°F)
Hypoxia
Corrected white blood cell count >30,000/mm3 or <5,000/mm3
Platelet count <100,000/mm3
History of pneumococcal sepsis*
Severe pain
Dehydration: poor skin turgor, dry mucous membranes, history of
poor fluid intake, or decreased output of urine
Presence of acute chest syndrome (new infiltrate on chest radiograph)
Hemoglobin level <5.0 g/dL
No prophylactic antibiotics
Not immunized
*Or other serious infection requiring hospital admission.
Adapted from Williams JA, Flynn PM, Harris S et al. A randomized study of outpatient
treatment with ceftriaxone for selected febrile children with sickle cell disease. N Engl J
Med 1993;329:472–476.

Outpatient management of fever without a source should be considered in children with the lowest risk of bacteremia and after appropriate
cultures are obtained and IV ceftriaxone or another cephalosporin is
given. Observation after antibiotic administration is important because
children treated with ceftriaxone can develop severe, rapid, and life-­
threatening immune hemolysis. In the event that Salmonella spp. or
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia occurs, strong consideration should
be given to an evaluation for osteomyelitis with an MRI, given the
increased risk of osteomyelitis in children with sickle cell anemia compared to the general population. Screening laboratory and radiologic
studies are strongly recommended to identify those at risk for transient
red cell aplasia, acute splenic sequestration, and acute chest syndrome
(ACS), because many children with these diagnoses present to acute
care settings with isolated fever. Screening children and caregivers for
psychosocial factors that could impede their return to the hospital in
the case of a positive blood culture is essential.

Aplastic Crisis

Human parvovirus B19 infection poses a unique threat for patients
with sickle cell disease because this infection results in temporary red
cell aplasia, limiting the production of reticulocytes and causing profound anemia (see Fig. 507.3 in Chapter 507). Any child with sickle
cell disease, fever, and reticulocytopenia should be presumed to have
parvovirus B19 infection until proven otherwise. However, reticulocytopenia is not a requirement for the diagnosis of a recent parvovirus B19 infection because reticulocytosis and increased nucleated
RBCs may be seen in the recovery phase. Diagnostic testing for the
presence of human parvovirus B19 with polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) testing is superior to using immunoglobulin M (IgM) and
IgG titers. The acute exacerbation of anemia is treated conservatively
using red cell transfusion when the patient becomes hemodynamically symptomatic or has a concurrent illness, such as ACS or acute
splenic sequestration. Children with suspected aplastic crisis should
be closely monitored because acute infection with parvovirus B19 is
associated with pain, splenic sequestration, ACS, glomerulonephritis,
arthropathy, and stroke. Patients with parvovirus-­associated aplastic
crisis are contagious, and infection precautions should be taken to
avoid nosocomial spread of the infection and to avoid exposure of
pregnant caregivers who may be at risk for adverse fetal outcomes
with acute infection.

Splenic Sequestration

Acute splenic sequestration is a life-­threatening complication occurring primarily in infants and young children with sickle cell anemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
The incidence of splenic sequestration has declined from an estimated
30% to 12.6% with early identification by newborn screening and
improved parental education. Sequestration can occur as early as 5
weeks of age but most often occurs in children between ages 6 months
and 2 years. Patients with the SC and Sβ+-­thalassemia types of sickle
cell disease can have acute splenic sequestration events throughout
adolescence and adulthood.
Splenic sequestration is associated with rapid spleen enlargement
causing left-­sided abdominal pain and Hb decline from the patient’s
baseline. Sequestration may lead to signs of hypovolemia as a result of
the trapping of blood in the spleen and profound anemia, with total Hb
falling below 3 g/dL. A decrease in WBC and platelet count may also
be present. Sequestration may be spontaneous or triggered by fever,
bacteremia, or viral infections.
Treatment includes early intervention and maintenance of hemodynamic stability using isotonic fluid or transfusions. Careful blood transfusions with RBCs are recommended to treat both the sequestration
and the resultant anemia. Blood transfusion aborts the RBC trapping
in the spleen and allows release of the patient’s blood cells that have
become sequestered, often raising Hb above baseline values. A reasonable approach is to provide only 5 mL/kg of RBCs and/or a posttransfusion Hb target of 8 g/dL, keeping in mind that the goal of transfusion is
to prevent hypovolemia. Blood transfusion that results in Hb levels >10
g/dL may put the patient at risk for hyperviscosity syndrome because
RBCs may be released from the spleen after transfusion.
Repeated episodes of splenic sequestration are common, occurring
in 65% of patients. Most recurrent episodes develop within 6 months
of the previous episode. Prophylactic splenectomy performed after
an acute episode has resolved is the only effective strategy for preventing future life-­threatening episodes. Although blood transfusion
therapy has been used with the goal of preventing subsequent episodes, evidence strongly suggests that this strategy does not reduce
the risk of recurrent splenic sequestration compared to no transfusion therapy. However, a short course of regular RBC transfusions
can be used until splenectomy is arranged. Children should be appropriately immunized with meningococcal and pneumococcal vaccines
before surgery. Penicillin prophylaxis should be prescribed after
splenectomy.

Hepatic and Gallbladder Involvement
See Chapters 408 and 414.

Sickle Cell Pain

Dactylitis, referred to as hand-­foot syndrome, is often the first
manifestation of pain in infants and young children with sickle
cell anemia, occurring in 50% of children by their second year of
life (Fig. 511.1). Dactylitis often manifests with symmetric or less
often unilateral swelling of the hands and/or feet. Unilateral dactylitis can be confused with osteomyelitis, and careful evaluation to
distinguish the two is important because treatment differs significantly. Dactylitis requires palliation with pain medications, whereas
osteomyelitis requires at least 4-­6 weeks of IV antibiotics. Feedback
from the parents is needed to determine if pain therapy is successful
in relieving pain.
The cardinal clinical feature of sickle cell disease is acute vasoocclusive pain. Acute sickle cell pain is characterized as unremitting
discomfort that can occur in any part of the body but most often
occurs in the chest, abdomen, or extremities. These painful episodes
are often abrupt and cause disruption of daily life activities and significant stress for children and their caregivers. A patient with sickle
cell anemia has approximately one painful episode per year that
requires medical attention, but the frequency is extremely variable.
The pattern of symptoms with subsequent episodes may resemble
that of previous episodes.
The exact etiology of pain is unknown, but the pathogenesis may
be initiated when blood flow is disrupted in the microvasculature by
sickled RBCs and other cellular elements, resulting in tissue ischemia.
Acute sickle cell pain may be precipitated by physical stress, infection,
dehydration, hypoxia, local or systemic acidosis, exposure to cold, and

A

2969

B

Fig. 511.1 Radiographs of an infant with sickle cell anemia and acute
dactylitis. A, The bones appear normal at the onset of the episode. B,
Destructive changes and periosteal reaction are evident 2 weeks later.

swimming for prolonged periods. However, most pain episodes occur
without an identifiable trigger. Successful treatment of these episodes
requires education of both caregivers and patients regarding the recognition of symptoms and the optimal management strategy. Given the
absence of any reliable objective laboratory or clinical parameter associated with pain, trust between the patient and the treating physician
is paramount to successful clinical management. Specific therapy for
pain varies greatly but generally includes the use of acetaminophen or
a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) early in the course of
pain, followed by escalation to a combination analgesic regimen using
a single-­agent short-­acting oral opioid, long-­acting oral opioid, and
continued nonopioid agent.
The majority of painful episodes in patients with sickle cell disease are managed at home with comfort measures, such as heating
pad, relaxation techniques, massage, and oral pain medication. Some
patients require treatment in an acute care setting with IV morphine
or derivatives of morphine. The primary goal of treatment in these settings is timely administration of analgesics to provide relief of pain.
The incremental increase and decrease in the use of the medication
to relieve pain roughly parallels the eight phases associated with a
chronology of pain and comfort in children (Table 511.3). When pain
requires continued parenteral analgesic administration, hospitalization or prolonged stays in day hospitals are required. The average
hospital length of stay for children admitted in pain is 4.4 days. The
American Society of Hematology and NHLBI clinical guidelines for
treating acute and chronic pain in children and adults with sickle cell
disease are comprehensive and represent a starting point for treating
pain.
The only measure for degree of pain is the patient. Healthcare providers working with children in pain should use a consistent, validated
pain scale (e.g., Wong-­Baker FACES Scale) for assessing pain. Although
pain scales have proved useful for some children, other forms of pain
assessment may be required to determine when opioid therapy should
be initiated and decreased. Individualized pain plans provide important information for assessment and treatment that address patient
preferences.
Several myths have been propagated regarding the treatment of pain
in sickle cell disease. The concept that all painful episodes in children
should be managed without opioids is without foundation and results
in unwarranted suffering on the part of the patient. Blood transfusion
therapy during an existing painful episode does not decrease the intensity or duration of the painful episode. Aggressive IV hydration does

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2970 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 511.3  Phases of a Painful Episode in Patients with Sickle Cell Disease
PHASE

DESCRIPTION AND COMFORT MEASURES

DATA FROM CHILDREN
I

Baseline
No pain and no comfort measures

II

Prepain phase
No evidence of pain
Child begins to display some prodromal signs and symptoms of VOE (yellow eyes, fatigue)
No comfort measures used
Caregivers encouraged child to increase fluids to prevent the pain event from occurring

III

Pain starting point
Child complained of mild “ache-­ish” pain in one specific area, which gradually or rapidly increased or “waxed”
Mild analgesics (ibuprofen and acetaminophen) given
Child maintained normal activities and continued to attend school
Caregivers hoped to prevent an increase in pain intensity

IV

Pain acceleration
Pain continued to escalate; intensity increased from mild to moderate; pain appeared in more areas of the body;
child was kept home from school; decreased level of activity; differences in behaviors, appearance, and mood
Stronger oral analgesics may be combined with rest, rubbing, heat, distraction, and psychologic comfort

V

Peak pain experience
Pain continued to escalate
Some children were incapacitated and unable to obtain pain relief
Pain described as “stabbing,” “drilling,” “pounding,” “banging,” “excruciating,” “unbearable,” or “throbbing”
Caregivers sometimes decide to seek help from ED for stronger analgesics and protection from complications such
as fever or respiratory distress
Caregivers may be exhausted from caring for the child for several days with little or no rest
All methods of comfort were used around the clock to reduce the pain and avoid going to the hospital
Pain increased despite all efforts
Decision is made to take the child to ED

VI

Pain decrease starting point
Pain begins to resolve after the use of IV fluids and analgesics
Analgesics sedate the child and allow the child to sleep for longer periods
Pain described as “slowly decreasing”
Pain is still sharp and throbbing

VII

Steady pain decline
Pain decreased slowly or rapidly
Child takes more interest in surroundings, roommates, and visitors
Child is less irritable
Level of activity increased—child may be taken to tub room for warm bath, may watch television, may play games
with other children or hospital volunteers
Mobility has improved
Pain levels reported as “just a little”
More animation in behaviors evident

VIII

Pain resolution
Pain is at a tolerable level
Child may be discharged from the hospital on mild oral analgesics; child is at or close to baseline conditions, with
behavior, appearance, and mood more normal
Caregiver and child attempt to regain, recapture, and catch up with life as it was before the pain event

DATA FROM ADULTS
I

Evolving/infarctive phase
3 days
↓ RBC deformability
↓ Hemoglobin
↑ % of dense RBCs
↑ RDW, ↑ HDW
S/S: fear, anorexia, anxiety, ↑ pain

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies

2971

Table 511.3  Phases of a Painful Episode in Patients with Sickle Cell Disease—cont’d
PHASE

DESCRIPTION AND COMFORT MEASURES

II

Postinfarctive/inflammatory phase
4-­5 days
↓ Hemoglobin
↑ White blood cells (leukocytosis)
↑ Acute-­phase reactants C-­reactive protein
↑ Reticulocytes, ↑ LDH, ↑ CPK
↑ % dense RBCs
↑ RDW, ↑ HDW
S/S: fever, severe steady pain, swelling, tenderness, joint stiffness, joint effusions

III

Resolving/healing/recovery/postcrisis phase
↑ RBC deformability
Hemoglobin returns to precrisis level
Retics return to precrisis levels
↓ % of dense RBCs
↓ RDW, ↓ HDW
↓ ISC
Precursors to relapse that happens in phase III: ↑ platelets, ↑ acute-­phase reactants (fibrinogen, α1-­acid glycoprotein,
osmomucoid), ↑ viscosity, ↑ ESR
↑ Retics expressing the ↑ α4β1-­integrin complex ICAM-­1

CPK, Creatinine phosphokinase; ED, emergency department; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; HDW, hemoglobin distribution width; ICAM, intracellular adhesion molecule; ISC,
irreversibly sickled cells; IV, intravenous; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; RBC, red blood cell; RDW, red cell distribution width; S/S, signs and symptoms; VOE, vasoocclusive episode.
Adapted from Jacob E. The pain experience of patients with sickle cell anemia. Pain Manage Nurs 2001;2:74–83; with data from Ballas SK, Smith ED. Red blood cell changes during
the evolution of the sickle cell painful crisis. Blood 1992;79:2154–2163; and Beyer JE, Simmons L, Woods GM, Woods PM. A chronology of pain and comfort in children with sickle cell
disease. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1999;153:913–920.

not relieve or prevent pain and is appropriate when the patient is dehydrated or unable to drink as a result of the severe pain. Opioid dependency in children with sickle cell disease is rare and should never be used
as a reason to withhold pain medication. However, patients with multiple painful episodes requiring hospitalization within 1 year or with
pain episodes that require hospitalization for >7 days should be evaluated for comorbidities and environmental stressors that are contributing to the frequency or duration of pain. Children with chronic pain
should be evaluated for other disease-­related complications, including,
but not limited to, presence of avascular necrosis, leg ulcers, and vertebral body compression fractures. A careful history is warranted to
distinguish chronic pain that often is not relieved by opioids versus
recurrent acute prolonged vasoocclusive pain episodes.
Skeletal pain (bone or bone marrow infarction) with or without fever
must be differentiated from osteomyelitis. Both Salmonella spp. and
S. aureus cause osteomyelitis in children with sickle cell disease, often
involving the diaphysis of long bones (in contrast to children without
sickle cell anemia, in whom osteomyelitis is in the metaphyseal region
of the bone). Differentiating osteomyelitis from a vasoocclusive crisis is
often difficult. Clinical signs and symptoms can be consistent with both
osteomyelitis and vasoocclusive crises because low-­grade fever pain,
swelling of the affected area, high WBC counts, and elevated C-­reactive
protein levels can be present in both. Blood, fluid, and tissue cultures,
when positive, are helpful. MRI may be useful for locating an area to
obtain fluid for culture. Ultimately, aspiration with or with or without
biopsy and culture will be needed to differentiate the two processes (see
Chapter 725).

Avascular Necrosis

Avascular necrosis (AVN) occurs at a higher rate among children with
sickle cell disease than in the general population and is a source of
both acute and chronic pain. Most often, the femoral head is affected.
AVN of the hip may cause limp and leg-­length discrepancy. Other sites
affected include the humeral head and mandible. Risk factors for AVN
include HbSS disease with α-­thalassemia trait, frequent vasoocclusive
episodes, and elevated hematocrit (for patients with sickle cell anemia). Optimal treatment of AVN has not been determined, and individual management requires consultation with a sickle cell specialist,
orthopedic surgeon, physical therapist, and primary care physician.

Initial management should include referral to a pediatric orthopedist and a physical therapist to address strategies to increase strength
and decrease weight-­bearing daily activities that may exacerbate the
pain associated with AVN as well as to determine whether surgical
approaches may be beneficial. Opioids are often used but usually can
be tapered after the acute pain has subsided. Regular blood transfusion
therapy has not been demonstrated as an effective therapy to abate the
acute and chronic pain associated with AVN.

Priapism

Priapism, defined as an unwanted painful erection of the penis, affects
males of all sickle genotypes but most frequently affects males with
sickle cell anemia. The mean age of first episode is 15 years, although
priapism has been reported in children as young as 3 years. The actuarial probability of a patient experiencing priapism is approximately
90% by 20 years of age.
Priapism occurs in two patterns: prolonged, lasting >4 hours, or stuttering, with brief episodes that resolve spontaneously but may occur
in clusters and herald a prolonged event. Both types occur from early
childhood to adulthood. Most episodes occur between 3 am and 9 am.
Priapism in sickle cell disease represents a low-­flow state caused by
venous stasis from RBC sickling in the corpora cavernosa. Recurrent
prolonged episodes of priapism are associated with erectile dysfunction (impotence).
The optimal treatment for acute priapism is unknown. Supportive
therapy, such as a hot shower, short aerobic exercise, or pain medication,
is often used by patients at home. A prolonged episode lasting >4 hours
should be treated by aspiration of blood from the corpora cavernosa, followed by irrigation with dilute epinephrine to produce immediate and
sustained detumescence. Urology consultation is required to initiate this
procedure, with appropriate input from a hematologist. Simple blood
transfusion with exchange transfusion has been proposed for the acute
treatment of priapism, but limited evidence supports this strategy as the
initial management. If no benefit is obtained from surgical management,
transfusion therapy should be considered. However, detumescence may
not occur for up to 24 hours (much longer than with urologic aspiration) after transfusion, and transfusion for priapism has been associated with acute neurologic events. Consultation with a hematologist and
urologist will help identify therapies to prevent recurrences.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2972 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Neurologic Complications

Neurologic complications associated with sickle cell disease are varied
and complex, ranging from acute ischemic stroke with focal neurologic deficit to clinically silent abnormalities found on imaging. Before
the development of transcranial Doppler ultrasonography to screen
for stroke risk among children with sickle cell anemia, approximately
11% experienced an overt stroke before age 20. A functional definition of overt stroke is the presence of a focal neurologic deficit lasting
for >24 hours and/or abnormal neuroimaging of the brain indicating a cerebral infarct on T2-­weighted MRI corresponding to the focal
neurologic deficit (Figs. 511.2 and 511.3). A silent cerebral infarct lacks
focal neurologic findings and is diagnosed by abnormal imaging on

A

B

Fig. 511.2 MRI and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the

brain. A, T2-­weighted MRI shows remote infarction of the territories
of the left anterior cerebral artery and middle cerebral artery. B, MRA
shows occlusion of the left internal carotid artery siphon distal to the
takeoff of the ophthalmic artery.

T2-­weighted MRI. The prevalence of silent infarct among children with
HbSS is around 35%. Children with other types of sickle cell disease,
such as HbSC or HbSβ+-­thalassemia, develop overt or silent cerebral
infarcts as well, but at a lower frequency than children with HbSS and
HbSβ0-­thalassemia. Other neurologic complications include transient
ischemic attacks, headaches that may or may not correlate to degree of
anemia, seizures, cerebral venous thrombosis, cerebral vasculopathy,
and posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). Chiari
I malformations can occur in older children with sickle cell disease.
Fat embolism syndrome (associated with bone marrow infarction)
is a rapidly progressive, potentially fatal complication involving pain,
respiratory distress, changes in mental status, and multiorgan system
failure. When this syndrome is identified early, exchange transfusion
therapy has improved patient survival in small case series. Skull infarction can lead to a subgaleal hematoma or epidural bleed, which may
present as altered mental status.
For patients presenting with acute focal neurologic deficit, a prompt
pediatric neurologic evaluation and consultation with a pediatric
hematologist is recommended. In addition, oxygen administration
to keep oxygen saturation (So2) >96% and blood transfusion within
2 hours of presentation, with a goal of increasing Hb to a maximum
of 10 g/dL, is warranted. A timely simple blood transfusion is important because this is the most efficient strategy to dramatically increase
oxygen content of the blood, particularly when exchange transfusion
is not readily available. However, greatly exceeding this posttransfusion Hb limits oxygen delivery to the brain as a result of hyperviscosity by increasing the Hb significantly over the patient’s baseline values.
Subsequently, prompt treatment with an exchange transfusion is recommended, either manually or with automated erythrocytapheresis,
to reduce the HbS percentage to <30%. Exchange transfusion at the
time of acute stroke is associated with a decreased risk of second stroke
compared to simple transfusion alone. CT of the head to exclude
cerebral hemorrhage should be performed as soon as possible, and, if
available, MRI of the brain with diffusion-­weighted imaging to distinguish between ischemic infarcts and PRES. MR venography is useful
to evaluate the possibility of cerebral venous thrombosis, a rare but
potential cause of focal neurologic deficit in children with sickle cell
disease. MR angiography may identify evidence of cerebral vasculopathy; these images are not critical in the initial time management of a
child with sickle cell disease presenting with a focal neurologic deficit
but are important for long-­term management.
The clinical presentation of PRES or central venous thrombosis can
mimic a stroke but would require a different treatment course. For both
PRES and cerebral venous thrombosis, the optimal management has
not been defined in patients with sickle cell disease, resulting in the
need for consultation with both a pediatric neurologist and a pediatric
hematologist. The primary approach for prevention of recurrent overt
stroke is blood transfusion therapy aimed at keeping the maximum
HbS concentration <30%. Despite regular blood transfusion therapy,
approximately 20% of patients will have a second stroke and 30% of
this group will have a third.

Transcranial Doppler Ultrasonography

Fig. 511.3 Fast fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery sequence MRI of
the brain showing a right hemisphere border-­zone cerebral infarction
in a child with sickle cell anemia. (From Switzer JA, Hess DC, Nichols
F, et al. Pathophysiology and treatment of stroke in sickle-­cell disease:
present and future. Lancet Neurol 2006;5:501–512.)

Primary prevention of overt stroke can be accomplished using screening transcranial Doppler ultrasonography (TCD) assessment of the
blood velocity in the terminal portion of the internal carotid and the
proximal portion of the middle cerebral artery. Children with sickle
cell anemia with an elevated time-­averaged mean maximum (TAMM)
blood flow velocity ≥200 cm/sec (abnormal study) are at increased
risk for a cerebrovascular event. A repeat study should be performed
within a week to confirm the result. However, a single value ≥220 cm/
sec is concerning and does not require repeating before recommending an intervention. A TAMM measurement of <200 but ≥170 cm/sec
represents a conditional threshold. A repeat measurement is suggested
within a few months because of the high rate of conversion to a TCD
velocity >200 cm/sec in this group of patients.
Two distinct methods of measuring TCD velocity are a nonimaging technique and an imaging technique. The nonimaging technique
was the method used in the stroke prevention trial sponsored by the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
National Institutes of Health, whereas most pediatric radiologists in
practice use the imaging technique. When compared to each other, the
imaging technique produces values that are 10–15% below those of the
nonimaging technique. The imaging technique uses the time-­averaged
mean of the maximum velocity (TAMX), and this measure is believed
to be equivalent to the nonimaging calculation of TAMM. A downward adjustment for the transfusion threshold is appropriate for centers using the imaging method to assess TCD velocity. The magnitude
of the transfusion threshold in the imaging technique has not been
settled, but a transfusion threshold of a TAMX of 185 cm/sec and a
conditional threshold of TAMX of 165 cm/sec seem reasonable. Alternatively, some experts recommend using the same thresholds regardless of technique.
Children with abnormal TCD studies should begin chronic blood
transfusion therapy to maintain HbS levels <30% to decrease the risk
of first stroke. This strategy results in an over 90% reduction in the
rate of overt strokes. Once transfusion therapy is initiated, a subset of
patients at low risk for the development of increased TCD values, such
as those without MRA-­confirmed cerebral vasculopathy, may be able
to transition from chronic transfusions to long-­term hydroxyurea therapy. Acute stroke risk is decreased when hydroxyurea use and chronic
transfusions overlap until a robust therapeutic response to hydroxyurea is achieved.

Pulmonary Complications

Lung disease in children with sickle cell disease is the second most common reason for hospital admission and is associated with significant
mortality. ACS refers to a life-­threatening pulmonary complication of
sickle cell disease defined as a new radiodensity on chest radiography.
Other clinical definitions include clinical features such as fever, respiratory distress, hypoxia, cough, and chest pain (Fig. 511.4). Even in
the absence of respiratory symptoms, very young children with fever
should receive a chest radiograph to identify evolving ACS because
clinical examination alone is insufficient to identify patients with a new
radiographic density. Early detection of ACS may alter clinical management. The radiographic findings in ACS are variable but may include
single-­lobe involvement, predominantly left lower lobe; multiple lobes,
most often both lower lobes; and pleural effusions, either unilateral or
bilateral. ACS may progress rapidly from a simple infiltrate to extensive
infiltrates and a pleural effusion. Therefore continuous pulse oximetry
and frequent clinical exams are required, and repeat chest x-­ray films
may be indicated for progressive hypoxia, dyspnea, tachypnea, and
other signs of respiratory distress.
Most patients with ACS do not have a single identifiable cause. Infection is the most well-­known etiology, yet only 30% of ACS episodes will

A

B

2973

have positive sputum or bronchoalveolar culture, and the most common bacterial pathogens are S. pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae,
and Chlamydia spp. The most frequent event preceding ACS is a painful episode requiring systemic opioid treatment. Fat emboli have also
been implicated as a cause of ACS, arising from infarcted bone marrow,
and can be life-­threatening if large amounts are released to the lungs.
Fat emboli can be difficult to diagnose but should be considered in any
patient with sickle cell disease presenting with rapid onset of respiratory distress and altered mental status changes. Petechial rash may also
occur but may be difficult to detect if not carefully sought.
Given that the causes of ACS are varied, recommended management is also multimodal (Table 511.4). The type of opioid, with overuse of morphine being more likely to cause ACS than nalbuphine

Table 511.4  Overall Strategies for the Management of
Acute Chest Syndrome
PREVENTION
Incentive spirometry and periodic ambulation in patients admitted
for sickle cell pain, surgery, or febrile episodes
Watchful waiting in any hospitalized child or adult with sickle cell
disease (pulse oximetry monitoring and frequent respiratory assessments)
Cautious use of intravenous fluids
Intense education and optimum care of patients who have sickle cell
anemia and asthma
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING AND LABORATORY MONITORING
Blood cultures, if febrile
Nasopharyngeal samples for viral culture (respiratory syncytial virus,
influenza), depending on clinical setting
Complete blood counts every day and appropriate chemistries
Continuous pulse oximetry
Chest radiographs, for persistent or progressive illness
TREATMENT
Blood transfusion (simple or exchange), depending on clinical features; consider maintaining an active type and cross match
Supplemental O2 for drop in pulse oximetry by 4% over baseline, or
values <90%
Empirical antibiotics (third-­generation cephalosporin and macrolide)
Continued respiratory therapy (incentive spirometry and chest physiotherapy as necessary)
Bronchodilators and corticosteroids for patients with asthma
Optimum pain control and fluid management

Fig. 511.4 Probable pulmonary infarction in a 15-­
year-­
old patient with
HbSS. A, Frontal radiograph shows
consolidation and a small pleural effusion posteriorly in the right lower lobe.
B, Radiograph obtained <24 hr later
shows massive right middle and lower
lobe consolidation and effusion. No
organisms could be cultured. The diagnosis of “probably pulmonary infarction” was established clinically. (Courtesy Dr. Thomas L. Stovis, Children’s
Hospital of Michigan, Detroit. From
Kuhn JP, Stovis TL, Haller JO: Caffey’s
Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby, 2004. p. 1087.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2974 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
hydrochloride, is associated with an increase in the risk of ACS, in
part because of sedation and hypoventilation. However, under no circumstance should opioid administration be limited to prevent ACS;
rather, other measures must be taken to prevent ACS from developing.
In patients with pain, regular use of an incentive spirometer at 10-­12
breaths every 2 hours can significantly reduce the frequency of subsequent ACS episodes. Because of the clinical overlap between pneumonia and ACS, all episodes should be treated promptly with antimicrobial
therapy, including at least a macrolide and a third-­generation cephalosporin. A previous diagnosis of asthma or wheezing with ACS should
prompt treatment following standard of care for an asthma exacerbation with bronchodilators. The diagnosis of ACS does not negate the
recommended management of a patient with asthma exacerbation.
Oxygen should be administered for patients who demonstrate hypoxia.
Blood transfusion therapy using either simple or exchange (manual or
automated) transfusion is the only method to abort a rapidly progressing ACS episode. The decision when to give blood and whether the
transfusion should be a simple or exchange transfusion is less clearly
defined. Usually, blood transfusions are given when at least one of the
following clinical features are present: decreasing So2, increasing work
of breathing, rapidly changing respiratory effort either with or without a worsening chest radiograph, a dropping Hb of 2 g/dL below the
patient’s baseline, or previous history of severe ACS requiring admission to the intensive care unit.
Pulmonary hypertension has been identified as a major long time
risk factor for death in adults with sickle cell anemia. The natural history of pulmonary hypertension in children with sickle cell anemia is
unknown. Asymptomatic patients do not require screening for pulmonary hypertension. The initial diagnostic test is an echocardiogram
and, depending on the severity of those findings, the echocardiogram
should be followed by right-­sided heart catheterization. Clinical findings suggestive of pulmonary hypertension include hypoxia or dyspnea
at rest or with exertion, comorbid vascular complications (leg ulcers,
priapism), elevated N-­terminal, pro-­B-­type natriuretic peptide, or an
abnormal 6-­minute walk distance.

Renal Disease and Enuresis

Renal disease among patients with sickle cell disease is a major comorbid condition that can lead to premature death. Seven sickle cell disease
nephropathies have been identified: gross hematuria, papillary necrosis, nephrotic syndrome, renal infarction, hyposthenuria, pyelonephritis, and renal medullary carcinoma. The presentation of these entities
is varied but may include hematuria, proteinuria, renal insufficiency,
concentrating defects, or hypertension.
The common presence of nocturnal enuresis occurring in children with sickle cell disease is not well defined but is troublesome
for affected children and their parents. The overall prevalence of
enuresis was 33% in the Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease,
with the highest prevalence (42%) among children 6-­8 years old.
Furthermore, enuresis may still occur in approximately 9% of older
adolescents. Patients with sickle cell disease and nocturnal enuresis should have a systematic evaluation for recurrent urinary tract
infections, kidney function, and possibly obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome. Unfortunately, most children with nocturnal enuresis do
not have an etiology, and targeted therapeutic interventions have
been of limited success.

Cognitive and Psychologic Complications

Ongoing evaluation of the family unit and identification of the
resources available to cope with a chronic illness are critical for optimal management. Children and adolescents with sickle cell disease
have decreased quality of life, as measured on standardized assessments, compared to their siblings and children with other chronic
diseases. Furthermore, children with sickle cell disease are at great
risk for academic failure and have a 20% high school graduation rate,
possibly because, among other reasons, approximately one third of
children with sickle cell anemia have had a cerebral infarct, either
silent or an overt stroke. Early school-­age children with sickle cell
anemia should have MRI without sedation to screen for silent cerebral
ischemia. Children with cerebral infarcts require ongoing cognitive

and school performance assessment so that education resources can
be focused to optimize educational attainment. Participation in relevant support groups and group activities, such as camps for children
with sickle cell disease, may be of direct benefit by improving self-­
esteem and establishing peer relationships.

Other Complications

In addition to the previous organ dysfunctions, patients with sickle cell
disease can have other significant complications. These complications
include, but are not limited to, sickle cell retinopathy, delayed onset of
puberty, leg ulcers, and complications associated with pregnancy. Optimal treatment for each of these entities has not been determined, and
individual management requires consultation with the hematologist
and primary care physician. Reproductive health issues are prevalent
in children and adolescents with sickle cell disease; therefore hematologists, adolescent medicine teams, and obstetrics/gynecology teams
should co-­manage patients to provide optimal care.

THERAPEUTIC CONSIDERATIONS
Hydroxyurea

Hydroxyurea is a well-­established drug proven effective in reducing
the frequency of acute pain episodes. In adults with sickle cell anemia,
hydroxyurea decreases the rate of hospitalization for painful episodes
by 50% and the rate of ACS and blood transfusion by almost 50%. In
addition, adults taking hydroxyurea have shorter hospitalizations and
require less analgesic medication during hospitalization.
In children with sickle cell anemia, hydroxyurea is safe and well
tolerated. The primary toxicities are limited to myelosuppression that
reverses on cessation of the drug. Infants treated with hydroxyurea
experience fewer episodes of pain, dactylitis, and ACS; are hospitalized less frequently; and less often require a blood transfusion. Infants
treated with hydroxyurea do not experience increased rates of bacteremia or serious infection.
Current recommendations are that all children with sickle cell anemia
should be offered hydroxyurea beginning at 9 months of age. Hydroxyurea may be indicated for other sickle cell–related complications,
especially in patients who are unable to tolerate other treatments. For
patients who either will not or cannot continue blood transfusion therapy to prevent recurrent stroke, hydroxyurea therapy may be a reasonable alternative. The trial assessing the efficacy of hydroxyurea as an
alternative to transfusions to prevent a second stroke was terminated
early after the data safety and monitoring process found an increased
stroke rate in the hydroxyurea arm compared to the transfusion arm.
Hydroxyurea alone is inferior to transfusion therapy for secondary
stroke prevention in patients who do not have contraindications to
ongoing transfusions.
The long-­term toxicity associated with initiating hydroxyurea in very
young children has not yet been established. However, all evidence to
date suggests that the benefits far outweigh the risks. For these reasons,
very young children starting hydroxyurea require well-­informed parents
and medical care by pediatric hematologists, or at least co-­management
by a physician with expertise in immunosuppressive medications. The
typical starting dose of hydroxyurea is 15-­20 mg/kg once daily, with an
incremental dosage increase every 8 weeks of 5 mg/kg, and if no toxicities occur, up to a maximum of 35 mg/kg per day. The infant hydroxyurea study found young children could safely be started at 20 mg/kg/
day without increased toxicity. Achievement of the therapeutic effect of
hydroxyurea can require several months, and for this reason, initiating
hydroxyurea to address short-­term symptom relief is not optimal. We
prefer to introduce the concept to parents within the first year of life, preferably by 9 months; provide literature that describes both the pros and
cons of starting hydroxyurea in children with severe symptoms of sickle
cell disease; and educate parents on starting hydroxyurea in asymptomatic children as a preventive therapy for repetitive pain and ACS events.
Other effects of hydroxyurea that may vary include an increase in the
total Hb level and a decrease in the TCD velocity.
Other medications are available for long-­term use in children and
adults with sickle cell disease. Oral L-­glutamine reduces hospitalizations and sickle cell crisis in children age 5 years and older. In addition, crizanlizumab, a humanized P-­selectin inhibitor administered

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
monthly IV, is indicated for reducing acute pain in adults and children
age 16 years and older. Voxelotor, a sickle hemoglobin polymerization
inhibitor, is FDA-­approved for adults and children 4 years and older. In
clinical trials, Voxelotor demonstrated reduced hemolysis in patients
with sickle cell disease.

Gene Therapy

The FDA (2023) has approved two different gene therapy approaches
to ex vivo gene modification of autologous hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells following myeloablative conditioning. Both therapies
are approved for patients ≥12 years of age with recurrent vasoocclusive
crises.
Casgevy (exagamglogene autotemcel: exa-cel), involves gene editing
with CRISPR/Cas9 (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats / CRISPR associated nuclease 9). Exa-cel specifically targets
and inactivates the red cell precursor BCL11A gene (a suppressor of
fetal hemoglobin expression), which results in increased production
of fetal hemoglobin (which does not sickle), resulting in decreased
polymerization of sickle hemoglobin.
Lyfgenia (lovotibeglogene autotemcel: lovo-cel) is a gene addition
approach using a lentiviral vector carrying a modified beta globin gene
(beta-A-T87Q globin), thus increasing the levels of hemoglobin A.
Both have been successful in reducing or eliminating vasoocclusive
crises after therapy. Lyfgenia has a black box warning for the risk of
off target editing /insertional mutagenesis and the possibility of acute
myeloid leukemia.

Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation

The only currently approved cure for sickle cell anemia is transplantation with human leukocyte antigen (HLA)–matched hematopoietic
stem cells from a sibling donor (allogenic) without sickle cell disease. Because of the limited availability of appropriate sibling donors,
research is exploring a wide variety of curative regimens. Clinical trials
are underway to explore unrelated and partially matched related donor
stem cell transplants.
The most common indications for allogenic transplant are recurrent ACS, stroke, and abnormal TCD. Sibling-­matched stem cell transplantation has a lower risk for graft-­versus-­host disease than unrelated
donors. Surveys suggest that younger children may have lower morbidity and mortality. The decision to consider unrelated transplantation
should involve appropriate consultation and counseling from physicians with expertise in sickle cell transplantation.
Stem cell transplantation for children with sickle cell disease who
have a genetically matched sibling and few complications is less commonly performed. The use of hydroxyurea has dramatically decreased
the disease burden for the patient and family, with far fewer hospitalizations for pain or ACS episodes and less use of blood transfusions.
The field of stem cell transplantation is also progressing such that larger
studies involving nonsibling donor and haploidentical donor transplantation. Transplant-­related complications caused by conditioning
regimens may be decreased by using low-­intensity, nonmyeloablative
HLA-­matched sibling, allogenic stem cell transplantation.

Red Blood Cell Transfusions

RBC transfusions are used frequently both in the treatment of acute
complications and to prevent acute or recurrent complications. Typically, short-­term transfusions are used to prevent progression of acute
complications such as ACS, aplastic crisis, splenic sequestration, and
acute stroke, as well as to prevent surgery-­related ACS. RBC transfusions are not recommended for uncomplicated acute pain events. Select
RBC volumes judiciously to avoid high posttransfusion Hb levels and
hyperviscosity. Long-­term or chronic transfusion therapy is used to
prevent first stroke in patients with abnormal TCD or MRI findings
(silent stroke), recurrent stroke, or recurrent ACS. Patients with sickle
cell disease are at increased risk of developing alloantibodies to less
common RBC surface antigens after receiving even a single transfusion. In addition to standard cross matching for major blood group
antigens (A, B, O, RhD), more extended matching should be performed
to identify donor units that are C-­, E-­, and Kell-­antigen matched. Full
RBC antigen phenotyping or genotyping for all patients with sickle cell

2975

disease should be performed before RBC transfusion whenever possible to have the RBC units least likely to result in alloimmunization
available for these patients.
Three methods of blood transfusion therapy are used in the management of acute and chronic complications associated with sickle cell
disease: automated erythrocytapheresis, manual exchange transfusion (phlebotomy of a set amount of patient’s blood followed by rapid
administration of donated packed RBCs), and simple transfusion. The
decision on which method to use depends on the patient’s pretransfusion Hb level, the clinical indication, RBC alloimmunization, and transfusional iron overload. Exchange transfusion, manual or automated,
is preferable for patients with new neurologic symptoms. Automated
erythrocytapheresis is the preferred method for patients requiring
chronic blood transfusion therapy because there is a minimum net iron
balance after the procedure, followed by manual exchange transfusion.
However, this method requires technical expertise, special machines,
and good patient venous access. Manual exchange is more accessible.
However, both methods may expose the patient to more RBC units
and possible alloimmunization. Simple transfusion therapy may lower
donor exposure and be more readily available but may result in higher
net iron burden when compared to erythrocytapheresis or exchange
transfusion.
Preparation for surgery for children with sickle cell disease requires
a coordinated effort from the hematologist, surgeon, anesthesiologist,
and primary care provider. Historically, ACS was associated with general
anesthesia in patients with sickle cell disease. Blood transfusion before
surgery for children with sickle cell disease is recommended to raise Hb
level preoperatively to no more than 10 g/dL, to avoid ACS development.
Because of better general perioperative care and the use of long-­term
therapies such as hydroxyurea and chronic transfusions, the decision
to transfuse before general anesthesia should be made in conjunction
with the medical team who provides sickle cell disease–related care for
the patient. When preparing a child with sickle cell disease for surgery
with a simple blood transfusion, caution must be used not to elevate Hb
level beyond 10 g/dL because of the risk of hyperviscosity syndrome.
For children with milder forms of sickle cell disease, such as HbSC or
HbSβ-­thalassemia, a decision must be made on a case-­by-­case basis as to
whether an exchange transfusion is warranted because a simple transfusion may raise the hemoglobin to an unacceptable level.

Iron Overload

The primary toxic effect of blood transfusion therapy relates to excessive iron stores or iron overload, which can result in organ damage and
premature death. Excessive iron stores develop after 100 mL/kg of RBC
transfusion, or about 10 transfusions. The assessment of iron overload
in children receiving regular blood transfusions is difficult. The most
common and least invasive method of estimating total body iron involves
serum ferritin levels. Ferritin measurements have significant limitations
in their ability to estimate iron stores for several reasons, including, but
not limited to, elevation during acute inflammation and poor correlation with excessive iron in specific organs, such as the heart and endocrine glands. MRI of the liver has proved to the most effective approach
for assessment of iron stores. MRI T2* and MRI R2 and R2* sequences
are used to estimate iron levels in the heart and liver. These imaging
strategies are more accurate than serum ferritin in estimating heart
and liver iron content. The standard for iron assessment previously was
liver biopsy, which is an invasive procedure exposing children to the
risk of general anesthesia, bleeding, and pain. Liver biopsy alone does
not accurately estimate total body iron because iron deposition in the
liver is not homogeneous and does not always correlate with iron levels
in the heart and other organs. The major advantage of a liver biopsy is
that histologic assessment of the parenchyma can be ascertained along
with appropriate staging of suspected pathology, particularly cirrhosis.
The primary treatment of transfusion-­related iron overload requires
iron chelation using medical therapy. In the United States, three chelating
agents are approved for use in transfusional iron overload. Deferoxamine
is administered subcutaneously 5 of 7 nights/week over 8 to 12 hours a
night. Deferasirox is taken by mouth daily, and deferiprone is available in
tablet forms taken orally twice or three times a day and an oral solution
taken three times a day. The FDA approved deferasirox for use in patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2976 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
age ≥2 years. A pill formulation of deferasirox is available that does not
require mixing before oral administration. A sprinkle formulation that
is mixed with a soft food such as applesauce also is available for young
children who are unable to swallow pills. Deferiprone is an older oral chelator that has been widely used outside the United States for many years
and was also approved as a first-­line agent (see Table 511.8). Because of a
1–2% risk of agranulocytosis, weekly CBC monitoring is recommended,
particularly in the first 6 months of treatment and with any febrile illness. Transfusion-­related excessive iron stores in children with sickle cell
disease should be managed by a physician with expertise in chelation
therapy because of the need for close monitoring and due to the risk of
significant toxicity from available chelation therapies.

OTHER SICKLE CELL SYNDROMES

The most common sickle cell syndromes besides HbSS are HbSC, HbSβ0-­
thalassemia, and HbSβ+-­
thalassemia. The other syndromes—HbSD,
HbSOArab, HbSHPFH, HbSE, and other variants—are much less common. Patients with HbSβ0-­thalassemia have a clinical phenotype similar
to those with HbSS. In the RBCs of patients with HbSC, crystals of HbC
interact with membrane ion transport, dehydrating RBCs and inducing sickling. Children who have HbSC disease can experience the same
symptoms and complications as those with severe HbSS disease, but less
frequently. Children with HbSC have increased incidence of retinopathy, chronic hypersplenism, and acute splenic sequestration over the life
span. The natural history of the other sickle cell syndromes is variable
and difficult to predict because of the lack of systematic evaluation.
There is no validated model that can predict the clinical course of
an individual with sickle cell disease. A patient with HbSC can have a
more severe clinical course than a patient with HbSS. Management of
end-­organ dysfunction in children with sickle cell syndromes requires
the same general principles as managing patients with sickle cell anemia; however, each situation should be managed on a case-­by-­case
basis and requires consultation with a pediatric hematologist.

ANTICIPATORY GUIDANCE

Children with sickle cell disease should receive general health maintenance as recommended for all children, with special attention to
disease-­specific guidance and infection prevention education. In addition to counseling regarding adherence to penicillin and a vaccination
schedule, patients, parents, and caregivers should be instructed to seek
immediate medical attention for all febrile illness. In addition, early
detection of acute splenic sequestration has been shown to decrease
mortality. Therefore parents and caregivers should be educated early
and repeatedly about the importance of daily penicillin administration
and correct palpation of the spleen.

Prophylactic Penicillin

Children with sickle cell anemia should receive prophylactic oral penicillin VK until at least 5 years of age (125 mg twice daily up to age 3
years, then 250 mg twice daily thereafter). No established guidelines
exist for penicillin prophylaxis beyond 5 years of age; some clinicians
continue penicillin prophylaxis, and others recommend discontinuation. Penicillin prophylaxis should be continued beyond 5 years in children with a history of pneumococcal infection because of the increased
risk of a recurrent infection. An alternative for children who are allergic to penicillin is erythromycin ethylsuccinate.

Immunizations

In addition to penicillin prophylaxis, routine childhood immunizations, as well as the annual administration of influenza vaccine, are
highly recommended. Children with sickle cell disease develop functional asplenia and also require immunizations to protect against
encapsulated organisms, including additional pneumococcal and
meningococcal vaccinations. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) provides vaccination guidelines at https://www.cdc.
gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-­recs/index.html.

Spleen Palpation

Splenomegaly is a common complication of sickle cell disease, and splenic
sequestration can be life threatening. Parents and primary caregivers

should be taught how to palpate the spleen to determine if the spleen is
enlarging starting at the first visit, with reinforcement at subsequent visits.
Parents should also demonstrate spleen palpation to the provider.

Transcranial Doppler Ultrasound

Primary stroke prevention using TCD has resulted in a decrease in
the prevalence of overt stroke among children with sickle cell anemia.
Children with HbSS or HbSβ0-­thalassemia should be screened annually
with TCD starting at age 2 years. TCD is best performed when the child
is quietly awake and in their usual state of health. TCD measurements
may be falsely elevated or decreased in the settings of acute anemia,
sedation, pain, fever, or immediately after blood transfusions. Screening
should occur annually from ages 2-­16 years. Abnormal values should
be repeated within a week to identify patients at greatest risk of overt
stroke. Conditional values should be repeated within at least 3 months,
and normal values should be repeated annually. Routine neuroimaging
with MRI in asymptomatic patients requires consultation with a pediatric hematologist or neurologist with expertise in sickle cell disease.

Hydroxyurea

Recommendations include offering hydroxyurea therapy to all children
with sickle cell anemia starting at 9 months of age regardless of clinical
symptoms. Monitoring children receiving hydroxyurea is labor intensive.
Hydroxyurea is a chemotherapeutic agent, and patients receiving this
agent require the same level of nursing and physician oversight as any child
with cancer receiving chemotherapy. The parents must be educated about
the consequences of therapy, and when ill, children should be promptly
evaluated. Starting doses should be approximately 20 mg/kg/day. CBC
with differential and reticulocyte count should be checked within 4 weeks
after initiation of therapy or any dose change to monitor for hematologic
toxicity, then every 8-­12 weeks. Dose escalation should be based on clinical and laboratory parameters. If appropriate, dose increases should be in 5
mg/kg/day increments to a maximum of 35 mg/kg/day.
While receiving hydroxyurea, steady-­state absolute neutrophil count
should be approximately 2,000/μL or higher and platelet count should
be 80,000/μL or higher. However, children may tolerate lower absolute neutrophil counts while receiving hydroxyurea. Holding hydroxyurea and adjusting to lower doses may be required for neutropenia
and thrombocytopenia. Hydroxyurea is a pregnancy class D medication, and adolescents should be counseled regarding methods to prevent pregnancy while taking this medication. Close monitoring of the
patient requires a commitment by the parents and the patient as well as
diligence by a physician to identify toxicity early. Information is scarce
regarding the impact of hydroxyurea on fertility, although hydroxyurea
has been shown to further reduce sperm count in males with sickle
cell disease in several case reports; this effect may be reversible once
hydroxyurea is discontinued.

Red Cell Transfusion Therapy

At the initiation of blood transfusion therapy, children with sickle cell
disease should have testing to identify the presence of alloantibodies
and RBC phenotyping or genotyping, which is performed to identify
the best matched blood. RBC units selected should be extended antigen-­
matched for C, E, and K, when feasible. Goals of transfusion for acute
events should be established before initiating therapy, including target
posttransfusion Hb level and HbS percentage, or both. For children
receiving chronic transfusion therapy, pretransfusion HbS goals should
be defined; the most common goal is <30%. Posttransfusion Hb values
should be targeted to avoid hyperviscosity. Children, parents, and caregivers should be educated about the symptoms of delayed hemolytic
transfusion reactions. Any child with sickle cell disease with a recent history of RBC transfusion who presents with pain, dark urine, increased
scleral icterus, or symptoms of worsening anemia should be screened
for a delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction after consultation with the
blood bank. Children meeting criteria for chronic transfusion therapy
should receive annual evaluation for transfusion-­transmitted infections,
including hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and HIV. After receiving 100 mL/kg
RBC transfusions, regular assessments of iron overload should begin,
usually including measurements of serum ferritin and MRI assessments
for hepatic iron every 1-­2 years. Cardiac iron assessments should be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
performed in children over 10 years old, especially if there is a history
of poor adherence with iron chelation and/or liver iron concentration of
15 mg/g dry weight or higher. For children requiring chelation therapy,
audiology and ophthalmology exams should be performed annually and
monitoring of liver function and pituitary function performed regularly
because of iron deposition.

Pulmonary and Asthma Screening

Pulmonary complications of sickle cell disease are common and life
threatening. Asthma is common in children with sickle cell disease,
and thus evaluation for asthma symptoms and asthma risk factors
should be performed routinely, particularly given the high morbidity
and mortality. All children should receive annual screening for signs
and symptoms of lower airway disease, such as nighttime cough and
exercise-­induced cough. In children with symptoms consistent with
lower airway disease, consultation with an asthma specialist should be
considered. Pulse oximetry readings should be performed during well
visits to identify children with abnormally low daytime oxygen saturation. For children with snoring, daytime somnolence, and symptoms
associated with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS), sleep studies should be performed as necessary.

Retinopathy

Effective therapy is available for retinopathy associated with sickle cell
disease. Although all patients are at risk for development of retinopathy, those with sickle cell disease, type SC, are at very high risk. Patients
should receive annual screening by an ophthalmologist to identify vascular changes that would benefit from laser therapy. Although changes
may occur earlier, children with sickle cell disease should begin annual
screenings no later than age 10 years.

Renal Disease

Sickle cell–associated renal disease starts in infancy and may not become
clinically evident until adulthood. Chronic kidney disease is common in
adults with sickle cell disease, with high morbidity and mortality. Screening protocols for early signs of sickle nephropathy in children have not
been adopted due to lack of data. However, when creatinine elevation,
microalbuminuria, or macroalbuminuria is detected, a nephrologist
should be consulted to determine next steps for further evaluation and
possible treatment. The age to begin screening for proteinuria has not
been defined, but some experts recommend screening annually after
at least 10 years, if not sooner. If proteinuria is detected, urine studies should be repeated with an early-­morning urine collection; if the
protein remains elevated, the patient should be referred to a pediatric
nephrologist. Males with sickle cell disease should also receive counseling regarding the diagnosis and treatment of priapism. Because of the
high frequency of enuresis beyond early childhood, approximately 9%
between 18 and 20 years of age, parents and caregivers should be educated about the prolonged nature of enuresis in this disease. OSAS is
associated with an increased prevalence of enuresis in sickle cell disease.
Unfortunately, no evidence-­based therapies have been developed to treat
enuresis in children and young adults with sickle cell disease. In children
with enuresis who have symptoms and clinical features of OSAS, referral
to specialists for evaluation is recommended.

Echocardiography

Echocardiography is a screening tool to identify individuals with sickle
cell disease who have pulmonary artery hypertension (see the section
on “Pulmonary Hypertension”). Studies in adults with sickle cell disease have found that echocardiography is insensitive at identifying individuals truly at risk for pulmonary hypertension, although an elevated
tricuspid velocity measurement may still be a risk factor for premature
death in adults with sickle cell disease. Routine echocardiograms for
pulmonary hypertension screening are not recommended in asymptomatic children; however, they are recommended in patients with leg
ulcers, priapism, and connective tissue disease, as well as referral to a
pulmonary hypertension specialist for patients with new steady-­state
cardiorespiratory symptoms, heart failure, or pulmonary embolus.

2977

Additional Screening

Patients with sickle cell disease are at increased risk for behavioral
health issues, including anxiety and depression. Screening should be
performed at routine and acute visits. AVN of the hips and shoulders
is increased in patients with sickle cell disease and may be identified
early on routine physical exam. Plain radiographs may not detect early
disease; thus, when AVN is suspected and plain films are normal,
MRI should be obtained. When AVN is confirmed, patients should be
referred promptly to orthopedics and physical therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

511.2 Sickle Cell Trait (Hemoglobin AS)
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
The prevalence of sickle cell trait varies throughout the world; in the
United States, the incidence is 7–10% of the Black population. Because
all state newborn screening programs include sickle cell disease, for
most children, sickle cell trait is first identified on their newborn
screen. Communication of sickle cell trait status from infancy to young
adulthood for the affected individual, family, and healthcare providers
is often inconsistent, and many young adults are unaware of their sickle
cell trait status.
By definition, among individuals with sickle cell trait, the HbS level
is <50%. The life span of people with sickle cell trait is normal, and
serious complications are extremely rare. The CBC is within the normal range (Fig. 511.5B). Hemoglobin analysis is diagnostic, revealing
a predominance of HbA, typically >50%, and HbS <50%. Rare complications of sickle cell trait may exist. Sickle cell trait is reported to
be associated with exertional rhabdomyolysis in military recruits,
and possibly with sudden death during rigorous exercise. However,
whether these reports establish sickle cell trait as a risk factor that is
nonmodifiable by other genetic factors remains unclear. Other complications reported with sickle cell trait include splenic infarction at
high altitude, hematuria, hyposthenuria, deep vein thrombosis, and
susceptibility to progressive eye injury after hyphema (Table 511.5).
Renal medullary carcinoma has been reported almost exclusively in
individuals with sickle cell trait and occurs predominantly in young
people.
Children with sickle cell trait do not require limitations on physical activities as long as provisions are made for frequent rest and oral
hydration, particularly when participating in physical conditioning
or competitive sports. Sudden death in persons with sickle cell trait
while exercising under extreme conditions is most likely associated
with a second genetic factor and/or environmental factors and not
the presence of sickle cell trait itself. However, if exertional rhabdomyolysis is identified, evaluation by neurology and cardiology
should be considered. No causal pathway has been implicated for the
presence of sickle cell trait and sudden death. All patients with sickle
cell trait who participate in rigorous athletic activities should receive
maximum hydration and appropriate rest during exertion, as would
be the precautionary steps for all athletes, particularly when participating in hot, humid conditions. The presence of sickle cell trait
should never be a reason to exclude a person from athletic participation but rather should serve as an indication that prudent surveillance is necessary to ensure appropriate hydration and prevention
of exhaustion from heat or other strenuous exercise. If athletes are
to be screened for sickle cell trait, the appropriate procedure is testing using a hemoglobin electrophoresis followed by genetic counseling, along with the knowledge that genetic information may provide
opportunities to challenge paternity. Such situations are typically
handled by a pediatrician or hematologist accustomed to providing
both a balanced approach to genetic counseling and addressing the
challenges about paternity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2978 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 511.5 Red blood cell morphology associated with hemoglobin disorders. A, Sickle cell anemia (HbSS): target cells and fixed (irreversibly
sickled) cells. B, Sickle cell trait (HbAS): normal red blood cell (RBC) morphology. C, Hemoglobin CC: target cells and occasional spherocytes. D,
Congenital Heinz body anemia (unstable hemoglobin): RBCs stained with supravital stain (brilliant cresyl blue) reveal intracellular inclusions. E, Homozygous β0-­thalassemia: severe hypochromia with deformed RBCs and normoblasts. F, Hemoglobin H disease (α-­thalassemia): anisopoikilocytosis
with target cells. (Courtesy Dr. John Bolles, The ASH Collection, University of Washington, Seattle.)

Table 511.5  Complications Reported with Sickle Cell Trait
Renal medullary cancer
Hematuria
Renal papillary necrosis
Hyposthenuria
Splenic infarction at high altitudes
Exertional rhabdomyolysis
Protection against severe complications of falciparum malaria
Microalbuminuria (adults)
From Tsaras G, Owusu-­Ansah A, Boateng O, et al. Complications associated with sickle
cell trait: a brief narrative review. Am J Med 2009;122:507–512.

511.3 Other Hemoglobinopathies
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski

HEMOGLOBIN C

The pathogenic variant for HbC is at the same site as in HbS, with substitution of lysine instead of valine for glutamine. In the United States,
hemoglobin C trait (HbAC) occurs in 1:40 and homozygous hemoglobin C disease (HbCC) occurs in 1:5,000 of the Black population. HbAC
is asymptomatic. HbCC can result in mild anemia, splenomegaly, and
cholelithiasis; rare cases of spontaneous splenic rupture have been
reported. Splenic dysfunction does not occur. This condition is usually
diagnosed through newborn screening programs. HbC crystallizes,
disrupting the red cell membrane, and HbC crystals may be visible on
peripheral smear (see Fig. 511.5C).

HEMOGLOBIN E

Hemoglobin E is an abnormal hemoglobin resulting from a qualitative pathogenic variant in the β-­globin gene and is the second most
common globin pathogenic variant worldwide. Patients may have
asymptomatic hemoglobin E trait (HbAE) or benign homozygous
hemoglobin E disease (HbEE). Compound heterozygous hemoglobin
E/β-­thalassemia produces clinical phenotypes ranging from moderate to severe anemia, depending on the β-­thalassemia pathogenic

variant. In California, HbE/β-­thalassemia is found almost exclusively
in persons of Southeast Asian descent, with a prevalence of 1:2,600
births.

HEMOGLOBIN D

At least 16 variants of hemoglobin exist. HbD-­Punjab (Los Angeles)
is a rare hemoglobin that is seen in 1–3% of Western Indians and in
some Europeans with Asian-­Indian ancestry and produces symptoms
of sickle cell disease when present in combination with HbS. Heterozygous HbD or hemoglobin D trait (HbAD) is clinically silent. Homozygous hemoglobin D disease (HbDD) produces a mild to moderate
anemia with splenomegaly.

511.4 Unstable Hemoglobin Disorders
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
At least 200 rare unstable hemoglobins have been identified; the most
common is Hb Köln. Most patients seem to have de novo pathogenic variants rather than inherited hemoglobin disorders. The best-­
studied unstable hemoglobins are the ones leading to hemoglobin
denaturation from pathogenic variants affecting heme binding. The
denatured hemoglobin can be visualized during severe hemolysis
or after splenectomy as Heinz bodies. Unlike the Heinz bodies seen
after toxic exposure, in unstable hemoglobins, Heinz bodies are present in reticulocytes and older RBCs (see Fig. 511.5D). Heterozygotes
are asymptomatic.
Children with homozygous gene pathogenic variants can present in
early childhood with anemia and splenomegaly or with unexplained
hemolytic anemia. Hemolysis is increased with febrile illness and with
the ingestion of oxidant medications (similar to glucose-­6-­phosphate
dehydrogenase [G6PD] deficiency [see Chapter 512.3]) with some
unstable hemoglobins. If the spleen is functional, the blood smear can
appear almost normal or have only hypochromasia and basophilic stippling. A diagnosis may be made by demonstrating Heinz bodies, Hb
instability, or an abnormal Hb analysis (although some unstable hemoglobins have normal mobility and are not detected on Hb analysis).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies

2979

Treatment is supportive. Transfusion may be required during
hemolytic episodes in severe cases. Oxidative drugs should be avoided,
and folate supplementation may be helpful if dietary deficiency is a
concern. Splenectomy may be considered in patients requiring recurrent transfusion or demonstrating poor growth, but the complications
of splenectomy, including bacterial sepsis, risk of thrombosis, and risk
of developing pulmonary hypertension, should be considered before
surgery.

Low-­affinity hemoglobins have less cyanosis than the M hemoglobins. The amino acid substitutions destabilize the oxyhemoglobin and
lead to decreased oxygen saturation. The best characterized are Hb
Kansas, Hb Beth Israel, and Hb Denver. Hb analysis (IEF and HPLC
techniques) may be normal in affected individuals. When clinically
suspected, oxygen affinity studies reveal a right-­shifted dissociation
curve, and heat testing demonstrates unstable hemoglobin. Children
present with mild cyanosis only.

511.5 Abnormal Hemoglobins with
Increased Oxygen Affinity

511.7 Hereditary Methemoglobinemia

Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
More than 110 high-­affinity hemoglobins have been characterized.
These pathogenic variants affect the state of Hb configuration during oxygenation and deoxygenation. Hemoglobin changes structure when in the oxygenated versus the deoxygenated state. The
deoxygenated state is termed the T (tense) state and is stabilized by
2,3-­diphosphoglycerate. When fully oxygenated, hemoglobin assumes
the R (relaxed) state. The exact molecular interactions between these
two states are unknown. High-­affinity hemoglobins contain pathogenic variants that either stabilize the R form or destabilize the T
form. The interactions between the R and T forms are complex, and
the mechanisms of the pathogenic variants are not known. In most
cases, the high-­affinity hemoglobins can be identified by Hb analysis;
approximately 20% must be characterized under controlled conditions
where measurements are obtained with the P50 lowered to 9-­21 mm Hg
(normal: 23-­29 mm Hg). The decreased P50 in these hemoglobins leads
to an erythrocytosis with Hb levels of 17-­20 g/dL. Levels of erythropoietin and 2,3-­DPG are normal. Patients are usually asymptomatic and
do not need phlebotomy. If phlebotomy is performed, oxygen delivery
could be problematic because of the reduced number of Hb molecules
to carry oxygen.

511.6 Abnormal Hemoglobins Causing
Cyanosis
Kim Smith-­Whitley
Abnormal hemoglobins causing cyanosis, also called structural methemoglobinemias, are rare. They are referred to as M hemoglobins
and represent a group of hemoglobin variants that result from point
pathogenic variants in one of the globin chains, α, β, or γ, located in
the heme pocket; 13 known variants exist. These unstable hemoglobins lead to hemolytic anemia, most pronounced when the β-­globin
gene is affected. Clinically, these children are cyanotic from birth,
without other signs or symptoms of disease, if the pathogenic variant is in the α-­globin gene (HbM Boston, HbM Iwate, Hb Auckland).
Infants with β-­globin pathogenic variants become cyanotic later in
infancy after the fetal hemoglobin switch (HbM Saskatoon, HbM
Chile, HbM Milwaukee 1 and 2). The γ-­chain pathogenic variants
(HbF-­M Fort Ripley, HbF-­M Osaka, HbF Cincinnati, HbF Circleville,
HbF Toms River, HbF Viseu) are all transient, presenting with cyanosis at birth, which resolves during the neonatal period after HbF
production discontinues.
The abnormal M hemoglobins exhibit autosomal dominant inheritance
and are diagnosed by Hb analysis. HbM variants may not be isolated reliably using Hb analysis (HPLC or IEF); consequently, diagnostic confirmation may require DNA sequencing or mass spectrometry. There is no
specific treatment and affected patients do not respond to treatments used
for enzyme-­deficient methemoglobinemia. Beyond cyanosis, individuals
are otherwise asymptomatic and do not require additional monitoring.
Children with the β-­globin form should avoid oxidant drugs. Individuals
with all forms have a normal life expectancy and pregnancy course.

Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
Hereditary methemoglobinemia is a clinical syndrome caused by
an increase in the serum concentration of methemoglobin either
because of congenital changes in hemoglobin synthesis or of metabolism leading to imbalances in reduction and oxidation of hemoglobin. The iron molecule in hemoglobin is normally in the ferrous state
(Fe2+), which is essential for oxygen transport. Under physiologic
conditions, there is a slow, constant loss of electrons to released
oxygen, and the ferric (Fe3+) form combines with water, producing
methemoglobin (MetHb). The newly formed MetHb has a reduced
ability to bind oxygen.
Two pathways for MetHb reduction exist. The physiologic and predominant pathway is a reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)–dependent reaction catalyzed by cytochrome b5
reductase. This mechanism is >100-­fold more efficient than the production of MetHb. The alternate pathway uses NAD phosphate generated by G6PD in the hexose monophosphate shunt and requires an
extrinsic electron acceptor to be activated (i.e., methylene blue, ascorbic acid, riboflavin). In normal individuals, oxidation of hemoglobin
to MetHb occurs at a slow rate, 0.5–3%, which is countered by MetHb
reduction to maintain a steady state of 1% MetHb.
MetHb may be increased in the RBC because of exposure to toxic
substances or to absence of reductive pathways, such as NADH-­
cytochrome b5 reductase deficiency. Toxic methemoglobinemia is
much more common than hereditary methemoglobinemia (Table
511.6). Infants are exceptionally vulnerable to hemoglobin oxidation
because their erythrocytes have half the amount of cytochrome b5
reductase seen in adults, hemoglobin F is more susceptible to oxidation than hemoglobin A, and the more alkaline infant gastrointestinal
(GI) tract promotes the growth of nitrite-­producing gram-­negative
bacteria. When MetHb levels are >1.5 g/24 hours, cyanosis is visible
(15% MetHb); a level of 70% MetHb is lethal. The MetHb level is usually reported as a percentage of normal hemoglobin, and the toxic level
is lower at a lower Hb level. Methemoglobinemia has been described
in infants who ingested foods and water high in nitrates, who were
exposed to aniline teething gels or other chemicals, and in some infants
with severe gastroenteritis and acidosis. Methemoglobin can color the
blood brown (Fig. 511.6). A patient with significant methemoglobinemia is cyanotic and does not respond to 100% oxygen. Arterial
oxygen tension will be normal or elevated (if on high FiO2) despite
cyanosis, but blood oxygen saturation determined by multiwavelength
co-­oximetry will be low. Oxygen saturation calculated from arterial
blood gas or pulse oximetry is misleading and inaccurate. Although
pulse oximetry is usually lower than normal, it does not reflect the true
degree of desaturation.

511.8 Hereditary Methemoglobinemia with
Deficiency of NADH Cytochrome b5
Reductase
Kim Smith-­Whitley
The first reported inherited disorder causing methemoglobinemia
resulted from an enzymatic deficiency of NADH cytochrome b5

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2980 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 511.6  Known Etiologies of Acquired
­Methemoglobinemia
MEDICATIONS
Benzocaine
Chloroquine
Dapsone
Doxycycline
EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) topical anesthetic
(lidocaine 2.5% and prilocaine 2.5%)
Flutamide
Lidocaine
Metoclopramide
Nitrates
Nitric oxide
Nitroglycerin
Nitroprusside
Nitrous oxide
Phenazopyridine
Prilocaine
Primaquine
Riluzole
Silver nitrate
Sodium nitrate
Sulfonamides
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
Pediatric gastrointestinal infection, sepsis
Recreational drug overdose with amyl nitrate (“poppers”)
Sickle cell disease–related painful episode
MISCELLANEOUS
Aniline dyes
Fume inhalation (automobile exhaust, burning of wood and plastics)
Herbicides
Industrial chemicals: nitrobenzene, nitroethane (found in nail polish,
resins, rubber adhesives)
Pesticides
Gasoline octane booster
Nitrate rich vegetables (beets, borage, chard)
Well water
From Ash-­Bernal R, Wise R, Wright SM. Acquired methemoglobinemia. Medicine
(Baltimore) 2004;83:265–273.

reductase, which was classified into two distinct phenotypes. In type
I, the most common form, the deficiency of NADH cytochrome b5
activity is found only in erythrocytes, with other cell types unaffected.
In type II, the enzyme deficiency is present in all tissues and results in
more significant symptoms beginning in infancy with encephalopathy,
intellectual impairment, spasticity, microcephaly, and growth retardation, with death most often by 2 years of age. Both types exhibit an
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.
Cyanosis varies in intensity with season and diet. The time of cyanosis onset also varies, appearing in some patients at birth and others as
late as adolescence. Although as much as 50% of the total circulating
hemoglobin may be in the form of nonfunctional MetHb, little or no
cardiorespiratory distress occurs in these patients, except on exertion.
Daily oral treatment with ascorbic acid (200-­500 mg/day in divided
doses) gradually reduces the MetHb to approximately 10% of the total
pigment and alleviates the cyanosis as long as therapy is continued.
Chronic high doses of ascorbic acid have been associated with hyperoxaluria and renal stone formation. Ascorbic acid should not be used
to treat acute toxic methemoglobinemia. When immediately available,
poison control should be contacted to verify the most up-­to-­date therapeutic strategies. As with ascorbic acid, riboflavin uses the alternate
pathway of MetHb reduction and is most effective when given in high
doses. Methylene blue, administered via IV (1-­2 mg/kg initially), is
used to treat toxic methemoglobinemia. An oral dose can be administered (100-­300 mg/day) as maintenance therapy.

Fig. 511.6 Normal arterial blood vs methemoglobinemia. Arterial

whole blood with 1% methemoglobin (left) vs arterial whole blood with
72% methemoglobin (right). Note the characteristic chocolate-­brown
color of the sample with an elevated methemoglobin level. Both samples were briefly exposed to 100% oxygen and shaken. This quick analysis is a good bedside test for methemoglobinemia. The sample on
the left turned bright red, whereas the sample on the right remained
chocolate-­brown. Methods: Whole blood samples were drawn at the
same time from the same person. The measured hemoglobin concentration was 11.7 g/dL. Calculated concentration of methemoglobin:
11.7 g/dL × 0.01 = 0.117 g/dL (left) and 11.7 g/dL × 0.72 = 8.42 g/dL
(right). An elevated methemoglobin level was made in vitro by adding
0.1 mL of a 0.144 molar solution of sodium nitrate (right), and 0.1 mL of
normal saline was added as a control (left). Co-­oximetry measurements
were taken on both samples shortly after the blood was drawn and 20
min after the addition of sodium nitrate solution. Both blood samples
were exposed to 100% oxygen before the second measurement. (Protocol based on personal communication with Dr. Ali Mansouri, December 2002.)

Methylene blue should not be used in patients with G6PD deficiency.
This treatment is ineffective and can cause severe oxidative hemolysis.
If methylene blue is given to a patient with G6PD deficiency, symptoms
will not improve, and marked hemolysis can develop within 24 hours
of administration. Because G6PD deficiency status is rarely known at
the time of treatment, a careful history should be elicited. When the
history is negative for symptoms of G6PD deficiency, treatment with
methylene blue should be initiated judiciously, and the patient should
be closely monitored for improvement.

511.9 Syndromes of Hereditary Persistence
of Fetal Hemoglobin
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
Hereditary persistence of HbF (HPFH) syndromes are a form of thalassemia; pathogenic variants are associated with a decrease in the production of either or both β-­ and δ-­globins. There is an imbalance in
the α:non-­α synthetic ratio characteristic of thalassemia. More than 20
variants of HPFH have been described. They are deletional, δβ0 (Black,
Ghanaian, Italian), nondeletional (Tunisian, Japanese, Australian),
linked to the β-­globin–gene cluster (British, Italian-­Chinese, Black), or
unlinked to the β-­globin–gene cluster (Atlanta, Czech, Seattle). The δβ0
forms have deletions of the entire δ-­ and β-­globin gene sequences, and
the most common form in the United States is the Black (HPFH 1)
variant. As a result of the δ and β gene deletions, there is production
only of γ-­globin and formation of HbF. In the homozygous form, no
manifestations of thalassemia are present. There is only HbF with very
mild anemia and slight microcytosis. When inherited with other variant
hemoglobins, HbF is elevated into the 20–30% range; when inherited
with HbS, sickle cell disease is ameliorated, with fewer complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies

511.10 Thalassemia Syndromes
Janet L. Kwiatkowski
Thalassemia refers to a group of genetic disorders of globin-­chain production in which there is an imbalance between the α-­globin and β-­globin
chain production. β-­thalassemia syndromes result from a decrease in β-­
globin chains, which results in a relative excess of α-­globin chains. There
are >300 β-­thalassemia pathogenic variants that have been characterized.
These pathogenic variants can affect any step in the transcription of β-­
globin genes. β0-­thalassemia refers to the absence of production of the
β-­globin. When patients are homozygous for the β0-­thalassemia gene,
they cannot make any normal β-­globin chains (HbA). β+-­thalassemia
indicates a pathogenic variant that makes decreased amounts of normal
β-­globin (HbA). Some β-­thalassemia pathogenic variants have structural
changes such as HbE. Others, such as δβ-­thalassemia or HPFH, are variants of β-­thalassemia that have decreased production of β-­globin gene with
increased compensatory production of HbF. β0-­thalassemia syndromes
are generally more severe than β+-­thalassemia syndromes, but there is
significant variability between the genotype and phenotype. β-­thalassemia
major, commonly called transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia, refers to
severe β-­thalassemia that requires early transfusion therapy. β-­thalassemia
intermedia (also known as non–transfusion-dependent thalassemia) is
a clinical diagnosis of a patient with a less severe clinical phenotype that
usually does not require regular transfusion therapy in childhood. Many
of these patients have at least one β+-­thalassemia pathogenic variant. β-­
thalassemia syndromes usually require a β-­thalassemia pathogenic variant
in both β-­globin genes. Carriers with a single β-­globin pathogenic variant
are generally asymptomatic, except for microcytosis and mild anemia.
In α-­thalassemia, there is an absence or reduction in α-­globin
production usually due to deletions of α-­globin genes. Normal individuals have four α-­globin genes; the more genes affected, the more
severe the disease. α0-­thalassemia indicates no α-­chains produced
from that chromosome (− −/). α+-­thalassemia produces a decreased
amount of α-­globin chain from that chromosome (-­alpha/).
The primary pathology in the thalassemia syndromes stems from
the quantity of globin produced, whereas the primary pathology in
sickle cell disease is related to the quality of β-­globin produced.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

There are >300 different pathogenic variants resulting in absent or
decreased globin production. Although most are rare, the 20 most common abnormal alleles constitute 80% of the known thalassemias worldwide; 1.5% of the world’s population carries alleles for β-­thalassemia, and
in Southeast Asia 5–10% of the population carry alleles for α-­thalassemia.
In the United States, an estimated 2,000 persons have β-­thalassemia major.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Two related features contribute to the sequelae of β-­thalassemia syndromes: inadequate β-­globin gene production leading to decreased
levels of normal hemoglobin (HbA) and unbalanced α-­ and β-­globin
chain production leading to ineffective erythropoiesis. In β-­thalassemia
α-­globin chains are in excess to non–α-­globin chains, and α-­globin
tetramers (α4) are formed and appear as RBC inclusions. The free
α-­globin chains and inclusions are very unstable, precipitate in RBC
precursors, damage the RBC membrane, and shorten RBC survival,
leading to anemia and increased erythroid production (Table 511.7).
This results in a marked increase in erythropoiesis, with early erythroid
precursor death in the bone marrow. Clinically, this is characterized by
a lack of maturation of erythrocytes and an inappropriately low reticulocyte count. This ineffective erythropoiesis and the compensatory
massive marrow expansion with erythroid hyperactivity characterize
β-­thalassemia. Because of the low or absent production of β-­globin,
the α-­chains combine with γ-­chains, resulting in HbF (α2γ2) being the
dominant hemoglobin. In addition to the natural survival effect, the
γ-­globin chains may be produced in increased amounts, regulated by
genetic polymorphisms. The δ-­chain synthesis is not usually affected
in β-­thalassemia or β-­thalassemia trait, and therefore patients have a
relative or absolute increase in HbA2 production (α2δ2).

2981

In the α-­thalassemia syndromes, there is a reduction in α-­globin
production. Normally, there are four α-­globin genes (two from each
parent) that control α-­globin production. α-­thalassemia syndromes
vary from complete absence (hydrops fetalis) to only slightly reduced
(α-­thalassemia silent carrier) α-­globin production. In the α-­thalassemia
syndromes, an excess of β-­ and γ-­globin chains are produced. These
excess chains form hemoglobin Bart’s (γ4) in fetal life and HbH (β4)
after birth. These abnormal tetramers are nonfunctional hemoglobins
with very high oxygen affinity. They do not transport oxygen and result
in extravascular hemolysis. A fetus with the most severe form of α-­
thalassemia (hydrops fetalis) develops in utero anemia and, without
therapeutic intervention, the pregnancy usually results in fetal loss
because HbF production requires sufficient amounts of α-­globin. In
contrast, infants with β-­thalassemia major become symptomatic only
after birth when HbA predominates and insufficient β-­globin production manifests in clinical symptoms.

HOMOZYGOUS β-­THALASSEMIA (TRANSFUSIONDEPENDENT BETA THALASSEMIA, BETA
THALASSEMIA MAJOR, COOLEY ANEMIA)
Clinical Manifestations

If not treated, children with homozygous β0-­thalassemia usually
become symptomatic from progressive anemia, with weakness, poor
growth, and cardiac decompensation during the second 6 months of
life. Depending on the pathogenic variant and degree of HbF production, regular transfusions are necessary beginning in the second month
to second year of life, but rarely later. The decision to transfuse is multifactorial but is not determined solely by the degree of anemia. Persistent hemoglobin level below 7 g/dL in the absence of acute illness is
an indication to start transfusions. In addition, the presence of signs of
ineffective erythropoiesis, such as growth failure, bone deformities secondary to marrow expansion, and hepatosplenomegaly, are important
variables in determining transfusion initiation.
The classic presentation of children with severe disease includes
thalassemic facies (maxilla hyperplasia, flat nasal bridge, frontal bossing),
pathologic bone fractures, marked hepatosplenomegaly, and cachexia
and is primarily seen in countries without access to chronic transfusion
therapy. Occasionally, patients with moderate anemia develop these features because of severe compensatory, ineffective erythropoiesis.
In nontransfused patients with severe ineffective erythropoiesis,
marked splenomegaly can develop with hypersplenism and abdominal symptoms. The features of ineffective erythropoiesis include
expanded medullary spaces (with massive expansion of the marrow
of the face and skull), extramedullary hematopoiesis, and higher
metabolic needs (Fig. 511.7). The chronic anemia and increased
erythroid drive produce an increase in iron absorption from the GI
tract and secondary hemosiderosis-­induced organ injury.
Chronic transfusion therapy dramatically improves the quality of
life and reduces the complications of severe thalassemia. Transfusion-­
induced hemosiderosis becomes the major clinical complication of
transfusion-­dependent thalassemia. Each mL of pure packed RBCs
contains approximately 1 mg of iron. Physiologically, there is no
mechanism to eliminate excess body iron. Iron is initially deposited
in the liver and is followed by deposition in the endocrine organs and
the heart. This leads to a high rate of hypothyroidism, hypogonadotropic gonadism, growth hormone deficiency, hypoparathyroidism,
and diabetes mellitus. Iron deposition in the heart causes heart failure and arrhythmias, and heart disease is the leading cause of death
in inadequately chelated patients. Eventually, most patients not receiving adequate iron chelation therapy die from cardiac failure or cardiac
arrhythmias secondary to hemosiderosis. Hemosiderosis-­
induced
morbidity can be prevented by adequate iron chelation therapy.

Laboratory Findings

In the United States, some children with β-­thalassemia major will be
identified on newborn screening because of the detection of only HbF on
hemoglobin electrophoresis. However, infants with β+ pathogenic variants might be missed on newborn screen if small amounts of hemoglobin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2982 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 511.7  The Thalassemias
THALASSEMIA

GLOBIN GENOTYPE

⍺-­THALASSEMIA
1 Gene deletion

RED BLOOD CELL
FEATURES

CLINICAL FEATURES

HEMOGLOBIN
ANALYSIS

−,α/α,α

Normal

Normal

Newborn: Bart’s: 1–2%

2 Gene deletion
(α-­thalassemia trait)

−,α/−,α −, −/α,α

Microcytosis, mild
hypochromasia

Normal, mild anemia

Newborn: Bart’s: 5–10%

3 Gene deletion
­hemoglobin H

−,−/−,α

Microcytosis, hypochromic

Mild anemia, transfusions
not required

Newborn: Bart’s: 20–30%

2 Gene deletion +
Constant Spring

−,−/α,αConstant Spring

Microcytosis, hypochromic

Moderate to severe
anemia, transfusion,
splenectomy.

2–3% Constant Spring,
10–15% HbH

4 Gene deletion

−,−/−,−

Anisocytosis, poikilocytosis

Hydrops fetalis

Newborn: 89–90% Bart’s
with Gower-­1, Gower-­2,
and Portland

Nondeletional

α,α/α,αvariant

Microcytosis, mild anemia

Normal

1–2% variant hemoglobin

β-­THALASSEMIA
β0 or β+ heterozygote: trait

β0/A, β+/A

Variable microcytosis, mild
anemia

Normal

Elevated A2, variable
elevation of F

β0 or β+-­homozygote or
compound heterozygote
Thalassemia severe

β0/β0, β+/β0,
β+β+, E/β0,
E/β+

Microcytosis, nucleated
RBC

Transfusion dependent

F 98% and A2 2%,
E 30–40% (E/β0);
variably low HbA with β+

β0 or β+ homozygote or
compound heterozygote
Thalassemia intermedia

β0/β0, β+/β0,
β+β+, E/β0, E/β+

Hypochromic, microcytosis

Mild to moderate anemia,
intermittent transfusions

A2 2–5%, F 10–30%, HbA
variably low levels

Dominant (rare)

B0/A

Microcytosis, abnormal
RBCs

Moderately severe anemia,
splenomegaly

Elevated F and A2

δ-­Thalassemia

A/A

Normal

Normal

A2 absent

(δβ)0-­Thalassemia

(δβ)0/A

Hypochromic

Mild anemia

F 5–20%

(δβ)+-­Thalassemia Lepore

βLepore/A

Microcytosis

Mild anemia

Lepore 8–20%

Homozygous Hb Lepore

βLepore/βLepore

Microcytic, hypochromic

Thalassemia intermedia

F 80%, Lepore 20%

γδβ-­Thalassemia

(γAδβ)0/A

Microcytosis, microcytic,
hypochromic

Moderate anemia, splenomegaly, homozygote:
thalassemia intermedia

Decreased F and A2
compared with δβ-­
thalassemia

γ-­Thalassemia

(γAγG)0/A

Microcytosis

Insignificant unless
­homozygote

Decreased F

A are present. An HbFE pattern can be consistent with hemoglobin E β0-­
thalassemia, or the more benign hemoglobin EE disease, and needs to be
followed up. The lack of standardized neonatal diagnosis of thalassemia
disorders requires close follow-­up of newborns with unclear thalassemia
pathogenic variants and babies from high-­risk ethnic groups.
Infants with serious β-­thalassemia disorders have a progressive
anemia after the newborn period. Microcytosis, hypochromia, and
targeting characterize the RBCs. Nucleated RBCs, marked anisopoikilocytosis, and a relative reticulocytopenia are typically seen (see
Fig. 511.5E). The Hb level falls progressively often to <6 g/dL unless
transfusions are given. The reticulocyte count is commonly <8% and
is inappropriately low compared to the degree of anemia caused by
ineffective erythropoiesis. The unconjugated serum bilirubin level is
usually elevated, but other chemistries may be initially normal. Even
if the child does not receive transfusions, iron eventually accumulates
with elevated serum ferritin and transferrin saturation. Evidence of
bone marrow hyperplasia can be seen on radiographs (see Fig. 511.7).
Early definitive diagnosis is recommended. Newborn screening
techniques such as hemoglobin electrophoresis are not definitive.
DNA diagnosis of the β-­thalassemia pathogenic variants, along with
testing for common genetic modifiers of the clinical phenotype, is
recommended. Co-­inheritance of one or more α-­thalassemia deletions is common, and it decreases the severity of the β-­thalassemia

disease as it improves the α:β chain imbalance. Some patients’ pathogenic variants cannot be diagnosed by standard electrophoresis or
common DNA probes. Referral of the samples to a tertiary laboratory is indicated, along with parental and family testing. After the
definitive diagnosis, families should undergo detailed counseling.

Management and Treatment of Thalassemia
See Figure 511.8.

Transfusion Therapy

β-­thalassemia major is a clinical diagnosis that requires the integration of laboratory findings and clinical features. Of patients with
homozygous β0-­thalassemia (the most severe pathogenic variants),
15–20% may have a clinical course that is phenotypically consistent with thalassemia intermedia. In contrast, 25% of patients with
homozygous β+-­
thalassemia, typically a more benign genotype,
may have transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia. Transient clinical
events, such as a sudden fall in hemoglobin secondary to an episode
of parvovirus requiring transfusion, do not necessarily indicate a
transfusion-­dependent patient. The long-­term observation of the
clinical characteristics, such as growth, bony changes, and hemoglobin, are necessary to determine chronic transfusion therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies

2983

Quantitative liver iron by approved R2 or R2* MRI is the best
indicator of total body iron stores and should be obtained in
patients after chronic transfusion therapy has been initiated. The
liver iron results will help guide the chelation regimen. Cardiac iron
estimation by T2* MRI, is usually obtained starting at 10 years old,
but should be obtained earlier in the setting of severe iron overload
or if the transfusion and chelation history is not known. There may
be a discrepancy between the liver iron and the heart iron because
of different rates of tissue loading and unloading and the differential effects of iron chelators on organ-­specific iron removal.

Chelation Therapy

A

C

B

Fig. 511.7 Ineffective erythropoiesis in a 3-­yr-­old patient who has β-­
thalassemia major and has not received a transfusion. A, Massive widening of the diploic spaces of the skull as seen on MRI. B, Radiographic
appearance of the trabeculae as seen on plain radiograph. C, Obliteration of the maxillary sinuses with hematopoietic tissue as seen on CT
scan.

Guidelines for Transfusion Therapy. Patients who require
transfusion therapy should have an extended RBC phenotype and/
or genotype. Patients should receive RBCs depleted of leukocytes
and matched for D, C, c, E, e, and Kell antigens at a minimum.
Cytomegalovirus-­safe units are indicated in stem cell transplantation
candidates. Transfusions should generally be given at intervals of 3-­4
weeks, with the goal being to maintain a pretransfusion Hb level of 9.5-­
10.5 g/dL. Ongoing monitoring for transfusion-­associated transmitted infections (hepatitis A, B, and C, HIV), alloimmunization, annual
blood transfusion requirements, and transfusion reactions is essential.

Iron Overload Monitoring

Excessive iron stores from transfusion cause many of the complications of β-­thalassemia major. Accurate assessment of excessive
iron stores is essential to optimal therapy. Serial serum ferritin
levels provide a useful screening technique in assessing iron balance trends, but results may not accurately predict quantitative iron
stores. Undertreatment or overtreatment of presumed excessive
iron stores can occur in managing a patient based on serum ferritin
alone. Quantitative measurements of liver iron and cardiac iron by
MRI are standard noninvasive methods to assess tissue iron overload; estimation of pancreatic and gonadal iron is being studied.
This technology, along with access to multiple chelators, enables
targeted chelation therapy for patients with organ-­specific hemosiderosis before the onset of overt organ failure. Integration of these
imaging technologies with chelation therapy may prevent heart failure, diabetes, and other organ dysfunction.

Iron-­chelation therapy should start as soon as the patient becomes
significantly iron-­overloaded. In general, this occurs after 1 year of
transfusion therapy and correlates with the serum ferritin >1,000 ng/
mL and/or a liver iron concentration of >5,000 μg/g dry weight. Iron
chelation is not currently labeled for use in children <2 years.
There are three available iron chelators (deferoxamine, deferasirox,
and deferiprone); each varies in its route of administration, pharmacokinetics, adverse events, and efficacy (Table 511.8). Combination chelation therapy may be required for high iron burden. The overall goal
is to prevent hemosiderosis-­induced tissue injury and avoid chelation
toxicity. This requires close monitoring of the patients. In general, chelation toxicity increases as iron stores decrease.
Deferoxamine (Desferal) is the most studied iron chelator; it has
an excellent safety and efficacy profile. It requires subcutaneous or IV
administration because of its poor oral bioavailability and short half-­
life of <30 minutes, necessitating administration as a continuous infusion over at least 8 hours daily, 5-­7 days/week. Deferoxamine is initially
started at 25 mg/kg and can be increased to 60 mg/kg in heavily iron-­
overloaded patients. The major problem with deferoxamine is poor
adherence because of the difficult, time-­consuming route of administration. Adverse side effects include local skin reactions, ototoxicity,
retinal changes, and bone dysplasia with truncal shortening. Maintaining the therapeutic index (deferoxamine dose in mg/kg divided by the
serum ferritin) below 0.025 limits these adverse effects.
The oral iron chelator deferasirox is commercially available in
the United States. Of patients treated with deferoxamine, 70% have
switched to deferasirox because it is orally available. Deferasirox
has a half-­life of >16 hours and requires once-­daily administration.
The drug was initially available as a dispersible tablet that is dissolved in water or juice. Subsequently, a film coated tablet that is
swallowed whole and a granule form that is sprinkled on soft food
and ingested became available. Dosing is different for the different
deferasirox formulations. For the dispersible tablet form, the initial
dose typically is 20 mg/kg/day and can be escalated to as high as
40 mg/kg/day based on the iron burden. The dosing for the film-­
coated tablet and granule forms is 30% lower than the dispersible
tablet, with a starting dose of 14 mg/kg/day, which can be escalated
to a maximum of 28 mg/kg/day. The most common side effects are
GI symptoms, which may be lessened with the film-­coated tablet
and granule formulations because they do not contain lactose and
sodium laureate, which are found in the dispersible tablet and are
thought to be responsible for some of the GI symptoms. The most
serious side effect of deferasirox is potential kidney damage. Up
to 30% of patients have transient increases in creatinine that may
require temporary modifications of dosing. This toxicity may occur
more commonly in the setting of dehydration. Proteinuria also can
develop and, less commonly, a renal Fanconi syndrome may occur.
Long-­term studies in thousands of patients have not demonstrated
progressive renal dysfunction, but isolated cases of renal failure
in patients have occurred. In addition, hepatic transaminitis may
occur, with an increase to >5 times the upper limit of normal in
approximately 8% of patients. All patients require monthly chemistry panels and ongoing monitoring for proteinuria.
Deferiprone, an oral iron chelator, is approved in the United States
for use in individuals with transfusional iron overload 3 years and
older. Deferiprone has a half-­life of approximately 3 hours and requires
dosing 3 times daily; a new longer-­acting tablet form is available that is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2984 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Gene therapy

• Gene addition (beti cel: conditionally approved by the
European Medicines Agency)
• Gene editing

Hematopoietic stem-cell
transplantation

• Older patients
• Haploidentical donor

Curative therapies

Investigational

Hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation

•Young patients
•Available human leukocyte antigen-matched donor

Hemoglobin-inducing agents

• Luspatercept
• Investigational

Blood transfusion

• Regular (usually every 2–4 weeks)
• Targeting pre-transfusion hemoglobin concentrations:
95–105 g/L

Transfusion-dependent
thalassemia

• Deferoxamine, deferiprone, and deferasirox
(monotherapy or combination treatment daily)
• Timely initiation, individualize regimen, and toxicity
monitoring
• Target close to normal range of iron load

Conservative treatment

Treat iron overload
with iron chelation

Distinction of
transfusion-dependent
thalassemia versus
non-transfusiondependent
thalassemia is
based on phenotype,
genotype, or available
resources

Non-transfusion-dependent
thalassemia

• Deferoxamine and deferasirox approved; deferiprone,
off-label data available
• To start when liver iron concentration >5 mg/g dry
weight tissue or ferritin >800 µ/L

Thromboembolic events

Organ dysfunction

• Renal complications
• Cardiac (arrhythmias; insufficiency)
• Pulmonary hypertension

Endocrinopathies

• Growth failure, gonadal dysfunction
• Osteoporosis, glucose homeostasis disorders
• Hypoparathyroidism, hypothyroidism, hypoadrenalism

Other

• Infections
• Cancer
• Alloimmunization

Treat disease-related
and treatment-related
complications

Non-transfusion-dependent
thalassemia

Thalassemia

Transfusion-dependent
thalassemia

Treat anemia

Prevention or timely
detection of
complications

• Monitoring (growth, iron overload with ferritin/MRI, organ dysfunction, cancer surveillance)
• Healthy lifestyle, supplements

Splenectomy

Reserved mainly for signs of hypersplenism or symptomatic organomegaly

Hemoglobin-inducing
agents

• Investigational

Blood transfusion

• None or sporadic (0–6 sessions per year)
• Depends on severity of the anemia
• Often required during certain conditions (pregnancy,
infections, surgical procedures)

Treat anemia

Fig. 511.8 Algorithm for the therapeutic management of thalassemia. (From Kattamis A, Kwiatkowski JL, Aydinok Y. Thalassemia. Lancet.
2022;399:2310–2322; Fig. 3.)

dosed twice daily. The starting dose is 75 mg/kg/day and can be escalated to 99 mg/kg/day based on the degree of iron overload. Deferiprone, a small molecule, effectively enters cardiac tissue and may be
more effective than other chelators in reducing cardiac hemosiderosis.
The most serious side effect of deferiprone is transient agranulocytosis,
which occurs in 1-2% of patients and usually in the first year of treatment. It has been associated with rare deaths where patients were not
adequately monitored. The use of deferiprone requires frequent CBC
monitoring, typically weekly for at least the first 6 months of therapy.
Most importantly, the drug should be held and the neutrophil count
checked immediately with all febrile illnesses.

As thalassemia patients live longer, the iron chelation goals have
changed. Aggressive treatment with combination chelation therapy
is often used in heavily iron-­overloaded patients to prevent or reverse
organ dysfunction. Deferoxamine, in combination with deferiprone, is
routinely used in patients with increased cardiac iron. Combination
therapy of deferoxamine and deferasirox or with deferasirox and deferiprone may also be efficacious in patients with severe iron overload.

Luspatercept

Luspatercept is a recombinant fusion protein that binds TGFβ family ligands and thus blocks a signaling pathway involved in ineffective

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies

2985

Table 511.8  Properties of Iron Chelators
DEFEROXAMINE

DEFERASIROX

DEFERIPRONE

Prototype trade name

Desferal

Exjade; Jadenu

Ferriprox

Route of administration

Subcutaneous; intravenous

Oral dispersible tablet; film-­coated tablet;
granules

Oral solution; oral tablet (3 times
per day); oral tablet (twice per
day)

Usual dose

Standard, 25–40 mg/kg per day
over 8–12 h; low cardiac T2* or
heart failure, 50–60 mg/kg per
day over 12–24 h

Oral dispersible tablet, 20–40 mg/kg per
day once daily; film-­coated tablet and
granules, 14–28 mg/kg per day once daily

75–100 mg/kg per day divided
into 3 doses (oral solution or oral
tablet, 3 times per day); 75–100
mg/kg per day divided into 2
doses (oral tablet, twice per day)

Excretion

Urinary (60%), defecation (40%)

Defecation (∼90%)

Urinary (∼75–90%)

Ability to remove liver iron

High

High

Moderate*

Ability to remove cardiac
iron

Moderate†

Moderate‡

High

Adverse events

Local reactions, auditory,
ophthalmologic, allergic reactions, bone defects, Yersinia
or Klebsiella infections; high
doses: pulmonary, neurologic,
renal failure

Gastrointestinal, rash, renal impairment
(increase in creatinine, proteinuria,
proximal renal tubular dysfunction, renal
insufficiency), elevated hepatic enzymes,
gastrointestinal bleeding or ulcers,
hepatic failure, auditory, ophthalmologic

Gastrointestinal, elevated
hepatic enzymes, arthropathy,
neutropenia or agranulocytosis

EU licensure

Licensed

Patients age 6 years and older with
transfusion-­dependent thalassemia;
patients age 10 years and older with
non-­transfusion-­dependent thalassemia
(as a first-­line treatment); patients age
2 years and older with transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia (as a second-­line
treatment)

Patients with thalassemia major
when current chelation therapy
is contraindicated or inadequate

USA licensure

Licensed

Patients age 2 years and older with
transfusion-­dependent thalassemia;
patients age 10 years and older with
­non­transfusion-­dependent thalassemia

Patients age 8 years and older
with transfusional iron overload
and thalassemia syndromes

*Reports of insufficient liver iron removal in some patients at doses of 75 mg/kg per day, but higher dosages, especially for patients with high transfusional iron burden, might be
more effective.
†With continuous infusion.
‡Limited data show faster cardiac iron removal with modest hepatic iron loading, but this removal might be less effective in patients with more severe hepatic siderosis.
From Kattamis A, Kwiatkowski JL, Aydinok Y. Thalassemia. Lancet 2022;399:2310–2322; Table 1.

erythropoiesis and results in improved erythroid maturation. The drug is
given by subcutaneous injection every 3 weeks at a starting dose of 1 mg/
kg/dose, which can be escalated to 1.25 mg/kg/dose if no response after 6
weeks of treatment. In patients with transfusion-­dependent β-­thalassemia,
use of luspatercept was associated with a reduction in RBC requirements
in about 70% of treated patients. Luspatercept is approved by the FDA for
use in adults with transfusion-­dependent β-­thalassemia. Adverse effects
include bone pain, arthralgia, dizziness, hypertension, and hyperuricemia.
The drug also is being studied in nontransfusion dependent thalassemia,
where a 1 to 1.5 g/dL rise in hemoglobin has been seen.

Hydroxyurea

Hydroxyurea, a DNA antimetabolite, increases HbF production. It has
been most successfully used in sickle cell disease and in some patients
with β-­thalassemia intermedia. Studies in β-­thalassemia major are limited. In many parts of the world, hydroxyurea therapy is used in β-­
thalassemia intermedia patients. Even though increases in HbF levels
are observed, they do not predictively correlate with increase in total
Hb in these patients. In general, there appears to be a mean increase in
Hb of 1 g/dL (range: 0.1-­2.5 g/dL). Hydroxyurea therapy in thalassemia
intermedia is associated with a reduced risk of leg ulcers, pulmonary
hypertension, and extramedullary hematopoiesis. The initial starting
dose for thalassemia intermedia is 10 mg/kg and may be escalated
to 20 mg/kg/day. Patients with β-­thalassemia are at increased risk of
developing cytopenias with hydroxyurea use, which may prevent dose
escalation. Close monitoring of the CBC with differential is required.

Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation and
Gene Therapy

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has cured >3,000 patients who
had β-­thalassemia major. In low-­risk HLA-­matched sibling patients,
there is at least a 90% survival and an 80% event-­free survival. In general,
myeloablative conditioning regimens have been used to prevent graft
rejection and thalassemia recurrence. Most success has been in children <14 years old without excessive iron stores and hepatomegaly who
undergo sibling HLA-­matched allogeneic transplantation. All children
who have an HLA-­matched sibling should be offered the option of bone
marrow transplantation. Outcomes of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation with a matched unrelated donor using molecular techniques
for HLA typing have significantly improved, approaching outcomes with
matched sibling donors, but with an increased risk of graft versus host
disease. Alternative transplantation regimens for patients without appropriate donors are experimental and have variable success.
Gene therapy using gene addition or gene editing approaches are
FDA approved for transfusion-dependent patients with β-thalassemia.
Results with gene addition using lentiviral vectors containing a
functional β-­
globin gene have been promising. Betibeglogene
autotemcel is a rare gene-based, FDA- approved therapy for adults
and pediatric patients (≥4 years) with transfusion dependent
β-thalassemia. This one-time therapy transduces harvested autologous CD34+ cells with a replicant incompetent vector containing
a modified β-globin gene. Approximately 90% of treated patients
achieve transfusion independence.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2986 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
A second approved approach to gene therapy involves gene editing to
increase hemoglobin F levels. The first patient treated with transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia treated with a CRISPR-­Cas9 gene editing
approach was able to discontinue RBC transfusions while maintaining a
normal hemoglobin level, mostly consisting of HbF. This gene approach
is indicated for transfusion-dependent ­β-thalassemia patients ≥12 years
of age.

Table 511.9  Risk Factors of Thalassemia Comorbidities
CARDIOVASCULAR
Left ventricle dysfunction
Pulmonary hypertension

Chronic hypoxia; splenectomy
hypercoagulability; advanced
age; non­transfusion-­dependent
thalassemia

Arrhythmia

Anemia; cardiac iron overload;
thyroid disturbances

Thromboembolic events

Splenectomy; hypercoagulability;
iron-­induced endothelial damage

Splenectomy

Splenectomy may be required in thalassemia patients who develop
hypersplenism. These patients have a falling steady-­state Hb level and/
or a rising transfusion requirement. However, splenectomy is less frequently used as a therapeutic option; serious adverse effects of splenectomy are increasingly recognized beyond infection risk. In thalassemia
intermedia, splenectomized patients have a marked increased risk of
venous thrombosis, pulmonary hypertension, leg ulcers, and silent
cerebral infarction compared to nonsplenectomized patients. All
patients should be fully immunized against encapsulated bacteria and
receive appropriate instructions regarding fever management. Prophylactic penicillin should be administered after splenectomy to prevent
sepsis, and families need to be educated on the risk of fever and sepsis.

HEPATOBILIARY
Viral hepatitis

Red cell transfusions

Fibrosis or cirrhosis

Liver iron overload

Gallstones

Chronic hemolysis

ENDOCRINOPATHIES
Growth retardation; delayed
puberty; hypogonadism

Preventive Monitoring of Thalassemia Patients
See Table 511.9.

Cardiac Disease

Cardiac disease is the major cause of death in thalassemia. Serial echocardiograms should be monitored to evaluate cardiac function and
pulmonary artery pressure. Pulmonary hypertension frequently occurs
in non­transfusion dependent thalassemia patients and may be an indication for transfusion therapy. After approximately 8 years of chronic
transfusion therapy, cardiac hemosiderosis may occur; consequently,
cardiac T2* MRI imaging studies are recommended, typically beginning
at 10 years of age. Patients with cardiac hemosiderosis and decreasing
cardiac ejection fraction require intensive combination chelation therapy. Periodic electrocardiogram studies also are obtained after age 10
years because of the risk of arrhythmia from cardiac iron overload.

Endocrine Disease

Endocrine function progressively declines with age secondary to hemosiderosis and nutritional deficiencies. Iron deposition in the pituitary
and endocrine organs can result in multiple endocrinopathies, including
hypothyroidism, growth hormone deficiency, delayed puberty, hypoparathyroidism, diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis, and adrenal insufficiency.
Monitoring for endocrine dysfunction starts early, about 5 years of age, or
after at least 3 years of chronic transfusions. All children require monitoring
of their height, weight, pubertal assessment, and sitting height semiannually. Bone density scans should be obtained starting in the second decade of
life given the high rate of osteopenia. Nutritional assessments are required.
Most patients need vitamin D, vitamin C, and zinc replacement. Fertility is
a growing concern among patients and should be assessed routinely.

Psychosocial Support

Thalassemia imposes major disruption in the family unit and significant obstacles to normal development. Culturally sensitive anticipatory
counseling is necessary, and the early use of child life services decreases
psychologic trauma of therapy. Early social service consultation to
address financial and social issues is mandatory.

OTHER β-­THALASSEMIA SYNDROMES
Non–Transfusion-­Dependent Thalassemia: β-­
Thalassemia Intermedia

Non–transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia (thalassemia intermedia) includes a spectrum of patients who initially are not chronically transfused in infancy but may be sporadically transfused
throughout their lifetime. The major determining characteristic
of these patients is less α-­β–globin chain imbalance than observed
in thalassemia major. Sometimes, genetic modifiers alter the primary pathogenic variant severity and improve the globin-­chain

Anemia; cardiac iron overload

Pituitary iron deposition (thyroid
hormone, hypothalamus-­pituitary-­
gonadal axis, growth hormone-­
insulin like growth factor disturbances); nutrition; anemia

Glucose intolerance; diabetes

Liver iron overload; pancreatic iron
deposition; family predisposition

Thyroid dysfunction

Anemia; thyroid iron deposition;
hypopituitarism

Adrenal insufficiency

Anemia; adrenal iron deposition;
hypopituitarism

Bone disease

Ineffective erythropoiesis, iron
predisposition and chelator toxicity; hypogonadism; hypoparathyroidism

NEOPLASIA
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Thyroid cancer; renal cancer;
gastrointestinal cancer;
breast cancer; hematologic
malignancies
OTHER
Renal dysfunction; tubular
dysfunction; nephrolithiasis

Chronic hepatitis B or hepatitis C
virus infections; liver iron overload
Iron toxicity; chronic anemia;
advanced age

Anemia; renal iron deposition; and
chelator (especially deferasirox)
toxicity

Extramedullary hematopoiesis

Ineffective erythropoiesis

Leg ulcers

Anemia; hypercoagulability

Auditory disturbances

Chelator toxicity

Ophthalmologic disturbances

Chelator toxicity

Infectious complications

Splenic dysfunction; transfusion-­
related infections; iron overload;
use of iron chelation therapy
(especially deferoxamine)

Spleen (splenomegaly,
hypersplenism)

Ineffective erythropoiesis;
extramedullary hematopoiesis

From Kattamis A, Kwiatkowski JL, Aydinok Y. Thalassemia. Lancet 2022;399:2310–2322.
Table 2.

imbalance. Co-­
inheritance of α-­
thalassemia trait or polymorphisms of globin promoters such as BCL11A may lessen disease
severity and result in a nontransfusion dependent thalassemia. HbE
β-­thalassemia is a common cause of both transfusion-­dependent
and non–transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia. These secondary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
genetic modifiers play a role in altering the severity of this disorder. Occasionally, patients with a single β-­thalassemia pathogenic
variant or autosomal dominant β-­thalassemia trait have clinical
features of thalassemia intermedia, or non–transfusion-­dependent
thalassemia. Genetic studies of these patients often uncover co-­
inheritance of genetic modifiers that worsens the condition, such as
α-­gene triplication or an unstable β-­globin variant.
Individuals with thalassemia intermedia have significant ineffective erythropoiesis that leads to microcytic anemia with hemoglobin of approximately 7 g/dL (range: 6-­10 g/dL). These patients
have some of the complications characterized in untransfused
thalassemia major patients, but the severity varies depending on
the degree of ineffective erythropoiesis. They can develop medullary hyperplasia, hepatosplenomegaly, hematopoietic pseudotumors, pulmonary hypertension, leg ulcers, thrombotic events, and
growth failure. Many patients develop hemosiderosis secondary to
increased GI absorption of iron requiring chelation. Extramedullary hematopoiesis can occur in the vertebral canal, compressing
the spinal cord and causing neurologic symptoms; the latter is a
medical emergency requiring immediate local radiation therapy to
halt erythropoiesis. Transfusions are indicated in thalassemia intermedia patients with significant clinical morbidity.
Thalassemia trait is often misdiagnosed as iron deficiency in children because the two diagnoses produce similar hematologic abnormalities on CBC. However, iron deficiency is much more prevalent. A
short course of iron and reevaluation is all that is required to identify children who will need further evaluation. Children who have β-­
thalassemia trait have a persistently normal RBC distribution width
and low mean corpuscular volume (MCV), whereas patients with
iron deficiency develop an elevated red cell distribution width (RDW)
with treatment. On Hb analysis, patients with β-­thalassemia trait have
elevated levels of HbA2 and variably increased HbF. There are “silent”
forms of β-­thalassemia trait, and if the family history is suggestive, further studies may be indicated.

α-­THALASSEMIA SYNDROMES

The same evolutionary pressures that produced β-­thalassemia and
sickle cell disease produced α-­thalassemia. Infants are identified in
the newborn period by the increased production of hemoglobin Bart’s
(γ4) during fetal life and its presence at birth. The α-­thalassemia syndromes occur most frequently in Southeast Asia. Deletions are most
common in α-­thalassemia. In addition to deletional pathogenic variants, there are nondeletional α-­globin gene pathogenic variants, the
most common being Constant Spring (αCSα); these variants cause a
more severe anemia and clinical course than the deletional variants.
Normally, there are four α-­globin genes. The different phenotypes in α-­
thalassemia largely result from whether one (α+-­thalassemia) or both
(α0-­thalassemia) α-­globin genes are deleted in each of the two loci.
The deletion of one α-­globin gene (silent carrier) is not identifiable
hematologically. Specifically, no alterations are noted in the MCV and
mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH). Persons with this deletion are
usually diagnosed after the birth of a child with a two-­gene deletion or
HbH (β4), but some newborn screening programs report even low concentrations of Hb Bart’s. During the newborn period, <3% Hb Bart’s is
observed. The deletion of one α-­globin gene is common in Black persons.
The deletion of two α-­globin genes results in α-­thalassemia trait. The
α-­globin alleles can be lost in a trans (−α/−α) or cis (α,α/-­SEA) configuration. The trans or cis pathogenic variants can combine with other
pathogenic variants or deletions and lead to HbH or α-­thalassemia
major. In persons from Africa or of African descent, the most common
α-­globin deletions are in the trans configuration, whereas in persons
from or descended from Asia or the Mediterranean region, cis deletions are most common.
α-­Thalassemia trait (two missing α-­globin genes) manifests as a
microcytic anemia that can be mistaken for iron-­deficiency anemia

2987

(see Fig. 511.5F). The Hb analysis is normal, except during the newborn period, when Hb Bart’s is typically <8% but >3%. Children with
a deletion of two α-­globin genes are commonly mistaken to have
iron deficiency, given the presence of both low MCV and MCH. The
simplest approach to distinguish between iron deficiency and α-­
thalassemia trait is with a good dietary history. Children with iron-­
deficiency anemia often have a diet that is low in iron and drink
a significant amount of cow’s milk. Alternatively, a brief course of
iron supplementation along with monitoring of erythrocyte parameters might confirm the diagnosis of iron deficiency. If both parents
of a child diagnosed with α-­thalassemia trait are carriers in the cis
conformation, they are at risk for a future hydrops fetalis pregnancy.
Thus family screening and genetic counseling are indicated.
The deletion of three α-­globin genes leads to the diagnosis of HbH
disease. A more severe form of HbH disease may be caused by a nondeletional α-­globin pathogenic variant in combination with two gene
deletions. HbH Constant Spring (−α/α,αCS) is the most common type
of nondeletional HbH disease.
In California, where a large population of persons of Asian descent
resides, approximately 1:10,000 of all newborns have HbH disease. The
simplest manner of diagnosing HbH disease is during the newborn
period, when excess in γ-­tetramers are present and Hb Bart’s is commonly >25%. Obtaining supporting evidence from the parents is helpful. Later in childhood, there is an excess of β-­globin chain tetramers
that results in HbH. A definitive diagnosis of HbH disease requires
DNA analysis. Brilliant cresyl blue can stain HbH, but it is rarely used
for diagnosis. Patients with HbH disease have a marked microcytosis, anemia, mild splenomegaly, and, occasionally, scleral icterus or
cholelithiasis. Chronic transfusion is not usually required for therapy
because the Hb range is 7-­11 g/dL, with MCV 51-­73 fL, but intermittent transfusions for worsening anemia, particularly in the setting of
acute infection, may be needed. Individuals with nondeletional HbH
disease are more likely to require transfusions than individuals with
deletional HbH disease.
The deletion of all four α-­globin gene alleles causes profound anemia
during fetal life, resulting in hydrops fetalis; the ζ-­globin gene must be
present for fetal survival. There are no normal hemoglobins present at
birth (primarily Hb Bart’s, with Hb Gower-­1, Gower-­2, and Portland).
Intrauterine transfusions may rescue the fetus, but congenital abnormalities and neurodevelopmental delay often result. Infants with severe
α-­thalassemia will have lifelong transfusion dependence, and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is the only cure.
Treatment of HbH disease requires ongoing monitoring of growth
and organ dysfunction. Dietary supplement with folate and multivitamins without iron is indicated. Older patients may develop decreased
bone density with calcium and vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D
supplementation is indicated if the level is low, and adequate dietary
calcium intake should be encouraged to promote bone health. Iron
supplementation should be avoided as patients are at risk of developing iron overload. Intermittent transfusion requirements during
intercurrent infection may occur, particularly in nondeletional HbH.
Splenectomy is occasionally indicated, and because of the high risk of
postsplenectomy thrombosis, aspirin or other anticoagulant therapy
after splenectomy should be considered. Hemosiderosis, secondary
to GI iron absorption or transfusion exposure, may develop in older
patients and require chelation therapy. Because HbH is an unstable
hemoglobin sensitive to oxidative injury, oxidative medications should
be avoided. At-­risk couples for hydrops fetalis should be identified and
offered molecular diagnosis on fetal tissue obtained early in pregnancy.
Later in pregnancy, intrauterine transfusion can improve fetal survival,
but chronic transfusion therapy or bone marrow transplantation for
survivors will be required.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2988 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
in the liver and/or spleen. This is more pronounced in reticulocytes,
which require higher levels of ATP.

Chapter 512

Enzymatic Defects

ETIOLOGY

512.1 Pyruvate Kinase Deficiency
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
Congenital nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia occurs in persons
homozygous or compound heterozygous for autosomal recessive genes
that cause either a marked reduction in red blood cell (RBC) pyruvate
kinase (PK) or production of an abnormal enzyme with decreased
catalytic activity resulting in impaired conversion of phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate. Generation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
within RBCs at this step is impaired, and low levels of ATP, pyruvate,
and the oxidized form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+)
are found (Fig. 512.1). The concentration of 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate is
increased; this isomer is beneficial in facilitating oxygen release from
hemoglobin but detrimental in inhibiting hexokinase and enzymes of
the hexose monophosphate shunt. This decrease of hemoglobin oxygen affinity leads to a rightward shift of the hemoglobin-­oxygen dissociation curve and therefore improved oxygen delivery manifesting
as tolerance of anemia more than expected for the degree of severity.
In addition, an unexplained decrease occurs in the sum of the adenine (ATP, adenosine diphosphate, and adenosine monophosphate)
and pyridine (NAD+ and reduced form of NAD) nucleotides, further
impairing glycolysis. Because of decreased ATP, RBCs cannot maintain their potassium and water content; the cells become rigid, and
their life span is considerably reduced with precipitous destruction

There are two mammalian PK genes, but only the PKLR gene is
expressed in RBCs. More than 300 pathogenic variants are reported
in this structural gene, which codes for a 574–amino acid protein that
forms a functional tetramer. There is some correlation of the type, location, and amino acid substitution with disease severity. The majority of
patients have at least one missense pathogenic variant. Most affected
patients are compound heterozygotes for two different PK gene defects.
The many possible combinations likely account for the variability in
clinical severity. The pathogenic variants 1456 C to T and 1529 G to
A are the most common pathogenic variants in the White population.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND LABORATORY
FINDINGS

The clinical manifestations of PK deficiency vary from severe neonatal hemolytic anemia to mild, well-­compensated hemolysis first noted
in adulthood (Table 512.1). Perinatal complications include premature birth, prenatal anemia or fetal hydrops requiring transfusions,
and preterm labor. Severe hyperbilirubinemia, anemia, and, in rare
cases, hepatic failure may occur in the neonatal period, and kernicterus has been reported. The hemolysis in older children and adults
varies in severity, with hemoglobin values ranging from 2-­14 g/dL in
various reports and associated pallor, jaundice, scleral icterus, splenomegaly, bone deformities due to extramedullary hematopoiesis, and
hyperpigmentation. Reticulocyte counts are often extremely elevated,
reflecting the severe ongoing hemolysis. Associated serum chemistries
consistent with nonimmune hemolytic anemia are present, including
an elevated indirect bilirubin, decreased haptoglobin, increased lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH), negative direct antiglobulin test (DAT), and

Cysteine
Glutamic acid

Glucose
ATP
Hexokinase
ADP
Glucose 6-P

Anaerobic
glycolysis

-glutamylcysteine
synthetase

NADP

Glucosephosphate isomerase

Glucose-6-P dehydrogenase
Glutathione
6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase reductase

NADPH

Fructose-6-P
ATP
Phosphofructokinase
ADP

Glycine
Glutathione
synthetase

Reduced glutathione
(Anti-oxidant)

H2O2
Glutathione
peroxidase

Oxidized glutathione

H2O

Hexose Monophosphate Shunt

Fructose-1,6-diP
Aldolase

Dihydroxyacetone-P

Triosephosphate
isomerase

Diphosphoglycerate mutase

2,3-Diphosphoglycerate

Glyceraldehyde-3-P
NAD
Glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase
NADP

1,3-Diphosphoglycerate
ADP
Phosphoglycerate kinase
[Energy] ATP

Diphosphoglycerate phosphatase

1,3-Phosphoglycerate
Phosphoglycerate mutase

2-Phosphoglycerate
Enolase

2-Phosphoenolpyruvate
ADP

Pyruvate kinase

[Energy] ATP
Pyruvate
NADH

Lactate dehydrogenase

NAD
Lactate

Fig. 512.1 Red blood cell metabolism: glycolysis and hexose monophosphate pathway. The enzyme deficiencies clearly associated with hemolysis are shown in bold. ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; ADP, adenosine diphosphate; NADP, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NADPH,
reduced form of NADP.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 512 u Enzymatic Defects

2989

Table 512.1  	 Hexokinase Variants Associated with Hemolytic Anemia
CLINICAL FEATURES
INHERITANCE

ANEMIA

PROPERTIES OF RBC HEXOKINASE
OTHER

ACTIVITY

KINETIC
ABNORMALITIES

13-­24*

0

—

—

15-­20*

+

Normal

Abnormal

16*

0

—

Abnormal

20*

0

Normal

Normal

Congenital malformations

STABILITY

MOBILITY

—

+

Recessive

++

Recessive

++

Recessive

+++

Recessive

+

Recessive

++

Low platelet and fibroblast
HK activity

20*

0

Low

Normal

Recessive

++

Low platelet HK activity

25*

+

Normal

Abnormal

Recessive

+

25*

0

Low

Normal

Dominant

+

Spherocytes, ovalocytes

30*

0

Low

Normal

Developmental and
cognitive delays

45†

+

Normal

Normal

50*

0

Normal

Normal

33*

+

—

—

Hydrops fetalis

17

Recessive

+

Recessive

+

—

+

Recessive

+

40-­53*

+

Low

Normal

—

+

50*

+

—

—

45-­91†

+

Normal

Abnormal

75*

+

Normal

Abnormal

Congenital malformations

53
Dominant

+

Dominant

++

Recessive

±

WBC HK activity low

77†

*Maximal enzyme activity (Vmax) compared to reticulocytosis controls.
†Maximal enzyme activity (V
max) compared to normal red cells.

HK, Hexokinase; RBC, red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.
From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015: 583; Table 17.2.

negative indirect antiglobulin test. A severe form of the disease has a
relatively high incidence among the Amish of the Midwestern United
States (homozygous splicing pathogenic variant R479H). PK deficiency
may possibly provide protection against falciparum malaria. There are
long-­term effects of chronic hemolysis, including folate deficiency, skin
ulcers, gallstones, increased risk of bone fractures, and risk of transient
bone marrow aplasia associated with certain viral infections.
Polychromatophilia and mild macrocytosis reflect the elevated
reticulocyte count. Spherocytes are uncommon, but a few spiculated
pyknocytes may be found. Diagnosis relies on demonstration of a
marked reduction of RBC PK activity or an increase in the Michaelis-­
Menten dissociation constant (Km) for its substrate, phosphoenolpyruvate (high Km variant). Other RBC enzyme activity is normal or
elevated, reflecting the reticulocytosis. No abnormalities of hemoglobin are noted. The white blood cells (WBCs) and platelets have normal
PK activity and must be rigorously excluded from the RBC hemolysates used to measure PK activity. Fructose 1,6-­disphosphate (FDP)
must also be removed because it is an allosteric activator of PK. Heterozygous carriers usually have moderately reduced levels of PK activity.
Molecular testing provides additional evidence for the disease. However, due to genotype-­phenotype variability with unclear pathogenicity
regarding variants, it is recommended to perform initial biochemical
testing.

TREATMENT

Intrauterine RBC transfusions are performed in the setting of severe
anemia associated with fetal hydrops. Phototherapy and exchange transfusions may be indicated for hyperbilirubinemia in newborns. Transfusions of packed RBCs are necessary for severe anemia or for aplastic
crises. If the anemia is consistently severe and frequent transfusions

are required, iron chelation may be necessary. Splenectomy should be
considered after the child is 5-­6 years of age to decrease the need for
transfusions and minimize iron overload. Although not curative, splenectomy may be followed by higher Hb levels and by strikingly high
(30–60%) reticulocyte counts. Death resulting from overwhelming
pneumococcal sepsis has followed splenectomy; thus immunization
with vaccines for encapsulated organisms should be given before splenectomy and prophylactic penicillin administered after the procedure.
Splenectomy has also been associated with thrombosis and pulmonary
hypertension. There is currently no standard curative therapy, although
the role of gene therapy and hematopoietic cell transplant are actively
being investigated. An oral allosteric PK activator (mitapivat) is being
studied in clinical trials involving adults and is under review by the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The natural history of the disease is limited and is currently being studied through an international
registry.

512.2 Other Glycolytic Enzyme Deficiencies
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
Chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemias of varying severity have
been associated with deficiencies of other enzymes in the glycolytic pathway, including hexokinase, glucose phosphate isomerase,
and aldolase, which are inherited as autosomal recessive disorders.
Phosphofructokinase deficiency, which occurs primarily in Ashkenazi Jews in the United States, results in hemolysis associated
with a myopathy classified as glycogen storage disease type VII
(see Chapter 107.1). Clinically, hemolytic anemia is complicated by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2990 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
muscle weakness, exercise intolerance, cramps, and myoglobinuria.
Erythrocyte production is increased to compensate for hemolysis.
Enzyme assays for phosphofructokinase yield low values for RBCs
and muscle.
Triose phosphate isomerase deficiency is an autosomal recessive
disorder affecting many systems. Affected patients have hemolytic anemia, cardiac abnormalities, and lower motor neuron and pyramidal
tract impairment, with or without evidence of cerebral impairment.
They usually die in early childhood. The gene for triose phosphate
isomerase has been cloned and sequenced and is located on chromosome 12.
Phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) is the first ATP-­generating step
in glycolysis. At least 23 kindreds with PGK deficiency have been
described. PGK is the only glycolytic enzyme inherited on the X
chromosome. PGK is important in erythrocytes, the central nervous system (CNS), and skeletal muscle. The phenotype is quite
variable and may affect one isolated tissue or a combination of all
three. Affected males may present with dysfunction of the CNS
with seizures, intellectual disability, and nonspherocytic hemolytic
anemia; hemolytic anemia without CNS involvement; or myopathy,
myoglobinuria, and progressive weakness. Some patients present
with parkinsonism. Female heterozygotes have been shown to have
partial symptoms depending on their degree of enzymatic activity, including signs of hemolysis. The gene for PGK is particularly
large, spanning 23 kb, and various genetic abnormalities, including nucleotide substitutions, gene deletions, missense, and splicing
pathogenic variants, result in PGK deficiency.

DEFICIENCIES OF ENZYMES OF HEXOSE
MONOPHOSPHATE PATHWAY

The most important function of the hexose monophosphate pathway is to maintain glutathione in its reduced state (GSH) as protection against the oxidation of RBCs (see Fig. 512.1). Approximately
10% of the glucose taken up by RBCs passes through this pathway
to provide the reduced form of NAD phosphate (NADPH) necessary for the conversion of oxidized glutathione to GSH. Maintenance of GSH is essential for the physiologic inactivation of oxidant
compounds, such as hydrogen peroxide, that are generated within
RBCs. If glutathione, or any compound or enzyme necessary for
maintaining it in the reduced state, is decreased, the SH groups of
the RBC membrane are oxidized, and the Hb becomes denatured
and may precipitate into RBC inclusions called Heinz bodies. Once
Heinz bodies have formed, an acute hemolytic process results from
damage to the RBC membrane by the precipitated Hb, the oxidant
agent, and the action of the spleen. The damaged RBCs then are
rapidly removed from the circulation.

512.3 Glucose-­6-­Phosphate Dehydrogenase
Deficiency and Related Deficiencies
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
Glucose-­
6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, the most
frequent disease involving enzymes of the hexose monophosphate
pathway, is responsible for two clinical syndromes: episodic acute
hemolytic anemia and chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. The
most common manifestations are neonatal jaundice and episodic acute
hemolytic anemia, which is induced by infections, certain drugs, and,
rarely, fava beans. This X-­linked deficiency affects >400 million people
worldwide, representing an overall 4.9% global prevalence. The global
distribution of this disorder parallels that of malaria, representing an
example of “balanced polymorphism,” in which there is an evolutionary advantage of resistance to falciparum malaria in heterozygous
females that outweighs the small negative effect of affected hemizygous
males.

Fig. 512.2 Most common pathogenic variants along coding sequence

of G6PD gene. Exons are shown as open numbered boxes. Open circles
are pathogenic variants causing classes II and III variants. Filled circles
represent sporadic pathogenic variants giving rise to severe variants
(class I). Open ellipses are pathogenic variants causing class IV variants.
X is a nonsense pathogenic variant; f, a splice site pathogenic variant;
filled squares, small deletions. 202A and 968C are the two sites of base
substitution in G6PD-­A. (From Cappellini MD, Fiorelli G. Glucose-­6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Lancet. 2008;371:64–74.)

The deficiency is caused by inheritance of any of a large number
of abnormal alleles of the gene responsible for the synthesis of the
G6PD protein. Over 200 pathogenic variants have been described
in the gene responsible for the synthesis of the G6PD protein. Many
of these pathogenic variants are missense point pathogenic variants
leading to amino acid substitutions and destabilization of the G6PD
enzyme. ­Figure 512.2 shows some of the pathogenic variants that
cause episodic versus chronic hemolysis. Milder disease is associated with pathogenic variants near the amino terminus of the G6PD
molecule, and chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia is associated with pathogenic variants clustered near the carboxyl terminus
near the G6P and NADP-­binding sites. The normal enzyme found
in most populations is designated G6PD B+. A normal variant, designated G6PD A+, is common in Americans of African descent.

EPISODIC OR INDUCED ACUTE HEMOLYTIC
ANEMIA
Etiology

G6PD catalyzes the conversion of glucose 6-­
phosphate to
6-­phosphogluconic acid. This reaction produces NADPH, which maintains GSH (glutathione in its reduced, functional state; see Fig. 512.1).
GSH provides protection against oxidant threats from certain drugs
and infections that would otherwise cause precipitation of hemoglobin
(Heinz bodies) or damage the RBC membrane.
Synthesis of RBC G6PD is determined by a gene on the X chromosome. Thus heterozygous females have intermediate enzymatic
activity and have two populations of RBCs: one is normal, and the
other is deficient in G6PD activity. Because they have fewer susceptible cells, most heterozygous females do not have clinically evident
hemolysis after exposure to oxidant drugs. Rarely, the majority of
RBCs is G6PD deficient in heterozygous females because the inactivation of the normal X chromosome is random and sometimes
exaggerated.
Disease involving this enzyme therefore occurs more frequently
in males than in females. Approximately 13% of male Americans of African descent have a variant enzyme (G6PD A−) that
results in a deficiency of RBC G6PD activity (5–15% of normal).
Italians, Greeks, and other Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, African, and Asian ethnic groups also have a high incidence, ranging
from 5–40%, of a variant designated G6PD B− (G6PD Mediterranean). In these variants, the G6PD activity of homozygous females
or hemizygous males is <5% of normal. Therefore the defect in
Americans of African descent is less severe than that in Americans
of European descent. A third variant enzyme with greatly reduced
activity (G6PD Canton) occurs in approximately 5% of the Chinese
population.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 512 u Enzymatic Defects
Clinical Manifestations

Most individuals with G6PD deficiency are asymptomatic, with
no clinical manifestations of illness unless triggered by infection,
drugs, or ingestion of fava beans. Typically, hemolysis ensues in
about 24-­96 hours after a patient has ingested a substance with
oxidant properties. In severe cases, hemoglobinuria and jaundice result, and the Hb concentration may fall precipitously. Drugs
that elicit hemolysis in these individuals include fluoroquinolones,
methylene blue, sulfonylureas, rasburicase, and antimalarials, such
as primaquine and dapsone (Table 512.2). There is mixed evidence
regarding the safety data of aspirin and sulfa-­containing medications, which are generally thought to be safe. Chemical exposures
to henna compounds and naphthalene (e.g., mothballs and deodorant) have also been implicated. The degree of hemolysis varies with
the inciting agent, amount ingested, and severity of the enzyme
deficiency. In some individuals, ingestion of fava beans also produces an acute, severe hemolytic syndrome, known as favism. Fava
beans contain divicine, isouramil, and convicine, which ultimately
lead to production of hydrogen peroxide and other reactive oxygen
products. Favism is thought to be more frequently associated with
the G6PD Mediterranean and G6PD Canton variants.
In the G6PD A− variant, the stability of the folded protein dimer
is impaired, and this defect is accentuated as the RBCs age. Thus
hemolysis decreases as older RBCs are destroyed, even if administration of the drug is continued. This recovery results from the
age-­labile enzyme, which is abundant and more stable in younger
RBCs (Fig. 512.3). The associated reticulocytosis produces a compensated hemolytic process in which the blood hemoglobin may be
only slightly decreased, despite continued exposure to the offending
agent.
G6PD deficiency can produce hemolysis in the neonatal period.
In G6PD A–, spontaneous hemolysis and hyperbilirubinemia have
been observed in preterm infants. In newborns with the G6PD B−
and G6PD Canton varieties, hyperbilirubinemia and even kernicterus may occur. Neonates with co-­inheritance of G6PD deficiency

2991

and a pathogenic variant of the promoter of uridine-­diphosphate-­
glucuronyl transferase (UGT1A1), seen in Gilbert syndrome, have
more severe neonatal jaundice. When a pregnant woman ingests
oxidant drugs, they may be transmitted to her G6PD-­deficient
fetus, and hemolytic anemia and jaundice may be apparent at birth.
Similarly, medications may be transmitted to a neonate through
breast milk.

Laboratory Findings

The onset of acute hemolysis usually results in a precipitous fall in
hemoglobin and hematocrit. If the episode is severe, the Hb-­binding
proteins, such as haptoglobin, are saturated, and free hemoglobin
may appear in the plasma and subsequently in the urine. Hemolysis is
intravascular and extravascular. Unstained or supravital preparations
of RBCs reveal precipitated hemoglobin, or Heinz bodies. The RBC
inclusions are not visible on the Wright-­stained blood film. Cells that
contain these inclusions are seen only within the first 3-­4 days of illness because they are rapidly cleared from the blood. Also, the blood
film may contain RBCs with what appears to be a bite taken from their
periphery (“bite cells”) and polychromasia (evidence of bluish, larger
RBCs), representing reticulocytosis (Fig. 512.4).

Diagnosis

The diagnosis depends on direct or indirect demonstration of reduced
G6PD activity in RBCs. By direct measurement, enzyme activity in
affected persons is ≤10% of normal, and the reduction of enzyme activity is more extreme in Americans of European descent and in Asians
than in Americans of African descent. Satisfactory screening tests are
based on decolorization of methylene blue, reduction of methemoglobin, or fluorescence of NADPH. Confirmatory testing is available
using quantitative NADPH formation measured spectrophotometrically. Immediately after a hemolytic episode, reticulocytes and young
RBCs predominate. These young cells have significantly higher enzyme
activity than do older cells in the A− variety (African). Testing may
therefore have to be deferred for a few weeks before a diagnostically low

Table 512.2  	 Agents Precipitating Hemolysis in Glucose-­6-­Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency
DEFINITE RISK OF AHA
ANTIMALARIAL DRUGS
Dapsone
Pamaquine
Primaquine
Tafenoquine
OTHER DRUGS
Ciprofloxacin
Glibenclamide
Methylene blue
Moxifloxacin
Nalidixic acid
Nitrofurantoin
Norfloxacin
Ofloxacin
Phenazopyridine
Rasburicase and pegloticase
Sulfamethoxazole/cotrimoxazole
Henna (cosmetic use)

“POSSIBLE” RISK OF AHA

POSSIBLE ASSOCIATION (LESS LIKELY)

Chloroquine
Quinidine
Quinine

Aspirin*
Menadiol sodium phosphate
Sulfadiazine
Sulfasalazine
Sulfonylureas
Tolonium chloride

Chloramphenicol
Dimercaptosuccinic acid
Glibenclamide
Mepacrine
Vitamin K analogs

*Hemolysis is dose related. Typical 75 to 100 mg per day, widely used for prophylaxis of cardiovascular events, is safe for G6PD-­deficient persons.
AHA, acute hemolytic anemia.
From Luzzatto L, Ally M, Notaro R. Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Blood. 2020;136:1225–1240; Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2992 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
100

50
Normal
G6PD

G6PD (g/g Hb)

10

5

G6PD
Seattle

Fig. 512.4 Morphologic erythrocyte changes (anisopoikilocytosis,

1

bite cells) during acute hemolysis in a G6PD-­deficient patient. Arrows
show bite cells. Anisopoikilocytosis is abnormality in the shape or size
of erythrocytes. (From Cappellini MD, Fiorelli G. Glucose-­6-­phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency. Lancet. 2008;371:64–74.)

0.5
G6PD
Mediterranean

0.1
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Age of erythrocytes (days)

Fig. 512.3 Main mechanism of G6PD deficiency in RBCs is in vivo
instability of mutant enzyme. For many G6PD variants, such as the two
studied here, this is essentially acceleration of a process that takes place
normally with the aging of RBCs in the circulation. Hb, Hemoglobin.
(Adapted from Morelli A, Benatti U, Gaetani GF, et al. Biochemical
mechanisms of glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 1978;75:1979–1983.)

level of enzyme can be shown. The diagnosis can be suspected when
G6PD activity is within the low-­normal range in the presence of a high
reticulocyte count. G6PD variants also can be detected by electrophoretic and molecular analysis. G6PD deficiency should be considered
in any neonatal patients with hyperbilirubinemia and borderline low
G6PD activity.

Prevention and Treatment

Prevention of hemolysis constitutes the most important therapeutic
measure. When possible, males belonging to ethnic groups with a significant incidence of G6PD deficiency (e.g., Greeks, southern Italians,
Sephardic Jews, Filipinos, southern Chinese, Black Americans, Thais)
should be tested for the defect before known oxidant drugs are given.

The usual doses of aspirin and trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole do not
cause clinically relevant hemolysis in the A− variety. Aspirin administered in doses used for acute rheumatic fever (50-­100 mg/kg/24 hr)
may produce a severe hemolytic episode. Infants with severe neonatal jaundice who belong to these ethnic groups also require testing for
G6PD deficiency because of their heightened risk for this defect. If
severe hemolysis has occurred, supportive therapy may require blood
transfusions, although recovery is the rule when the oxidant agent is
discontinued.

CHRONIC HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS ASSOCIATED
WITH DEFICIENCY OF G6PD OR RELATED FACTORS

Chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia has been associated
with profound deficiency of G6PD caused by enzyme variants, particularly those defective in quantity, activity, or stability. The gene
defects leading to chronic hemolysis are located primarily in the
region of the NADP-­binding site near the carboxyl terminus of the
protein (see Fig. 512.2). These include the Loma Linda, Tomah,
Iowa, Beverly Hills, Nashville, Riverside, Santiago de Cuba, and
Andalus variants. Persons with G6PD B− enzyme deficiency occasionally have chronic hemolysis, and the hemolytic process may
worsen after ingestion of oxidant drugs. Splenectomy is of little
value in these types of chronic hemolysis.
Other enzyme defects may impair the regeneration of GSH as an
oxidant “sump” (see Fig. 512.1). Mild, chronic nonspherocytic anemia
has been reported in association with decreased RBC GSH, resulting
from γ-­glutamylcysteine or GSH synthetase deficiencies. Deficiency
of 6-­phosphogluconate dehydrogenase has been associated primarily
with drug-­induced hemolysis, and hemolysis with hyperbilirubinemia
has been related to a deficiency of GSH peroxidase in newborn infants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 513 u Hemolytic Anemias Resulting from Extracellular Factors—Immune Hemolytic Anemias

Chapter 513

Hemolytic Anemias
Resulting from
Extracellular Factors—
Immune Hemolytic
Anemias
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow

IMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS

A number of extrinsic agents and disorders may lead to premature
destruction of red blood cells (RBCs) at a rate where hemolysis exceeds
hematopoietic replacement. Among the most clearly defined are antibodies associated with immune hemolytic anemias. The hallmark of this group
of diseases is the positive result of the direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test
(DAT), which detects a coating of immunoglobulin or components of
complement on the RBC surface. The most important immune hemolytic
disorder in pediatric practice is hemolytic disease of the newborn (erythroblastosis fetalis), caused by transplacental transfer of maternal antibody
active against the RBCs of the fetus, that is, isoimmune hemolytic anemia
(see Chapter 140).
Various other immune hemolytic anemias are autoimmune
(Table 513.1). Often, no underlying cause can be found; this is the primary or idiopathic type. If the autoimmune hemolysis is associated with
an underlying disease, including various infections (Epstein-­Barr virus
[EBV], rarely HIV, cytomegalovirus, and mycoplasma), autoimmune or
Table 513.1  Diseases Characterized by Immune-­Mediated
Red Blood Cell Destruction
AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA CAUSED BY WARM-­
REACTIVE AUTOANTIBODIES
Primary (idiopathic)
Secondary
Lymphoproliferative disorders
Connective tissue disorders (especially systemic lupus
­erythematosus)
Nonlymphoid neoplasms (e.g., ovarian tumors)
Chronic inflammatory diseases (e.g., ulcerative colitis)
Immunodeficiency disorders
AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA CAUSED BY COLD-­
REACTIVE AUTOANTIBODIES (CRYOPATHIC HEMOLYTIC
SYNDROMES)
Primary (idiopathic) cold agglutinin disease
Secondary cold agglutinin disease
Lymphoproliferative disorders
Infections (Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Epstein-­Barr virus)
Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria
Primary (idiopathic)
Viral syndromes (most common)
Congenital or tertiary syphilis
DRUG-­INDUCED IMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
(SEE TABLE 513.2)
Hapten/drug adsorption (e.g., penicillin)
Ternary (immune) complex (e.g., quinine, quinidine)
True autoantibody induction (e.g., methyldopa)
Adapted from Packman CH. Autoimmune hemolytic anemias. In Rakel R (ed). Conn’s
Current Therapy. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1995: 305.

2993

inflammatory diseases (autoimmune lymphoproliferative disease [ALPS],
systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE], rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes
mellitus, ulcerative colitis), primary immunodeficiency diseases (common variable immunodeficiency [CVID], Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome),
neoplasms (lymphoproliferative, solid tumors), or posttransplant (solid
organ or allogeneic stem cell), it is considered secondary (Table 513.2). As
many as 20% of episodes of autoimmune hemolysis are drug-­induced (e.g.,
Table 513.2  Secondary Etiologies Causing Autoimmune
Cytopenias in ­Children
DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH AUTOIMMUNE CYTOPENIAS IN
CHILDREN
Lymphoproliferative Disorders
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS)*
Rosai-­Dorfman disease
Castleman disease
Ras-­associated leukoproliferative disorder
Immune Deficiencies
Common variable immune deficiency (CVID)*
Selective IgA deficiency
Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion (DiGeorge or velocardiofacial syndrome)
Severe combined immunodeficiency syndromes
IPEX syndrome
Rheumatologic Conditions
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)*
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome*
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Sjögren syndrome
Sarcoid
Malignancies
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Hodgkin lymphoma
Chronic Infections
EBV
HIV**
Helicobacter pylori
CMV
HCV
Other
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
RECOMMENDED EVALUATION FOR CHILDREN WITH CHRONIC
SINGLE LINEAGE AUTOIMMUNE CYTOPENIAS OR MULTI-­
LINEAGE AUTOIMMUNE CYTOPENIAS*
Flow cytometry for double negative T cells (ALPS)
ANA (SLE)
Anti-­phospholipid antibodies
Quantitative immunoglobulins (CVID)
Specific antibody titers (CVID)
T cells subsets (CD3/CD4, CD3/CD8)
Ferritin
HIV**
FOXP3 testing (IPEX)
Exome or specific gene panels
*Consider screening for these conditions in children with chronic single lineage autoimmune cytopenias or multi-­lineage autoimmune cytopenias.
**Consider also screening for HIV in adolescents with chronic single lineage or multi-­
lineage autoimmune cytopenias. Other diseases should be considered if the history
or physical are suggestive of the underlying condition. It is extremely rare for the
other conditions to present with autoimmune cytopenias and no other signs or symptoms suggestive of the underlying disease. Thus, the utility of routine screening is low.
EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; ANA, antinuclear
antibody; IPEX, immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy X-linked.
Modified from Teachey DT, Lambert MP. Diagnosis and management of autoimmune
cytopenias in childhood. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2013;60:1489–1511; Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2994 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
methyldopa, l-­
dopa, checkpoint inhibitors). Other drugs (penicillins,
cephalosporins) cause hemolysis by means of “drug-­dependent antibodies”—antibodies directed toward the drug and in some cases toward an
RBC membrane antigen as well.

Etiology

Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) is caused by the production of
anti-­RBC autoantibodies generated by tissue and self-­reactive B lymphocytes circulating in the periphery supported by T helper lymphocytes.
The complement system induces sequential activation of the membrane
attack complex (MAC) leading to erythrocyte lysis typically in the liver
and circulation. RBCs are opsonized by the autoantibodies or complement
then phagocytosed primarily in the spleen and lymph tissue. Antibody-­
dependent cell-­mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) induced by cytotoxic CD8+
T lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells are an additional important
mechanism contributing to AIHA also predominantly in lymphoid organs
and the spleen.
The underlying cause of autoimmunity is loss of central self-­tolerance in
the early stages of lymphocyte differentiation, as well as loss of peripheral
self-­tolerance driven by Tregs and CD8+ suppressor T lymphocytes. Loss
of tolerance allows for autoreactive cells to avoid negative selection, and/or
suppression of autoantibodies fails to occur appropriately in the periphery.
It is theorized patients who develop AIHA have an underlying predisposition to losing such self-­tolerance, which is stimulated by environmental
factors.
The autoantibody may be produced as an inappropriate immune
response to an RBC antigen or to another antigenic epitope similar to an
RBC antigen, known as molecular mimicry. Alternatively, an infectious
agent may alter the RBC membrane so that it becomes “foreign” or antigenic to the host.
The autoantibodies that form in AIHA have antibody class, antigenic
reactivity, and thermal characteristics associated with binding and/or
destroying erythrocytes. The temperature predilection is associated
with corresponding nomenclature, including warm (wAIHA), cold
(cold agglutinin disease [CAD]), paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria
(PCH), and rare mixed forms.

AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS ASSOCIATED
WITH “WARM” ANTIBODIES
Etiology

Warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia (wAIHA) is the most common
form in children found in as many as 90% of cases. Autoantibodies
are “warm-­reactive” meaning they preferentially bind to erythrocytes
at 37°C. Extravascular hemolysis occurs in the spleen. Typically, the
antibodies are immunoglobulin (Ig) G, and react to epitopes (antigens)
that are “public” or common to all human RBCs, such as Rh proteins.
When IgG is present in exceptional quantity, it can fix complement,
which results in intravascular hemolysis.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with wAIHA present with symptoms consistent with anemia
and nonspecific signs of hemolysis. Onset may be acute, with pallor,
jaundice, icterus, hemoglobinuria, abdominal pain, fever, shortness of
breath, and dizziness, or more gradual with primarily fatigue and pallor. Cardiovascular compromise is rare. The spleen is usually enlarged
and is the primary site of destruction of IgG-­coated RBCs.

Laboratory Findings

In many cases, anemia is profound with hemoglobin (Hb) levels <6
g/dL. Considerable spherocytosis and polychromasia (reflecting the
reticulocyte response) are present. More than 50% of the circulating
RBCs may be reticulocytes, and nucleated RBCs usually are present.
In some cases, a low reticulocyte count may be found, particularly
early in the episode due to similar epitopes on RBC precursors in the
marrow, marrow suppression if there is concurrent infection, and/
or a “shocked” marrow after a severe hemolytic event. Leukocytosis is common. The platelet count is usually normal, but concomitant immune thrombocytopenic purpura sometimes occurs (Evans
syndrome). Patients with Evans syndrome often have or eventually
develop a chronic disease, including SLE, an immunodeficiency

syndrome (common variable immunodeficiency), or autoimmune
lymphoproliferative syndrome.
Results of the DAT (Coombs test) are strongly positive, and free antibody can sometimes be demonstrated in the serum (indirect Coombs
test). These antibodies are active at 35–40°C (95–104°F) (“warm” antibodies) and most often belong to the IgG class. They do not require complement for activity. Antibodies from the serum and those eluted from
the RBCs react with the RBCs of many persons in addition to those of the
patient. They often have been regarded as nonspecific panagglutinins,
but careful studies have revealed specificity for RBC antigens of the Rh
system in 70% of patients (50% of adult patients). Complement, particularly fragments of C3b, may be detected on the RBCs in conjunction with
IgG. The Coombs test result is rarely negative because of the sensitivity
of the Coombs reaction. A minimum of 260-­400 molecules of IgG per
cell is necessary on the RBC membrane to produce a positive reaction.
Special tests are required to detect the antibody in cases of “Coombs-­
negative” autoimmune hemolytic anemia. In warm antibody hemolytic
anemia, the direct Coombs test may detect IgG alone, both IgG and complement fragments, or solely complement fragments if the level of RBC-­
bound IgG is below the detection limit of the anti-­IgG Coombs reagent.

Treatment

Transfusions may provide only transient benefit but may be lifesaving in cases of severe anemia until the effects of other treatments are
observed. All tested units for transfusion are serologically incompatible. It is important to identify the patient’s ABO blood group to avoid
a hemolytic transfusion reaction mediated by anti-­A or anti-­B. The
blood bank should also test for the presence of an underlying alloantibody, which could cause rapid hemolysis of transfused RBCs. Patients
who have been neither previously transfused nor pregnant are unlikely
to harbor an alloantibody. Early consultation between the clinician and
the blood bank physician is essential. Failure to transfuse a profoundly
anemic infant or child may lead to serious morbidity and even death.
Patients with mild disease and compensated hemolysis may not require
treatment. If the hemolysis is severe and results in significant anemia or
symptoms, treatment with glucocorticoids is initiated. Glucocorticoids
decrease the rate of hemolysis by blocking macrophage function through
downregulating Fcγ receptor expression, decreasing the production of the
autoantibody, and perhaps enhancing the elution of antibody from the
RBCs. Initial dosing is dependent on the degree of anemia and symptoms.
In patients who present with Hb <6 to 7 g/dL or severe symptoms, initial
treatment with intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone 0.5-­1 mg/kg every 6
to 8 hours in the first 24-­72 hours is typically indicated. With rapid deterioration or severity of anemia, high-­dose methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg with
maximum 1 g daily for 3 days may be required. When hemolytic anemia
remains severe despite glucocorticoid therapy, or if very large doses are
necessary to maintain a reasonable Hb level, intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) may be tried. Long-­term use of IVIG has not been shown to be
effective in the majority of children. In children who present with mild to
moderate anemia with Hg ≥7 to 8 g/dL and an appropriate reticulocyte
count, oral prednisone 2 mg/kg/day may be started. Response is typically
seen within 2-­4 weeks after initiation of steroids and considered adequate
with Hb concentration >9 to 10 g/dL. Hb, reticulocyte count, lactate dehydrogenase, and DAT should be monitored for response. Treatment should
be continued until the rate of hemolysis decreases, with the dose then
gradually reduced, typically over at least 4 months. The Coombs test result
may remain positive even after the Hb level returns to normal. It is usually
safe to discontinue prednisone once the direct Coombs test result becomes
negative.
The majority of patients (approximately 80%) have an initial response
to glucocorticoids within the first month of treatment; however, it is
common to require prolonged or multimodal therapies over time. If
a patient is unable to taper prednisone effectively within 1-­2 months
after diagnosis, addition of a second-­line therapy should be considered.
Relapse occurs in 15–40% of patients with wAIHA, typically within
the first 6-­12 months after initial response to treatment. If this occurs,
resumption of the lowest dose of prednisone that was effective in treating
the patient is recommended. Because of the adverse effects of long-­term
steroid use, alternative agents could be considered if relapse continues to
occur.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 513 u Hemolytic Anemias Resulting from Extracellular Factors—Immune Hemolytic Anemias
There are limited data in second-­line therapies for wAIHA in children.
Rituximab, a monoclonal antibody that targets B lymphocytes, the source
of antibody production, is useful in chronic cases refractory to conventional
therapy. Plasmapheresis has been used in refractory cases but generally is
not helpful because most hemolysis is in the extravascular space. Splenectomy may be beneficial but is complicated by a heightened risk of infection
with encapsulated organisms, particularly in patients <6 years old. Prophylaxis is indicated with appropriate vaccines (pneumococcal, meningococcal, and Haemophilus influenzae type b) before splenectomy and with oral
penicillin after splenectomy. Thrombosis and pulmonary hypertension
are also increasingly recognized problems after splenectomy. In refractory
disease, several immunomodulating agents have been used in small case
series or reports including azathioprine, 6-­mercaptopurine, cyclosporine,
mycophenolate mofetil, tacrolimus, sirolimus, and monoclonal antibodies
(e.g., obinutuzumab, daratumumab, alemtuzumab, bortezomib).

Prognosis

Acute idiopathic autoimmune hemolytic disease in childhood varies
in severity but is self-­limited; death from untreatable anemia is rare.
Approximately 30% of patients have chronic hemolysis, often associated with an underlying disease, such as SLE, immunodeficiency, or
lymphoma. The presence of antiphospholipid antibodies in adult
patients with immune hemolysis predisposes to thrombosis. Mortality
in chronic cases depends on the primary disorder.

AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS ASSOCIATED
WITH “COLD” ANTIBODIES OR COLD AGGLUTININ
DISEASE

“Cold” antibodies agglutinate RBCs at temperatures <37°C (98.6°F).
They are primarily of the IgM class and require complement for hemolytic activity. The highest temperature at which RBC agglutination
occurs is called the thermal amplitude. A higher thermal amplitude
antibody—that is, one that can bind to RBCs at temperatures achievable in the body—results in hemolysis with exposure to a cold environment. High antibody titers are associated with high thermal amplitude.
Cold antibodies usually have specificity for the oligosaccharide
antigens of the I/i system. They may occur in primary or idiopathic
cold agglutinin disease, secondary to infections such as those from
Mycoplasma pneumoniae and EBV, or secondary to lymphoproliferative disorders. After M. pneumoniae infection, the anti-­I levels may
increase considerably, and occasionally, enormous increases may occur
to titers ≥1/30,000. The antibody has specificity for the I antigen and
thus reacts poorly with human cord RBCs, which possess the i antigen but exhibit low levels of I. Patients with infectious mononucleosis
occasionally have CAD, and the antibodies in these patients often have
anti-­i specificity. This antibody causes less hemolysis in adults than in
children because adults have fewer i molecules on their RBCs. Spontaneous RBC agglutination is observed in the cold and in vitro, and
RBC aggregates are seen on the blood film (rouleaux formation). Mean
corpuscular volume (MCV) may be spuriously elevated because of
RBC agglutination and reticulocytosis. The severity of the hemolysis

2995

is related to the thermal amplitude of the antibody, which itself partly
depends on the IgM antibody titer.
When very high titers of cold antibodies are present and active near
body temperature, severe intravascular hemolysis with hemoglobinemia
and hemoglobinuria may occur and may be heightened on a patient’s
exposure to cold (external temperature or ingested foods). Each IgM molecule has the potential to activate a C1 molecule, so that large amounts of
complement are found on the RBCs in CAD. These sensitized RBCs may
undergo intravascular complement-­mediated lysis or may be destroyed
in the liver and spleen. Only complement, not IgM, is detected on RBCs
because the IgM is removed during the washing steps of the DAT.
CAD is less common in children than in adults and more frequently
results in an acute, self-­limited episode of hemolysis. RBC transfusion
is indicated based on symptoms and severity of anemia. If transfusion
is required, blood should be warmed before administration. Glucocorticoids are much less effective in CAD than in hemolytic disease with
warm antibodies. Patients should avoid exposure to cold and should be
treated for any underlying disease. In the uncommon patient with severe
hemolytic disease, immunosuppression and plasmapheresis can be used.
Successful treatment of CAD has been reported with rituximab, which
effectively depletes B lymphocytes. Splenectomy is not useful in CAD.

Paroxysmal Cold Hemoglobinuria

Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria is mediated by the Donath-­
Landsteiner (D-­L) hemolysin, which is an IgG cold-­reactive autoantibody with anti-­P specificity. In vitro, the D-­L antibody binds to RBCs
in the cold, and the RBCs are lysed by complement as the temperature
is increased to 37°C. A similar sequence is thought to occur in vivo as
RBCs move from the cooler extremities to warmer parts of the circulation. Most reported cases are self-­limited; many patients experience
only one paroxysm of hemolysis. Congenital or acquired syphilis was
once the most common underlying cause of paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria, but currently, most cases are associated with nonspecific
viral infections. Treatment includes transfusion for severe anemia and
avoidance of cold ambient temperatures.

Drug-­Induced Hemolytic Anemia

Drugs (penicillin or sometimes cephalosporins) that cause hemolysis
through the “hapten” mechanism (immune but not autoimmune) bind
tightly to the RBC membrane. Antibodies to the drug, either newly or
previously formed, bind to the drug molecules on RBCs, mediating their
destruction in the spleen. In other cases, certain drugs, such as quinine and
quinidine, do not bind to RBCs, but rather form part of a “ternary complex,” consisting of the drug, an RBC membrane antigen, and an antibody
that recognizes both (see Table 513.3). Methyldopa and sometimes cephalosporins may, by unknown mechanisms, incite true autoantibodies to
RBC membrane antigens, so that the presence of the drug is not required
to cause hemolysis. Cephalosporins are the most common cause of drug-­
induced immune hemolytic anemia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 513.3  Selected Drugs That Cause Immune-­Mediated Hemolysis
MECHANISM

DRUG ADSORPTION (HAPTEN)

TERNARY (IMMUNE) COMPLEX

AUTOANTIBODY INDUCTION

Direct antiglobulin test

Positive (anti-­IgG)

Positive (anti-­C3)

Positive (anti-­IgG)

Site of hemolysis

Extravascular

Intravascular

Extravascular

Medications

Penicillins
Cephalosporins
6-­Mercaptopurine
Tetracycline
Oxaliplatin
Hydrocortisone

Cephalosporins
Quinidine
Amphotericin B
Hydrocortisone
Rifampin (Rifadin)
Metformin
Quinine
Probenecid
Chlorpromazine
Oxaliplatin

α-­Methyldopa
Cephalosporins
Oxaliplatin
l-­Dopa
Procainamide
Ibuprofen
Diclofenac (Voltaren)
Interferon alfa

Adapted from Packman CH. Hemolytic anemia resulting from immune injury. In Kaushansky K, Lichtman MA, Beutler E, et al, (eds): Williams Hematology. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-­
Hill, 2010.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2996 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 514

Hemolytic Anemias
Secondary to Other
Extracellular Factors
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
FRAGMENTATION HEMOLYSIS

See Table 506.2 in Chapter 506.
Red blood cell (RBC) destruction may occur in hemolytic anemias
because of mechanical injury as the cells traverse a damaged vascular bed. Damage may be microvascular when RBCs are sheared
by fibrin in the capillaries during intravascular coagulation or when
renovascular disease accompanies the hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
(HUS) (see Chapter 560.5) or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) (see Chapter 533.5). Larger vessels may be involved in
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome (giant hemangioma and thrombocytopenia; see Chapter 554) or when a replacement heart valve is poorly
epithelialized. The blood film shows many schistocytes, or fragmented
cells, as well as polychromatophilia, reflecting the reticulocytosis
(see Fig. 507.4F in Chapter 507 on Castleman disease). Secondary
iron deficiency may complicate the intravascular hemolysis because
of urinary hemoglobin and hemosiderin iron loss (see Fig. 506.2 in
Chapter 506). Treatment should be directed toward the underlying condition, and the prognosis depends on the effectiveness of this
treatment. The benefit of transfusion may be transient because the
transfused cells are destroyed as quickly as those produced by the
patient.
It is critical to determine the precise etiology of the fragmentation
hemolysis because the treatment depends on the underlying problem
(Table 514.1). Acquired TTP results from an antibody to an enzyme
(ADAMTS13) that regulates the size of von Willebrand multimers. The

lack of this enzyme results in a marked increase in multimer size and
a resultant thrombotic microangiopathy. Congenital TTP can result in
the inability to produce adequate amounts of the enzyme ADAMTS13
and results in the same pathophysiology. The treatment for acquired
TTP involves plasma exchange (PEX) to remove the antibody and
replace the ADAMTS13, in addition to immunosuppressive therapy
with glucocorticoids. Treatment should be initiated as soon as possible
when there is a high index of suspicion, even before confirmation of
the diagnosis because of high morbidity and mortality. Once diagnosis has been confirmed, rituximab is suggested. Use of caplacizumab,
an anti-­von Willebrand factor monoclonal antibody, is used in adult
patients with severe disease, although it has not been approved by the
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in children. The treatment
for congenital TTP involves scheduled plasma infusions to replace
the ADAMTS13. Recombinant ADAMTS13 is under investigation
for use in acquired and congenital TTP. In contrast, HUS results from
Shiga toxin produced by Escherichia coli 0157 and may not be helped
by plasmapheresis, and treatment is largely based on supportive measures. Atypical HUS involves activation of the alternative complement
pathway and can be treated with eculizumab (anti-­C5), an inhibitor of
the complement pathway. Plasmapheresis may reduce the RBC fragmentation and improve the platelet count but has little effect on the
tissue (kidney) vasculopathy, and thus is not usually recommended.
Pneumococcal-­induced HUS results from neuraminidase produced
by the bacteria, which damages the membranes of the RBCs and the
kidney, exposing the T-­antigen. Plasma contains natural antibody to
the T-­antigen, producing hemolysis, renal damage, and a thrombotic
microangiopathy. Thus, patients with T-­antigen activation from suspected pneumococcal-­induced HUS should not be given plasma infusions because this will significantly exacerbate the RBC hemolysis and
can lead to life-­threatening anemia.

THERMAL INJURY

Extensive burns may directly damage the RBCs and cause hemolysis
that results in the formation of spherocytes. Blood loss and marrow
suppression may contribute to anemia and require blood transfusion.
Erythropoietin (EPO) has been used as treatment for diminished RBC
production. There may be a role of early use of propranolol, which has
been shown to restore erythrocyte progenitors.

Table 514.1  Thrombotic Microangiopathies
DISEASE*

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

LAB FINDINGS

MANAGEMENT

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP)

Acquired: Ab to ADAMTS13
Congenital: Inadequate
­ADAMTS13 production

Ab to ADAMTS13
ADAMTS13 <10%

Acquired: Plasma exchange (PEX)
Glucocorticoids
+/-­ Rituximab
Congenital: Scheduled plasma
infusions, recombinant
ADAMTS13

Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome (HUS)

Escherichia coli 0157, Shiga toxin

E. coli 0157, Shiga toxin

Supportive
? Value of plasmapheresis

Atypical HUS

Complement-­mediated
­alternative pathway

ADAMTS13 >10%
Decreased factors H and I
(inhibitors of complement)†

Eculizumab (Ab to C5)
Plasmapheresis not indicated

Pneumococcal-­induced HUS

Neuraminidase-­induced RBC,
platelet, and kidney damage
Exposure of T-­antigen on RBC and
kidney

Pneumococcal infection
ADAMTS13 >10%

Plasmapheresis with albumin for
neuraminidase and endogenous
T Ab removal
Avoid plasma infusions, which will
exacerbate RBC hemolysis

Disseminated intravascular
­coagulation (DIC)

Sepsis, shock, endotoxin

Decreased fibrinogen, increased
fibrin split products, decreased
clotting factors and platelets

Treat underlying condition;
replace factors and platelets if
bleeding

*All show fragmentation hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and potential renal and other organ damage. An elevated lactate dehydrogenase and reduced haptoglobin usually
are present secondary to hemolysis.
†May be related to inherited defect in factor H or I.
Ab, Antibody; RBC, red blood cell.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 515 u Polycythemia
RENAL DISEASE

The anemia of uremia is multifactorial in origin. EPO production may
be decreased, and the marrow suppressed by toxic metabolites. Furthermore, the RBC life span often is shortened because of retention of metabolites and organic acidemia. The use of EPO in chronic renal disease can
decrease the need for blood transfusion. Abnormalities in the hepcidin-­
ferroportin pathway provide an additional pathway contributing to
anemia associated with chronic kidney disease. Investigative use of medications targeting this pathway are being evaluated in patients. Hemodialysis is also implicated in causing fragmentation of erythrocytes.

LIVER DISEASE

A change in the ratio of cholesterol to phospholipids in the plasma may
result in changes in the composition of the RBC membrane and shortening of the RBC life span. Some patients with liver disease have many
target RBCs on the blood film, whereas others have a preponderance
of spiculated cells. These morphologic changes reflect the alterations in
the plasma lipid composition.

TOXINS AND VENOMS

Bacterial sepsis caused by Haemophilus influenzae, staphylococci, or
streptococci may be complicated by accompanying hemolysis. Particularly severe hemolytic anemia has been observed in clostridial infections and results from a hemolytic clostridial toxin. Large numbers
of spherocytes may be seen on the blood film. Spherocytic hemolysis also may be noted after bites by various snakes, including cobras,
vipers, and rattlesnakes, which have phospholipases in their venom.
Large numbers of bites by insects, such as bees, wasps, and yellow jackets, also may cause spherocytic hemolysis by a similar mechanism (see
Chapter 768).

WILSON DISEASE

See Chapter 405.2.
An acute and self-­limited episode of hemolytic anemia may precede
by years the onset of hepatic or neurologic symptoms in Wilson disease. This event appears to result from the toxic effects of free copper
on the RBC membrane. The blood film often (but not always) shows
large numbers of spherocytes, and the Coombs test result is negative.
Because early diagnosis of Wilson disease permits prophylactic treatment with penicillamine and prevention of hepatic and neurologic
disease, correct assessment of this rare type of hemolysis is important.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 4

Polycythemia
(Erythrocytosis)
Chapter 515

Polycythemia
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
Polycythemia exists when the hemoglobin concentration and/
or hematocrit and total red blood cell (RBC) volume exceed the

2997

upper limits of normal in peripheral blood. In postpubertal individuals, an RBC mass >25% above the mean normal value (based
on body surface area) or a hemoglobin level >16.5 g/dL (in males)
or >16.0 g/dL (in females) and/or hematocrit >49% (in males) or
>48% (in females) indicate absolute erythrocytosis. A decrease in
plasma volume, such as occurs in acute dehydration and burns, may
result in a high hemoglobin value. These situations are more accurately designated as hemoconcentration or relative polycythemia
because the RBC mass is not increased, and normalization of the
plasma volume restores hemoglobin to ­normal levels. Once the
diagnosis of true polycythemia is made, sequential studies should
be done to determine the underlying etiology (Fig. 515.1).

CLONAL POLYCYTHEMIA (POLYCYTHEMIA VERA)
Pathogenesis

Polycythemia vera is an acquired clonal myeloproliferative neoplastic disorder, which is rare in children and adolescents. The
median age of diagnosis is >60 years. Although primarily manifesting as erythrocytosis, thrombocytosis and leukocytosis can also be
seen. When isolated severe thrombocytosis exists in the absence of
erythrocytosis, the myeloproliferative disorder is called essential
thrombocythemia. A gain-­of-­function pathogenic variant involving exon 12 or 14 (V617F) of JAK2, a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase,
is found in >90% of adult patients with polycythemia vera, but in
<30% of children with this condition. The erythropoietin receptor
is normal, and serum erythropoietin levels are low. Patients without JAK pathogenic variants may have variants in the calreticulin
or thrombopoietin receptor genes. Risk factors for development of
polycythemia vera include a family history of polycythemia vera
and presence of an autoimmune disorder.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with polycythemia vera usually have splenomegaly. Erythrocytosis may cause hypertension, headache, early satiety, or
neurologic symptoms and increases the risk of thrombosis. Granulocytosis may cause diarrhea or pruritus from histamine release.
Thrombocytosis (with or without platelet dysfunction) may cause
thrombosis or hemorrhage. Bleeding or acquired von Willebrand
disease with extreme thrombocytosis, and complications of pregnancy may occur. Long-­term effects include progression to myelofibrosis, myelodysplasia, and/or acute leukemia. These events are
rare in children. Table 515.1 lists the diagnostic criteria for polycythemia vera.

Treatment

Phlebotomy and low-­dose aspirin are the initial treatments of choice
to alleviate symptoms of hyperviscosity and decrease the risk of
thrombosis. Iron supplementation should be given to prevent viscosity problems from iron-­deficient microcytosis or thrombocytosis. If these treatments are unsuccessful, the patient has progressive
splenomegaly, thrombocytosis, or leukocytosis, or has high-­risk
features (i.e., age >60 or history of thrombosis), antiproliferative
treatments (hydroxyurea, pegylated interferon, or busulfan) may
be helpful. The use of ruxolitinib (a JAK2 inhibitor) is approved
in hydroxyurea-­resistant or hydroxyurea-­intolerant adult patients,
but the long-­term effectiveness remains under investigation. There
are limited data in the treatment of children, given the rarity of the
condition. Often only phlebotomy is required. Transformation of
the disease into myelofibrosis or acute leukemia is rare in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2998 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Red cell mass
Normal

Elevated

Low plasma
volume

Normal

High

COHgb

Smoke exposure

Abnormal

Arterial O2

Low

Heart
Lung
Other cause
CT scan head, abdomen
Kidney


CNS
Other cause
Hemoglobin
Normal
studies

High O2 affinity hemoglobin
2,3-DPG deficiency

Normal

Low

Rule out polycythemia
vera:
CBC, differential
Bone marrow with chromosomes
Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase
B12/B12 binding capacity
JAK2 mutation

Erythropoietin

Normal

Elevated

von Hippel–Lindau mutations
Erythropoietin receptor
mutations
Other causes

Fig. 515.1 Algorithm showing sequential studies in the evaluation of polycythemia. CBC, Complete blood count; CNS, central nervous system;
COHgb, carboxyhemoglobin; 2,3-­DPG, 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate.

Table 515.1  World Health Organization (WHO) Diagnostic
Criteria for Polycythemia Vera
MAJOR CRITERIA
1.	Hb >16.5 g/dL (males) or Hb >16.0 g/dL (females)
or
Hct >49% (males) or >48% (females)
or
Elevated red cell mass >25% above mean normal predicted value
2.	Bone marrow (BM) biopsy showing hypercellularity for age with
trilineage growth (panmyelosis) including prominent erythroid,
granulocytic, and megakaryocytic proliferation with pleomorphic
mature megakaryocytes (difference in sizes)
3.	Presence of JAK2 or JAK2 exon 12 mutation
MINOR CRITERIA
1.	Subnormal serum erythropoietin level
DIAGNOSIS
All three major criteria
or
First two major criteria and the minor criterion*
*Criterion number 2 (BM biopsy) may not be required in cases with sustained absolute
erythrocytosis: hemoglobin levels >18.5 g/dL in males (hematocrit, 55.5%) or 16.5 g/dL
in females (hematocrit >49.5%) if major criterion 3 and the minor criterion are present.
However, initial myelofibrosis (present in up to 20% of patients) can only be detected
by performing a BM biopsy; this finding may predict a more rapid progression to overt
myelofibrosis (post-­PV MF).
Hb, Hemoglobin; Hct, hematocrit.
Modified from Arber DA, Orazi A, Hasserjian R, et al. The 2016 revision to the World
Health Organization classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia. Blood.
2016;127: 2391–405.

Chapter 516

Nonclonal Polycythemia
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
PATHOGENESIS

Nonclonal polycythemia is diagnosed when polycythemia is caused by
a physiologic process that is not derived from a single cell (Table 516.1).
Nonclonal polycythemia can be congenital or acquired (secondary).

Table 516.1  	 Differential Diagnosis of Polycythemia
CLONAL (PRIMARY)
Polycythemia vera
NONCLONAL
Congenital
High–oxygen affinity hemoglobinopathy (e.g., hemoglobin
­Chesapeake, Malmo, San Diego)
Erythropoietin receptor mutations (primary familial and congenital
polycythemia [PFCP])
Methemoglobin reductase deficiency
Hemoglobin M disease
2,3-­Diphosphoglycerate deficiency
Acquired
Hormonal
Adrenal disease: virilizing hyperplasia, Cushing syndrome
Athletic performance enhancing substances (e.g., anabolic ­steroids,
androgens, recombinant erythropoiesis stimulating agents)
Malignant tumors: adrenal, cerebellar, hepatic, other
Renal disease: cysts, hydronephrosis, renal artery stenosis
Hypoxia
Altitude
Cardiac disease
Lung disease
Sleep apnea
Central hypoventilation
Chronic carbon monoxide exposure including smoking
Neonatal: delayed cord clamping (placental-­fetal transfusion)
Normal intrauterine environment
Placental insufficiency (preeclampsia, maternal chronic
­hypertension, placental abruption)
Twin-­twin or maternal-­fetal hemorrhage
Perinatal asphyxia
Infants of diabetic mothers
Intrauterine growth restriction
Trisomy 13, 18, or 21
Adrenal hyperplasia
Maternal-­congenital hyperthyroidism
Spurious
Plasma volume decrease

Congenital Polycythemia

Lifelong or familial polycythemia should trigger a search for a
congenital problem. These inherited conditions may be transmitted as dominant or recessive disorders instigating erythrocytosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2998 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Red cell mass
Normal

Elevated

Low plasma
volume

Normal

High

COHgb

Smoke exposure

Abnormal

Arterial O2

Low

Heart
Lung
Other cause
CT scan head, abdomen
Kidney


CNS
Other cause
Hemoglobin
Normal
studies

High O2 affinity hemoglobin
2,3-DPG deficiency

Normal

Low

Rule out polycythemia
vera:
CBC, differential
Bone marrow with chromosomes
Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase
B12/B12 binding capacity
JAK2 mutation

Erythropoietin

Normal

Elevated

von Hippel–Lindau mutations
Erythropoietin receptor
mutations
Other causes

Fig. 515.1 Algorithm showing sequential studies in the evaluation of polycythemia. CBC, Complete blood count; CNS, central nervous system;
COHgb, carboxyhemoglobin; 2,3-­DPG, 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate.

Table 515.1  World Health Organization (WHO) Diagnostic
Criteria for Polycythemia Vera
MAJOR CRITERIA
1.	Hb >16.5 g/dL (males) or Hb >16.0 g/dL (females)
or
Hct >49% (males) or >48% (females)
or
Elevated red cell mass >25% above mean normal predicted value
2.	Bone marrow (BM) biopsy showing hypercellularity for age with
trilineage growth (panmyelosis) including prominent erythroid,
granulocytic, and megakaryocytic proliferation with pleomorphic
mature megakaryocytes (difference in sizes)
3.	Presence of JAK2 or JAK2 exon 12 mutation
MINOR CRITERIA
1.	Subnormal serum erythropoietin level
DIAGNOSIS
All three major criteria
or
First two major criteria and the minor criterion*
*Criterion number 2 (BM biopsy) may not be required in cases with sustained absolute
erythrocytosis: hemoglobin levels >18.5 g/dL in males (hematocrit, 55.5%) or 16.5 g/dL
in females (hematocrit >49.5%) if major criterion 3 and the minor criterion are present.
However, initial myelofibrosis (present in up to 20% of patients) can only be detected
by performing a BM biopsy; this finding may predict a more rapid progression to overt
myelofibrosis (post-­PV MF).
Hb, Hemoglobin; Hct, hematocrit.
Modified from Arber DA, Orazi A, Hasserjian R, et al. The 2016 revision to the World
Health Organization classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia. Blood.
2016;127: 2391–405.

Chapter 516

Nonclonal Polycythemia
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
PATHOGENESIS

Nonclonal polycythemia is diagnosed when polycythemia is caused by
a physiologic process that is not derived from a single cell (Table 516.1).
Nonclonal polycythemia can be congenital or acquired (secondary).

Table 516.1  	 Differential Diagnosis of Polycythemia
CLONAL (PRIMARY)
Polycythemia vera
NONCLONAL
Congenital
High–oxygen affinity hemoglobinopathy (e.g., hemoglobin
­Chesapeake, Malmo, San Diego)
Erythropoietin receptor mutations (primary familial and congenital
polycythemia [PFCP])
Methemoglobin reductase deficiency
Hemoglobin M disease
2,3-­Diphosphoglycerate deficiency
Acquired
Hormonal
Adrenal disease: virilizing hyperplasia, Cushing syndrome
Athletic performance enhancing substances (e.g., anabolic ­steroids,
androgens, recombinant erythropoiesis stimulating agents)
Malignant tumors: adrenal, cerebellar, hepatic, other
Renal disease: cysts, hydronephrosis, renal artery stenosis
Hypoxia
Altitude
Cardiac disease
Lung disease
Sleep apnea
Central hypoventilation
Chronic carbon monoxide exposure including smoking
Neonatal: delayed cord clamping (placental-­fetal transfusion)
Normal intrauterine environment
Placental insufficiency (preeclampsia, maternal chronic
­hypertension, placental abruption)
Twin-­twin or maternal-­fetal hemorrhage
Perinatal asphyxia
Infants of diabetic mothers
Intrauterine growth restriction
Trisomy 13, 18, or 21
Adrenal hyperplasia
Maternal-­congenital hyperthyroidism
Spurious
Plasma volume decrease

Congenital Polycythemia

Lifelong or familial polycythemia should trigger a search for a
congenital problem. These inherited conditions may be transmitted as dominant or recessive disorders instigating erythrocytosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia
by augmenting hypoxia sensing or abnormalities in oxygen sensing. Autosomal dominant causes include hemoglobins that have
increased oxygen affinity (P50 [partial pressure of oxygen in
the blood at which the hemoglobin is 50% saturated] <20 mm
Hg), erythropoietin receptor pathogenic variants resulting in an
enhanced effect of erythropoietin, or variants in the von Hippel–
Lindau (VHL), EGLN1, or EPAS1 genes that result in altered intracellular oxygen sensing. Another rare cause is autosomal recessive
2,3-­diphosphoglyceric acid deficiency, which leads to a left shift of
the oxygen dissociation curve, increased oxygen affinity, and consequent polycythemia.
Subtle decreases in oxygen delivery to tissues may cause polycythemia. Congenital methemoglobinemia resulting from an autosomal recessive deficiency of cytochrome b5 reductase may cause
cyanosis and polycythemia (see Chapter 511.7). Most affected individuals are asymptomatic. Neurologic abnormalities may be present
in patients whose enzyme deficits are not limited to hematopoietic
cells. Hemoglobin M disease (autosomal dominant) causes methemoglobinemia and can lead to polycythemia. Cyanosis may occur in
the presence of as little as 1.5 g/dL of methemoglobin but is uncommon in other hemoglobin variants unless hyperviscosity results in
localized hypoxemia.
In rare cases, there is an undefined inherited lesion causing primary
familial and congenital polycythemia (PFCP), which is described as
an elevation of erythrocyte mass and hemoglobin, hypersensitivity
to EPO, and low serum EPO in the setting of a normal hemoglobin-­
oxygen dissociation curve.

Acquired (Secondary) Polycythemia

Polycythemia may be present in clinical situations associated with
chronic arterial oxygen desaturation. Cardiovascular defects involving right-­to-­left shunts and pulmonary diseases interfering with
proper oxygenation are the most common causes of hypoxic polycythemia. Clinical findings usually include cyanosis, hyperemia of
the sclerae and mucous membranes, and clubbing of the fingers. As
the hematocrit rises to >65%, clinical manifestations of hyperviscosity, such as headache and hypertension, may require phlebotomy. Living at high altitudes also causes hypoxic polycythemia; the
hemoglobin level increases approximately 4% for each rise of 1,000
m (∼3,300 ft) in altitude. Smoking has been associated with polycythemia secondary to tissue hypoxia, elevation of carbon monoxide,
and volume contraction. Partial obstruction of a renal artery rarely
results in polycythemia. Polycythemia has also been associated with
benign and malignant tumors that secrete paraneoplastic erythropoietin. Exogenous or endogenous excess of anabolic steroids also
may cause polycythemia. A common spurious cause is a decrease in
plasma volume, as occurs in moderate to severe dehydration.

DIAGNOSIS

See Chapter 515; Figure 515.1 outlines sequential studies to evaluate
polycythemia.

TREATMENT

For mild disease, observation is sufficient. When the hematocrit is
>65–70% (hemoglobin >23 g/dL), blood viscosity greatly increases.
Periodic phlebotomy may prevent or decrease symptoms such as
headache, dizziness, or exertional dyspnea. Apheresed blood should
be replaced with plasma or saline to prevent hypovolemia in patients
accustomed to a chronically elevated total blood volume. Increased
demand for red blood cell production may cause iron deficiency.
Iron-­deficient microcytic red cells are more rigid, further increasing the risk of intracranial and other thromboses in patients with
polycythemia. Periodic assessment of iron status should be performed, and iron deficiency should be treated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2999

Section 5

The Pancytopenias
Chapter 517

Inherited Bone Marrow
Failure Syndromes with
Pancytopenia
Yigal Dror and Michaela Cada

Pancytopenia refers to a reduction below normal values of all three
peripheral blood lineages: leukocytes, platelets, and erythrocytes.
Identifying the etiology of pancytopenia usually requires microscopic
examination of the peripheral blood smear, as well as bone marrow
biopsy and aspirate specimens to assess overall cellularity and morphology. The three general categories of pancytopenia are related to
bone marrow pathologies and can frequently be differentiated based
on bone marrow findings.
Pancytopenia with hypocellular bone marrow on biopsy is seen
with inherited bone marrow failure syndromes (IBMFSs) with pancytopenia, acquired aplastic anemia of varied etiologies, and the hypoplastic
variant of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Pancytopenia with cellular bone marrow is seen with primary bone marrow disease (e.g.,
acute leukemia, myelodysplasia) and secondary to autoimmune disorders (e.g., autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, systemic lupus
erythematosus), vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, storage diseases (e.g.,
Gaucher, Niemann-­Pick), overwhelming infection, sarcoidosis, and
hypersplenism. Pancytopenia with bone marrow infiltration can be
seen in metastatic solid tumors, myelofibrosis, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, and osteopetrosis. It is important to note that exceptions exist with regard to this classification; IBMFSs can manifest as
normocellular or hypercellular bone marrow at early stages of presentation or in cases where MDS develops.
Inherited pancytopenias with hypocellular bone marrow are
IBMFSs that feature decreased bone marrow production of the three
major hematopoietic lineages occurring on an inherited basis and
resulting in anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia. Patients may
have single-­lineage or bi-­lineage cytopenia at presentation and gradually develop pancytopenia over time. All disorders for which a genetic
basis has been deciphered have thus far been shown to be monogenic.
Transmission of pathogenic variant genes is mendelian and in an
autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-­linked manner (Table
517.1). Modifying genes and acquired factors may also be operative.
Inherited pancytopenias account for approximately 30% of cases of
pediatric bone marrow failure. Clinical features may help differentiate the IBMFS disorders (Table 517.2), but whole exome sequencing
(WES) or specific bone marrow failure syndrome gene panels help to
confirm the diagnosis.

FANCONI ANEMIA
Etiology and Epidemiology

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare multisystem hereditary disorder resulting in the development of bone marrow failure in those affected and a
predisposition to malignancy, including myelodysplasia (MDS), acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), and epithelial cancers. Individuals with FA

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3000 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 517.1  Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Multilineage Cytopenia and Familial MDS/AML: Inheritance,
Variant Genes, and Affected Pathways
DISORDER

INHERITANCE

Fanconi anemia

AR

GENE

AFFECTED PATHWAYS
DNA repair, homologous recombination, ribosome biogenesis (FANCI)

XLR

FANCA, FANCC, FANCD1/BRCA2, FANCD2,
FANCE, FANCF, FANCG/XRCC9, FANCI,
FANCJ/BRIP1, FANCL/PHF9, FANCM,
FANCN/PALB2, FANCO/RAD51C, FANCP/
SLX4, FANCQ/ERCC4, FANCR/RAD51,
FANCS/BRCA1, FANCT/UBE2T, FANCU/
XRCC2, FANCV/REV7, FANCW/RFWD3
FANCB

Mixed Fanconi anemia/­xeroderma
pigmentosa/Cockayne
­syndrome

AR

ERCC1/XPF

DNA repair

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome

AR

SBDS, DNAJC21, EFL1

Ribosome biogenesis

AD

SRP54

Co-­translational protein modification

XLR

DKC1

AD
AR

TINF2, TERC, TERT, RTEL1, ACD(TPP1), PARN
TERT, RTEL1, ACD(TPP1), WRAP53(TCAB1),
CTC1, POT1, RPA1, PARN, NOP10, NHP2

Telomere maintenance, ribosome
biogenesis
Telomere maintenance, RNA processing
Telomere maintenance, RNA
­processing, ribosome biogenesis

Congenital amegakaryocytic
thrombocytopenia

AR

MPL

Hematopoietic cytokine receptor

SRP72-­associated hereditary
aplastic anemia/MDS

AD

SRP72

Co-­translational protein modification

ERCC6L2-­associated hereditary
aplastic anemia/MDS

AR

ERCC6L2

Transcription

THPO-­associated hereditary
aplastic anemia/MDS

AR/AD

THPO

Hematopoietic cytokine

Reticular dysgenesis

AR

AK2

Nucleotide metabolism

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia

AR

RMRP, POP1, NEPRO

rRNA and mitochondrial RNA processing

Pearson’s syndrome

Maternal

mDNA

Mitochondrial DNA genes

Familial thrombocytopenia with
predisposition to AML

AD

RUNX1/CBFA2

Hematopoietic cytokines

AD

ETV6

Transcription repression

AD

GATA2

Transcription

Bone marrow failure and diabetes

DUT

Nucleotide metabolism

Familial MDS/AML (others)

CEBPA

Transcription

Familial MDS/AML (others)

DDX41

RNA helicase

Dyskeratosis congenita

GATA2-­associated disorders
(MonoMac syndrome, ­Emberger
syndrome, familial MDS
­syndrome)

DNA repair, homologous
­recombination

Seckel syndrome

AR

CEP152, CENPJ, CEP63, NIN, PLK4,
­CDK5RAP2;
ATR, RBBP8, ATRIP, DNA2

Centriole/Centrosome duplication and
function;
DNA damage sensing and repair, and
checkpoint signaling activation

Schimke immunoosseous
­dysplasia

AR

SMARCAL1

Chromatin remodeling

Dubowitz syndrome

AR

NSUN2;
LIG4

Cytosine methylation in various RNA
types;
DNA non-­homologous end joining
repair

AD

-­14q32, -­17q24, -­19q13

Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome

AR

RECQL4

Chromosome segregation

Nijmegen breakage syndrome

AR

NBN

DNA repair

AD, Autosomal dominant; AML, acute myeloid leukemia AR, autosomal recessive; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; UK, unknown; XLR, X-­linked recessive.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia

3001

Table 517.2  Clinical Manifestations and Laboratory Findings in Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndrome
SYNDROME

NONHEMATOLOGICAL CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Fanconi anemia

Short stature, low birth weight, microcephaly, microphthalmia, hearing loss, triangular face, micrognathia, cardiac
anomalies, tracheoesophageal fistula, esophageal atresia,
kidney anomalies, hypoplastic thenar eminence, clinodactyly, café-­au-­lait spots

Pancytopenia, macrocytosis, elevated Hb F,
increased chromosome breakage in clastogenic assay

Dyskeratosis congenita

Mucocutaneous triad (skin pigmentation, nail dysplasia,
oral leukoplakia), short stature, low birth weight, failure to
thrive, pulmonary fibrosis, stenosis of the esophagus, liver
fibrosis

Pancytopenia, macrocytosis, elevated Hb F,
very short telomeres

Diamond-­Blackfan anemia

Low birth weight, short stature, developmental delay,
anomalies in craniofacial skeleton, eyes, heart, visceral
organs, and limbs

Anemia, elevated red blood cell adenosine
deaminase, macrocytosis, elevated Hb F

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, failure to thrive, malabsorption, short stature, neurodevelopment and skeletal
abnormalities

Neutropenia, low serum isoamylase, low
serum trypsinogen

Severe congenital neutropenia

Recurrent infection

Neutropenia

Congenital amegakaryocytic
thrombocytopenia

Nonsyndromic (occasionally, growth retardation, cardiac
anomalies, psychomotor developmental delay)

Thrombocytopenia, reduced megakaryocytes

GATA2 deficiency

Lymphedema, immunodeficiency, atypical mycobacterial
infections

Neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia

SAMD9/SAMD9L disorders

MIRAGE (SAMD9): MDS, infection, restriction of growth,
adrenal hypoplasia, genital phenotypes, and enteropathy

Transient or permanent cytopenia

Ataxia–pancytopenia syndrome (SAMD9L): cerebellar atrophy and white matter hyperintensities, gait disturbance,
nystagmus
MECOM-­associated syndromes

Radioulnar synostosis, clinodactyly, hearing loss, cardiac/
renal malformation

Thrombocytopenia

Pearson syndrome

Pancreatic insufficiency, failure to thrive, microcephaly,
ptosis, Kearns-Sayre syndrome

Neutropenia, anemia, pancytopenia, lactic
acidosis, hyperglycemia

Hb F, Hemoglobin F; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome.
Modified from Park M. Overview of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. Blood Res. 2022;57(S1):49–54. Table 1.

often have congenital malformations and high sensitivity to alkylating
agents and radiation. The estimated frequency of FA is 1 in 200,000
in most populations but is higher in Ashkenazi Jews (1:30,000) and
Afrikaners (1:22,000). Carrier frequency is approximately 1:200-­300 in
most populations. Pathogenic variants in 22 genes, designated FANC
genes, have been reported to cause FA or FA-­like disease. All pathogenic variants except for one are inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. One uncommon form of FA is X-­linked recessive. FA occurs
in all ethnic groups. At presentation, patients may have typical physical
anomalies and abnormal hematologic findings (majority of patients),
normal physical features but abnormal hematologic findings (about
one third of patients), or physical anomalies and normal hematologic
findings (unknown percentage of patients). There can be sibling discordance in clinical and hematologic manifestations, even in affected
monozygotic twins.

Pathology

All FA genes code for proteins that play roles in various cellular pathways and most prominently in DNA cross linking and repair. Patients
with FA have faulty DNA repair and increased chromosomal fragility caused by DNA interstrand cross-­linking agents such as diepoxybutane (DEB) and mitomycin C (MMC). Cell fusion of FA cells with
normal cells or with cells from some unrelated patients with FA produces a corrective effect on chromosomal fragility, a process called
complementation. The classic FA phenotype that clearly defines the
FA-­associated genes (FANCA, FANCB, FANCC, FANCD1/BRCA2,
FANCD2, FANCE, FANCF, FANCG, FANCI, FANCJ/BACH1/BRIP1,
FANCL, FANCM, FANCN/PALB2, FANCP/SLX4, FANCQ/ERCC4,

UBE2T, REV7, RFWD3) includes the triad of bone marrow failure,
congenital anomalies, and elevated chromosome fragility. These
genes can be mutated in patients who have one or all of the components of the triad. Genes that were found to be associated with one or
two but not all three of the components are FA-­like genes (FANCO/
RAD51C, RAD51, FANCS/BRCA1, FANCR/EXCC2). FANCA accounts
for approximately 64% of FA cases, FANCC for 14%, and FANG for 9%.
FANCB, FANCD1/BRCA2, FANCD2, FANCE, and FANCF are collectively mutated in almost 13% of FA patients. The remaining genes are
pathogenic variants in rare cases.
The proteins encoded by wild-­type FANC genes are involved in the
DNA damage recognition and repair biochemical pathway. Therefore
aberrant proteins lead to genomic instability and chromosome fragility.
FANC proteins are involved in other cellular activities, such as reactive
oxygen species detoxification, energetic metabolism, and cytokine signaling. Thus FANC pathogenic variants likely affect several cellular and
biochemical roles of the respective proteins, which eventually leads to
the FA phenotype. The observed disease complexity and heterogeneity
is likely caused by the involvement of multiple cellular and biochemical
pathways both in unrelated individuals and in family members with
the same genetic pathogenic variant.

Clinical Manifestations

The most common congenital anomalies in FA are skeletal and include
absence of radii and/or thumbs that are hypoplastic, supernumerary, bifid, or absent. Anomalies of the feet, congenital hip dislocation,
and leg abnormalities can also be seen (Fig. 517.1 and Table 517.3).
Skin hyperpigmentation of the trunk, neck, and intertriginous areas;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3002 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

C

A

B

D

Fig. 517.1 A 3-­year-­old boy with Fanconi anemia who exhibits several classic phenotypic features. A, Front view. B, Face. C, Hands. D, Back right
shoulder. The features to be noted include short stature, dislocated hips, microcephaly, a broad nasal base, epicanthal folds, micrognathia, thumbs
attached by a thread, and café-­au-­lait spots with hypopigmented areas beneath. (From Nathan DC, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al, eds: Nathan and
Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and Childhood, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003. p. 285.)

Table 517.3  Specific Types of Anomalies in Fanconi Anemia
SKIN (40%)
Generalized hyperpigmentation on the trunk, neck, and intertriginous
areas; café-­au-­lait spots; hypopigmented areas
BODY (40%)
Short stature, delicate features, small size, underweight
UPPER LIMBS (35%)
Thumbs (35%): absent or hypoplastic; supernumerary, bifid, or
­duplicated; rudimentary; short, low set, attached by a thread;
triphalangeal, tubular, stiff, hyperextensible
Radii (7%): absent or hypoplastic (only with abnormal thumbs); absent
or weak pulse
Hands (5%): clinodactyly; hypoplastic thenar eminence; six fingers;
absent first metacarpal; enlarged, abnormal fingers; short fingers;
transverse crease
Ulnae (1%): dysplastic or absent
LOWER LIMBS (5%)
Feet: toe syndactyly, abnormal toes, flat feet, short toes, clubfeet, six
toes, supernumerary toe
Legs: congenital hip dislocation, Perthes disease, coxa vara, abnormal
femur, thigh osteoma, abnormal legs
GONADS
Males (25%): hypogenitalia, undescended testes, hypospadias,
­abnormal genitalia, absent testis, atrophic testes, azoospermia,
­phimosis, abnormal urethra, micropenis, delayed development
Females (2%): hypogenitalia; bicornuate uterus; abnormal genitalia;
aplasia of uterus and vagina; atresia of uterus, vagina, and ovary
OTHER SKELETAL ANOMALIES
Head (20%) and face (2%): microcephaly, hydrocephalus, micrognathia,
peculiar face, birdlike face, flat head, frontal bossing, scaphocephaly,
sloped forehead, choanal atresia, dental abnormalities
Neck (1%): Sprengel deformity; short, low hairline; webbed
Spine (2%): spina bifida (thoracic, lumbar, cervical, occult sacral),
­scoliosis, abnormal ribs, sacral agenesis, sacrococcygeal sinus,
Klippel-­Feil syndrome, vertebral anomalies, extra vertebrae

EYES (20%)
Small eyes, strabismus, epicanthal folds, short or almond-­shaped
­palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, ptosis, slanting, cataracts,
­astigmatism, blindness, epiphora, nystagmus, proptosis, small iris
EARS (10%)
Deafness (usually conductive); abnormal shape; atresia; dysplasia; low
set, large, or small; infections; abnormal middle ear; absent eardrum;
dimples; rotated; canal stenosis
KIDNEY (20%)
Ectopic or pelvic; abnormal, horseshoe, hypoplastic, or dysplastic;
­absent; hydronephrosis or hydroureter; infections; duplicated;
­rotated; reflux; hyperplasia; no function; abnormal artery
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM (5%)
High-­arched palate, atresia (esophagus, duodenum, jejunum),
­imperforate anus, tracheoesophageal fistula, Meckel ­diverticulum,
umbilical hernia, hypoplastic uvula, abnormal biliary ducts,
­megacolon, abdominal diastasis, Budd-­Chiari syndrome
UROGENITAL
Males (25%): micropenis, penile-­scrotal fusion, undescended or ­atrophic
or absent testes, hypospadias, chordae, phimosis, ­azoospermia
Females (2%): bicornuate uterus, aplasia or hypoplasia of vagina and
uterus, atresia of vagina, hypoplastic uterus, hypoplastic or absent
ovary, hypoplastic fused labia
CARDIOPULMONARY SYSTEM (6%)
Patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal defect, abnormal heart,
peripheral pulmonic stenosis, aortic stenosis, coarctation, absent lung
lobes, vascular malformation, aortic atheromas, atrial septal defect,
tetralogy of Fallot, pseudotruncus, hypoplastic aorta, abnormal
­pulmonary drainage, double aortic arch, cardiac myopathy
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (3%)
Hyperreflexia, Bell palsy, central nervous system arterial ­malformation,
moyamoya syndrome, Arnold-­Chiari malformation, stenosis of
­internal carotid artery, small pituitary gland, absent corpus callosum
Slow development (10%)

Abnormalities are listed in the approximate order of frequency within each category.
Adapted from Shimamura A, Alter BP. Pathophysiology and management of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. Blood Rev. 2010;24:101–122.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia
café-­au-­lait spots; and vitiligo, alone or in combination, occur with
similar frequency. Short stature is common and in some patients is
aggravated by subnormal growth hormone (GH) secretion or hypothyroidism. Male patients with FA may have an underdeveloped penis;
undescended, atrophic, or absent testes; and hypospadias or phimosis,
and all are infertile. Females can have malformations of the vagina,
uterus, and ovary, and all have reduced fertility. Many patients have
characteristic facial dysmorphisms, including microcephaly, small
eyes, epicanthal folds, and abnormal shape, size, or positioning of
the ears (see Fig. 517.1). Kidneys may be ectopic, pelvic, horseshoe-­
shaped, hypoplastic, dysplastic, or absent. Cardiovascular (CV) and
gastrointestinal (GI) malformations also occur. Approximately 10%
of patients with FA are cognitively delayed. Neonates with FA usually
have intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and low birthweight and
may show malformations consistent with VACTERL/VACTERL-­
H
association (vertebral anomalies, anal atresia, cardiac malformations,
tracheoesophageal fistula with esophageal atresia, renal and limb structural abnormalities with hydrocephalus).
Bone marrow failure usually appears within the first decade of life.
Thrombocytopenia, red blood cell (RBC) macrocytosis, and increased
fetal hemoglobin (Hb F), as a result of bone marrow stress, often appear
first. At these stages, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy often show a hypocellular specimen. Subsequently, patients develop neutropenia and then
anemia. Severe aplasia develops in most cases, usually over a few years.

Cancer Risk and Other Complications

In addition to the low blood counts and physical anomalies, patients
with FA have a high risk of developing cancer. The most frequent solid
tumors are squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) of the head and neck (600-­
fold higher risk than the general population) and carcinoma of the
upper esophagus (2,000-­fold higher risk), the vulva (3,000-­fold higher
risk), and/or anus, cervix, and lower esophagus. Onset of solid-­tumor
malignancy is much sooner than that seen in the general population,
with median age of onset of SCC in the FA population occurring at
33 years vs 60–70 years in the general population. Human papillomavirus (HPV) is suspected in the pathogenesis of SCC. Benign and
malignant liver tumors can occur (adenomas, hepatomas) and are
usually associated with androgen therapy for aplastic anemia. Androgens are also implicated in the etiology of peliosis hepatis (blood-­
filled hepatic sinusoids), which is reversible when androgen therapy
is discontinued. Clonal bone marrow cytogenetic abnormalities are
common in FA and on follow-­up can either be stable, intermittently
detected, or progressive. The cumulative incidence of clonal and
malignant myeloid transformation by age 18 years, which includes
clonal cytogenetic marrow abnormalities, MDS, and AML, is approximately 75%. One study indicated that by age 40 years, the cumulative
incidence of leukemia is 33%.

Diagnosis

FA should be considered in all children and young adults with unexplained cytopenias. Abnormal hematologic findings and characteristic physical anomalies suggest the diagnosis, which can be confirmed
with a lymphocyte chromosomal breakage study done with and
without the addition of cross-­linking agents such as DEB and MMC.
Increased chromosome fragility is indicated by spontaneously occurring chromatid breaks, rearrangements, gaps, endoreduplications, and
chromatid exchanges in blood lymphocytes cultured with phytohemagglutinin, as well as in cultured skin fibroblasts, underscoring the
constitutional nature of FA. With the addition of DEB or MMC, fragility is strikingly enhanced in lymphocyte cultures of patients with
FA compared with those of controls. Abnormal chromosome breakage
analysis and genetic testing for prenatal diagnosis can be performed on
amniotic fluid cells or on tissue from a chorionic villus biopsy. No other
inherited pancytopenia is associated with a prominent in vitro hypersensitivity to DEB or MMC by the chromosomal breakage study. However, 10–15% of patients with suspected FA have somatic mosaicism
and may not show the characteristically high degree of chromosomal
fragility in their lymphocytes, reflecting the presence of mixed populations of somatic cells, some with two abnormal alleles and some with

3003

only one. The latter population of lymphocytes derives from a portion of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) that underwent spontaneous
somatic gene correction on one allele. Testing of skin fibroblasts should
be performed if the suspicion of FA is high despite negative testing on
peripheral blood lymphocytes.
Next-­generation sequencing (NGS) gene panels and WES are the
tests of choice for FA. NGS is an efficient and accurate method for
diagnosing FA but can occasionally be limited by difficulties in interpreting previously unreported variants or in unraveling pathogenic
variants due to reversion variants or technical matters. When no definite causative point pathogenic variants are found, high-­resolution
copy number variation analysis techniques are employed, followed by a
genome-­wide search for pathogenic variants in novel associated genes.
Pathogenic variants in one of the 22 FA genes are found in over 95%
of FA cases.
Extensive screening for potential medical problems is necessary after
the diagnosis of FA is established. Imaging using radiation should be
minimized as much as possible because of the carcinogenic risk inherent to this genetic instability disease; MRI should replace CT whenever
possible. In addition to detailed review of the past medical history and
thorough physical examination, the screen should include ultrasonographic examination of the abdomen and echocardiography to rule
out internal congenital anomalies. Other imaging may be done as necessary and based on the initial screen. Subspecialty consultations for
anomalies and disabilities that have been identified can be arranged
during this interval. If growth velocity is below expectations, endocrine
evaluation is needed to assess for GH and thyroid deficiency. Blood
work should include evaluation of renal, liver, thyroid, metabolic, and
immune systems.

Treatment

A hematologist, preferably one who specializes in IBMFSs, with a multidisciplinary team should manage patients with FA. At diagnosis, a
detailed assessment of the patient’s blood counts, bone marrow function, growth, development, and other organ function should be carried
out.
If hematologic abnormalities are mild to moderate and stable and
there is no transfusion requirement, patients can be observed closely
with peripheral blood counts every 3 months and bone marrow aspiration surveillance every year for clonal cytogenetic abnormalities, MDS,
and AML. Bone marrow biopsy might also be intermittently done
during bone marrow testing to evaluate changes in percentage of cellularity and fibrosis. More frequent monitoring can be applied when
deemed necessary, as when a decline in blood counts occurs. Glucose
levels should be performed annually or biannually, depending on the
degree of hyperglycemia found on initial testing. Screening for hypothyroidism should be performed yearly. Patients should be assessed for
solid tumors at least annually, with a careful physical examination that
includes comprehensive inspection of the skin, oral cavity, and other
organs for unusual masses. After a certain age (e.g., 10 years) or after
HSC transplant (HSCT), fluoroscopic examination of the orolaryngeal
cavity and occult fecal blood testing are also recommended. Beginning
at menarche, female patients should be screened annually for gynecologic cancer. Administration of HPV quadrivalent vaccine to decrease
the risk of SCC is advised.
Chromosome fragility (and/or targeted genetic testing) should be
offered to siblings and parents of affected patients for identification of
other affected individuals. It is noteworthy that heterozygosity for several FA genes (e.g., FANCN, FANCD1, FANCS) is associated with cancer
development. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing of patients, biological parents, and full siblings for future HSCT should also occur early.
HSCT is the only curative therapy for the hematologic abnormalities
observed in FA patients. Outcomes have improved because of modified
reduced-­intensity regimens that include fludarabine, low dose cyclophosphamide, and antithymocyte globulin with or without low-­dose
busulfan. Most regimens do not use radiation. These regimens have
decreased the toxicities experienced by FA patients, who have high
sensitivity to DNA-­damaging agents such as alkylating drugs and irradiation. Those who undergo transplant using an HLA-­identical sibling

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3004 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
donor without irradiation in the preparative regimen have an overall
3-­5-­year survival rate of >90%.
Traditionally, HSCT of FA patients with matched unrelated donors
(MUD) or mismatched related donors have been a challenge because
of the high degree of HSCT-­related toxicity and death. However, major
progress has been made in this regard. Several reports of radiation-­
free HSCT with in vivo or ex-­vivo T-­cell depleted, peripheral blood
CD34+ selected MUD graft and conditioning with fludarabine, rabbit antithymocyte globulin (ATG), low-­
dose cyclophosphamide,
and low-­
dose busulfan demonstrated 80% or higher probabilities
of overall and disease-­free survival 1–­5 years post HSCT. Improvement in high-­resolution HLA typing contributes to better selection
of unrelated-­donor selection and a better outcome. Transplantation
using haploidentical donors is on the rise and is showing promising
outcomes, similar to those seen with unrelated donors.
Those transplanted before they receive multiple transfusions or
develop clonal and malignant myeloid transformation (MDS or AML)
do better. Survival rates are higher for patients who undergo transplant
at <10 years of age. Molecular technology has led to preimplantation
genetic diagnosis on parent-­derived blastomeres, allowing for the unaffected ones to be implanted and resulting in the creation of an HLA-­
matched sibling donor without FA.
Androgens produce a response in approximately 70% of patients, heralded by reticulocytosis and a rise in hemoglobin within 1-­2 months.
White blood cell (WBC) counts may increase next, followed by platelet counts. After the initial response is seen, counts may continue to
improve over many months until a maximum response is achieved. If
a low dose is initially employed, the androgen dose can be increased
every 3-­4 weeks as long as no major side effects are seen and until
the desired response is achieved. If a high dose is initially employed,
androgen dosage can be slowly reduced to the minimum dose that
maintains the required blood counts. Oral danazol and oxymetholone
are currently the two most commonly used androgenic drugs. Patients
typically stop responding to androgens after several months or years,
as their bone marrow failure progresses or as they develop MDS or
AML. Thus androgen therapy is not curative but is used rather as a
bridge while waiting for a suitable donor for HSCT or while weighing
the risks and benefits of transplant. Side effects of androgens include
masculinization, increased linear growth, increased mood swings or
aggressiveness, elevated hepatic enzymes, cholestasis, peliosis hepatis,
and liver tumors. Screenings for these should be performed regularly.
The potential for recombinant growth factor (cytokine) therapy for
FA has not been defined. Granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (G-­
CSF) can usually induce an increase in the absolute neutrophil count;
however, there may be a heightened risk of expansion of bone marrow
cells with clonal cytogenetic abnormalities such as monosomy 7. In one
study, combination therapy consisting of G-­CSF given subcutaneously
daily or every 2 days along with erythropoietin given subcutaneously
or intravenously 3 times per week resulted in improved neutrophil
counts in most patients and a sustained rise in hemoglobin and platelet levels in approximately one third of patients. Most patients lost the
response because of progression of bone marrow disease.

Prognosis

Improvements in supportive care, careful surveillance of known complications, prompt intervention, and improved transplant techniques
have resulted in patients with FA surviving into their 30s. Unfortunately, there is an increased risk of solid tumors after HSCT. For example, head and neck cancer risk is increased 4.4-­fold and is accelerated
by approximately 15 years compared with nontransplanted patients.
The cumulative incidence of malignancy 20 years after transplant is
35–40%. Some of the increased risk might be attributed to the use of
DNA-­damaging agents or the occurrence of graft-­versus-­host disease
(GVHD).

SHWACHMAN-­DIAMOND SYNDROME
Etiology and Epidemiology

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome (SDS) is an inherited disorder caused
by pathogenic variants in one of four genes. It occurs in all racial and

Table 517.4  Major Clinical Features of Shwachman-­
Diamond Syndrome
CLINICAL FEATURE

TOTAL/AVERAGE

Number of patients

225

Neutropenia

90%

Severe (≤500/μL)

46%

Anemia

46%

Thrombocytopenia

42%

Pancytopenia

21%

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

98%

Liver (elevated transaminases)

61%

Skeletal abnormalities

70%

Metaphyseal dysostosis

53%

Rib cage abnormalities

35%

Short stature (<3rd percentile)

66%

Data from Ginzberg H, Shin J, Ellis L, et al. Shwachman syndrome: phenotypic
manifestations of sibling sets and isolated cases in a large patient cohort are similar.
J Pediatr. 1999;135:81–88; Cipolli M, D’Orazio C, Delmarco A, et al. Shwachman’s
syndrome: pathomorphosis and long-­term outcome. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
1999;29:265–272; and Kuijpers TW, Alders M, Tool AT, et al. Hematologic abnormalities
in Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome: lack of genotype-­phenotype relationship. Blood.
2005;106:356–361.

ethnic groups. SDS is a multisystem disorder. However, the nonhematologic manifestations of SDS are substantially different and usually
include exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and skeletal abnormalities
such as metaphyseal dysplasia (Table 517.4). SDS is a ribosomopathy,
and the underlying defect is in ribosome assembly.

Pathology

Four genes have been linked to SDS. SBDS is the first gene that was
described to have biallelic variants in SDS in 2003. SBDS maps to
chromosome 7q11 and accounts for 80–90% of SDS cases. SBDS plays
a role in the late stage of the pre-­60S ribosome subunit maturation,
binding to the EFL1 GTPase and facilitating the release of eIF6 to
enable 80S monosome formation. DNAJC21 is the second reported
SDS gene. The function of the human DNAJC21 is required for the
release and recycling of the Arx1/Alb1 heterodimer from the pre-­60S
biogenesis factors. The third SDS gene discovered is EFL1. DNAJC21
and EFL1-­associated SDS are autosomal recessive. Monoallelic pathogenic variants in SRP54, a protein involved in co-­translational protein
modification, mainly cause severe congenital neutropenia phenotype.
Nevertheless, a small proportion of the patients have partial or classical
SDS phenotype. The underlying genetic defects of SDS indicate that the
last step in ribosome biogenesis is associated with pancytopenia (most
often neutropenia) and a hypoplastic bone marrow. Defects in ribosomal proteins that are involved in earlier stages of ribosome subunit
maturation and are structural components of the ribosome are associated with predominantly anemia and pure red cell aplasia.
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is caused by failure of exocrine
pancreatic acinar development in SDS, and fatty replacement of pancreatic tissue is prominent. Bone marrow failure is characterized by
dysfunctional HSCs, accelerated apoptosis of bone marrow progenitors, and a defective bone marrow microenvironment that does not
support and maintain normal hematopoiesis.

Clinical Manifestations

Most patients with SDS have symptoms of fat malabsorption from
birth that are caused by pancreatic insufficiency, but steatorrhea is not
always obvious. Approximately 50% of patients appear to exhibit an
improvement in pancreatic enzyme secretion as they age. The clinical
picture can be dominated by complications from neutropenia, anemia,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia
or thrombocytopenia. Bacterial and fungal infections secondary to
neutropenia, neutrophil dysfunction, and immunodeficiency can
occur. A major concern is the development of MDS and acute leukemia, most often AML.
Short stature is a consistent feature of SDS. Most patients show normal growth velocity yet remain consistently below the 3rd percentile
for height and weight. The occasional SDS adult achieves the 25th percentile for height. Although skeletal abnormalities are variable, classic
findings are metaphyseal dysplasia, osteopenia, delayed appearance
of secondary ossification centers, short or flared ribs, and thoracic
dystrophy.
Some patients have hepatomegaly and elevations of liver enzymes.
Most patients have dental abnormalities and poor oral health. Many
have neurocognitive problems and poor social skills.

Laboratory Findings

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in SDS is associated with reduced
age-­
adjusted serum trypsinogen and pancreatic isoamylase levels.
Because serum pancreatic isoamylase is physiologically low in the first
3 years of life, and because reduced serum trypsinogen is typically seen
in young infants and often improves with age, testing both enzymes is
helpful. Fecal elastase is often reduced in SDS patients. Fat-­soluble vitamin (A, D, E, and K) absorption is impaired, and thus measurement
of vitamin A, D, and E levels, as well as prothrombin time (or international normalized ratio [INR]), is helpful to assess the consequences of
fat malabsorption. Ultrasound or CT scan can visualize fatty replacement of pancreatic tissue. Fat malabsorption can be proven by assay on
a 72-­hour stool collection.
Neutropenia is observed in about 70% of patients with SDS at presentation and is seen in close to 100% of patients on follow-­up. It is
chronic but can be persistent or intermittent and mild, moderate, or
severe. It has been identified in some neonates during an episode of
sepsis. Neutrophils may have a defect in mobility, migration, and chemotaxis because of alterations in neutrophil cytoskeletal or microtubular function. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and pancytopenia are seen
in 40–66%, 40–60%, and 21–44% of cases, respectively. Pancytopenia
can be severe as a result of full-­blown aplastic anemia. Bone marrow
aspirate and biopsy specimens show varying degrees of bone marrow hypoplasia and fat infiltration. However, at a young age or when
patients develop MDS or leukemia, the bone marrow can be normocellular or even hypercellular.
Patients may also have B-­cell defects with one or more of the following: low immunoglobulin G (IgG) or IgG subclasses, low percentage of
circulating B lymphocytes, decreased in vitro B-­cell proliferation, and
lack of specific antibody production. Patients may have a low percentage of circulating T cells, subsets, or natural killer cells and decreased
in vitro T-­cell proliferation.

Diagnosis

The clinical diagnosis of SDS relies on having evidence of two of the
following: bone marrow dysfunction, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency,
and metaphyseal dysplasia. However, atypical presentations have been
identified, such as MDS without previous documentation of low blood
counts. Up to 20% of patients lack clear evidence of exocrine pancreatic
defects at diagnosis. Furthermore, 20–60% lack metaphyseal dysplasia at diagnosis because this bony anomaly often develops with age.
Therefore it is recommended that all patients with either hypoplastic/
aplastic bone marrow or exocrine pancreatic insufficiency or metaphyseal dysplasia of unknown etiology be considered for SDS genetic testing. Genetic analysis for SBDS, DNAJC21, and EFL1 are definitive in all
or almost all cases of SDS. A patient with neutropenia and an SRP54
pathogenic variant who does not have exocrine pancreatic insufficiency or metaphyseal dysplasia should be considered as having severe
congenital neutropenia.
Pearson syndrome, consisting of refractory sideroblastic anemia, cytoplasmic vacuolization of bone marrow precursors, metabolic acidosis, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and a diagnostic
mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variant, is similar to SDS, but the
clinical course, morphologic features of the bone marrow, and gene

3005

pathogenic variant are different. Severe anemia requiring transfusion,
rather than neutropenia, is present in Pearson syndrome from birth to
1 year of age. SDS shares some manifestations with Fanconi anemia,
such as bone marrow dysfunction and growth failure, but patients
with SDS are readily distinguished because of pancreatic insufficiency
with fat malabsorption, fatty changes within the pancreatic body visualized by imaging, characteristic skeletal abnormalities not seen in
FA, and a normal chromosomal breakage study with DEB and MMC.
Distinguishing SDS from dyskeratosis congenita (DC) may not be
possible based solely on clinical findings and pancreatic enzyme levels; telomere length measurement may facilitate a correct diagnosis. In
difficult cases of IBMFSs that cannot be easily classified, comprehensive
genetic testing using an NGS panel of all known IBMFS genes or unbiased testing using WES/genome sequencing is likely to assist in establishing a diagnosis.

Predisposition to Cancer

Patients with SDS are predisposed to MDS and leukemic transformation. Approximately 25% of patients develop clonal marrow cytogenetic abnormalities, MDS, or leukemia by age 18 years. About one third
of patients have been reported to develop leukemia by age 30 years.
Isochromosome 7q [i(7q)] is particularly common and is rarely seen
in other conditions. i(7q) might be related to the presence of pathogenic variant SBDS on 7q11 and likely confers a compensatory effect
by increasing SBDS transcribing alleles (although they remain variant).
Other clonal chromosome abnormalities include monosomy 7, i(7q)
combined with monosomy 7, deletions or translocations involving part
of 7q, and deletions of 20q [Del(20q)]. The i(7q) and del(20q) are associated with relatively low risk and very slow progression to MDS or
leukemic transformation.

Treatment

Fat malabsorption responds to oral pancreatic enzyme replacement
and supplemental fat-­soluble vitamins, administered according to
guidelines similar to those for cystic fibrosis. A long-­term plan should
be initiated to periodically monitor changes in peripheral blood
counts that require corrective action and to look for early evidence of
malignant myeloid transformation. The latter also requires periodic
bone marrow aspirations for smears and cytogenetic testing, as well
as bone marrow biopsy. A common recommendation is to perform
bone marrow testing every 1-­3 years and complete blood counts every
3 months.
Daily subcutaneous G-­CSF for profound neutropenia is effective in
inducing a sustained increase in neutrophils. Some patients require
transfusion support for management of severe anemia or thrombocytopenia. Experience with erythropoietin is limited. Androgens have
been used in few published cases (with and without steroids); some
patients showed response, and some did not.
The only curative option for severe bone marrow failure and
advanced MDS or leukemia in SDS is allogeneic HSCT. Traditional
myeloablative HSCT results in treatment-­related mortality in 35–50%
of patients. Reduced-­intensity conditioning regimens that incorporate fludarabine appear to be safer and have been shown to be effective in SDS. Graft failure poses a challenge, possibly due to a stromal
cell defect that is not corrected by HSCT. Results of treatment for
advanced MDS and AML are generally limited, and outcome is typically poor.

Prognosis

The accurate life expectancy of SDS patients is unknown; analysis
of published cases revealed a median survival of 35 years. Because
the number of undiagnosed patients with mild or asymptomatic disease is unknown, the overall prognosis may be better than previously
thought.
Although all patients have some degree of hematologic cytopenia at
diagnosis, the changes in most patients are mild to moderate and do
not require therapeutic intervention. Severe neutropenia responds well
to G-­CSF, but there is a concern that G-­CSF may promote the growth
of evolving MDS or leukemia clones because of the agent’s powerful

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3006 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
growth stimulus on bone marrow cells. HSCT for severe bone marrow
failure has produced a 50–70% survival rate, but safer protocols need
to be introduced. Malignant bone marrow transformation remains
ominous.
Approximately 50% of patients experience spontaneous conversion
from exocrine pancreatic insufficiency to pancreatic sufficiency as a
result of improvement in pancreatic enzyme secretion.

DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA
Etiology and Epidemiology

DC is an inherited multisystem telomere disorder. A diagnostic triad
of mucocutaneous features was proposed when the disorder was first
described and included dysplastic nails, lacy reticular pigmentation
of the upper chest and/or neck, and oral leukoplakia (Fig. 517.2).
However, this triad is not present in all individuals. If it occurs, skin
and nail findings usually become apparent in the first 10 years of life,
whereas oral leukoplakia may be noticed later. Manifestations tend to
progress as patients age. Hematological manifestations are actually the
most common features in this disease. Varying degrees of bone marrow failure are seen in approximately 90% of patients. Severe aplastic
anemia occurs in approximately 50% of cases, with the age of onset
varying according to the genetic group. In some genetic groups, the
disease usually starts in the first decade of life (e.g., DKC1, TINF2,
PARN), whereas in others, it typically starts after the first decade (e.g.,
TERT, TERC). In addition to progressive bone marrow failure, patients
with DC are also at high risk for pulmonary and hepatic fibrosis, other
congenital anomalies, and a predisposition to solid tumors and MDS
or AML. DC is rare, with an incidence in childhood of approximately 4
cases per 1 million population per year.

Pathology

DC is genetically heterogeneous, and patients have pathogenic variants in genes that encode components of the telomerase complex
(TERT, TERC), telomere-­capping complex (CTC1, STN1), T-­loop
unwinding and telomere replication (RTEL1, RPA1), telomerase
trafficking (WRAP53/TCAB1), TERC-­associated factors that stimulate telomerase activity (DKC1, NOP10, NHP2, NAF1), TERC-­
maturation factors (PARN), and telomere-­shelterin complex (TINF2,
POT1, ACD).
All components are critical for telomere maintenance. The X-­linked
recessive form of DC maps to Xq28, and many pathogenic variants
have been identified in the DKC1 gene, which codes for the nuclear
protein dyskerin. The autosomal dominant form of disease is caused
by pathogenic variants in TINF2, TERC, TERT, RTEL1, ACD, NAF1,
and RPA1. Autosomal recessive DC is linked to pathogenic variants in NOP10, NHP2, TCAB1/WRAP53, CTC1, and STN1, as well
as TERT, TERC, RTEL1, PARN, and ACD. Because of impaired telomere maintenance in all three inherited forms of DC, extremely short
telomeres (<1st percentile for age) are demonstrated in the peripheral
blood cells of all patients. Finding extremely short telomeres in lymphocytes performed by automated multicolor flow fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) has 97% sensitivity and 91% specificity for DC.
Approximately 70% of individuals who meet clinical diagnostic criteria
of DC have a pathogenic variant in one of the known DC-­related genes.
Pathogenic variants in DKC1 are most common (20–25% of individuals), followed by TINF2 (12–20% of individuals), TERC (5–10% of
individuals), RTEL1, TERT, and CTC1. The remainder of the genetic
pathogenic variants have been described in only a few families. Bone
marrow failure is likely caused by progressive attrition and depletion
of HSCs because of premature senescence, apoptosis, or chromosome
instability, which manifests as pancytopenia.

Clinical Manifestations

A

B

C

E

D

F

Fig. 517.2 Features of the diagnostic triad in dyskeratosis congenita.

A and B, Dystrophic nails on hands and feet. C and D, Lacy reticular
pigmentation on neck and upper thorax. E and F, Oral leukoplakia on
tongue and buccal mucosa. (A-­C and E from Shimamura A, Alter BP.
Pathophysiology and management of inherited bone marrow failure
syndromes. Blood Rev. 2010;24:101–122, Fig. 8; D and F from Savage
SA, Alter BP. Dyskeratosis congenital. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am.
2009;23:215–231)

The clinical criteria for classic DC include the presence of at least two
of the four major features—abnormal skin pigmentation, nail dystrophy, leukoplakia, and bone marrow failure—and two or more of
the other somatic features known to occur in DC. However, making
a diagnosis continues to be challenging because individuals develop
clinical features of DC at variable rates and ages, even within the same
family. Further, some of the patients have only one complication (e.g.,
isolated bone marrow failure or isolated pulmonary fibrosis). In about
one quarter of individuals with DC, pathogenic variants in the known
DC-­related genes cannot be identified. The spectrum ranges from individuals who develop bone marrow failure first, then years later develop
other classic findings such as nail abnormalities, to others who have
severe nail problems and abnormalities of skin pigmentation at presentation but normal bone marrow function. In classic disease, skin
pigmentation and nail changes typically appear first, usually in the first
decade of life. Bone marrow failure usually develops within the first
two decades, with 80% of patients developing bone marrow failure by
age 30 years and almost 90% of patients having bone marrow failure at
some point in their life.
Lacy reticulated skin pigmentation affecting the face, neck, chest,
and arms is a common finding (89%). The degree of pigmentation
increases with age and can involve the entire skin surface. There may
also be a telangiectatic erythematous component. Nail dystrophy of
both hands and feet is the next most common finding (88%). It usually
starts with longitudinal ridging, splitting, or pterygium formation and
may progress to complete nail loss. Leukoplakia usually involves the
oral mucosa (78%), especially the tongue, but may also be seen in the
conjunctiva and the anal, urethral, or genital mucosa. Excessive tearing (epiphora) secondary to nasolacrimal duct obstruction is common and observed in about 30% of individuals. Approximately 25%
of individuals have learning difficulties and/or developmental delay.
Hyperhidrosis of the palms and soles, hair loss and graying, dental caries or loss, esophageal stricture, pulmonary disease with reduced diffusion capacity and/or a restrictive defect due to pulmonary fibrosis
and abnormalities in pulmonary vasculature, and short stature are each
seen in approximately 15–20% of individuals.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia
Ocular abnormalities include conjunctivitis, blepharitis, loss of eyelashes, strabismus, cataracts, and optic atrophy. Skeletal abnormalities include osteoporosis, avascular necrosis of the hips or shoulders,
abnormal bone trabeculation, scoliosis, and mandibular hypoplasia.
Genitourinary abnormalities include hypoplastic testes, hypospadias,
phimosis, urethral stenosis, and horseshoe kidney. GI findings, such as
vascular lesions causing bleeding, hepatomegaly, peptic ulceration, and
fibrosis, are seen in 10% of cases.

Laboratory Findings

The initial hematologic change in DC is usually thrombocytopenia,
anemia, or both, followed by pancytopenia and aplastic anemia. The
red cells are often macrocytic, and the Hb F is elevated. Initial bone
marrow specimens may be normocellular or hypercellular, but with
time, a symmetric depletion of all hematopoietic lineages ensues.
Some patients have immunologic abnormalities, including reduced or
elevated immunoglobulin values, decreased B-­and/or T-­lymphocyte
counts, and reduction or absence of lymphocyte proliferative responses
to phytohemagglutinin. This is particularly common and severe in the
DKC1-­
associated disease. Primary skin fibroblasts in culture have
abnormal morphologic features and doubling rate and show numerous unbalanced chromosome rearrangements, such as dicentrics, tricentrics, and translocations, in the absence of DEB or MMC. These
findings provide evidence of a defect that predisposes patient cells to
chromosomal rearrangements and possibly to DNA damage.
The hallmark of DC is very short telomeres, below the first percentile
for age. However, some patients do not have short telomeres. Further,
adult patients tend to have telomere length at the low range of normal
rather than below the first percentile.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of DC can often be made based on medical and family
history and physical examination. The following abnormalities are seen
in patients with DC but not in those with FA: nail dystrophy, early-­
onset leukoplakia, tooth abnormalities, hyperhidrosis of the palms and
soles, and hair loss. There are several relatively more severe forms of
DC. Hoyeraal-­Hreidarsson syndrome is a multisystem disorder that
presents in early childhood, which requires the features of DC along
with cerebellar hypoplasia to establish the diagnosis. Patients have
the classic diagnostic DC triad, in addition to developmental delay,
IUGR, and bone marrow failure. Hoyeraal-­Hreidarsson syndrome is
genetically heterogeneous and caused by X-­linked recessive pathogenic variants in DKC1. Some patients may also have severe immunodeficiency. Revesz syndrome has many of the features of DC and
presents in early childhood. Bilateral exudative retinopathy is required
to establish a diagnosis. Patients may also have intracranial calcifications, IUGR, developmental delay, and bone marrow failure. Pathogenic variants of TINF2 are involved in Revesz syndrome, making it
mostly an autosomal dominant condition, but a few patients have been
described without an identified pathogenic variant. Individuals with
these severe forms of DC have even shorter telomere lengths than those
with classic DC. Coats plus syndrome is caused by compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the CTC1 gene or the STN1 gene and
has overlapping features with DC, including sparse and graying hair,
dystrophic nails, and anemia. Telomeres can be very short, but patients
display variable telomere length. Coats plus syndrome is characterized
by retinal telangiectasia and exudates, intracranial calcification, leukodystrophy, brain cysts, osteopenia, GI bleeding, and portal hypertension caused by the development of vasculature ectasias in the stomach,
small intestine, and liver.
Laboratory testing and imaging are an important part in establishing
a diagnosis but also evaluate the spectrum of patient organ involvement. These tests include, but are not limited to, the laboratory tests
described in the section “Laboratory Findings,” as well as ultrasound of
the abdomen, pulmonary function tests, liver enzymes, and nutritional
elements (such as ferritin, folic acid, and vitamin B12). MRI of the head
is useful when the patient has developmental delay and ataxia. Baseline
bone marrow testing is critical. Annual evaluation of the bone marrow
and complete blood counts every 3 months are common practice.

3007

Because of genomic instability, imaging involving radiation should
be limited to those that may affect management.

Cancer Risk and Other Complications

Patients with DC are predisposed to MDS and AML, as well as to solid
tumors. Cancer usually develops in the third and fourth decades of life.
The cumulative incidence of solid cancers and leukemia by the age of
65–70 years were estimated as 20% and 5–10%, respectively. The cumulative incidence of MDS was predicted to be 20% by the age of 50 years.
The actuarial risk of clonal and malignant myeloid disease is 25% by
age 18 years.
Forty percent of the cancers in such patients are SCCs of the head
and neck (tongue, mouth, pharynx). SCCs of the skin and GI tract
(esophagus, stomach, colon), as well as anorectal adenocarcinoma, are
common. Patients may develop multiple separate primaries in different
sites involving the tongue and nasopharynx.
Other life-­threatening complications include pulmonary fibrosis,
liver fibrosis, and severe GI bleeding.

Treatment

Androgens can induce improvement of bone marrow function in
approximately 70% of patients, and in some, this treatment can result
in normal trilineage blood counts for a number of years. Patients with
DC become refractory to androgens as aplastic anemia progresses due
to HSC depletion. They also tend to be more sensitive to the side effects
of androgens than FA patients, making it important to start with lower
doses and to monitor for side effects frequently. When the response is
maximal, the androgen dose can be slowly reduced to the minimum
dose required to maintain desired and safe blood cell counts but cannot be stopped.
Cytokine therapy with granulocyte-­macrophage colony stimulating
factor (GM-­CSF) or with G-­CSF alone or combined with erythropoietin appears to offer potential benefit, at least in the short term. Use
of cytokines needs to be balanced with a potential growth-­promoting
effect of these medications on as-­yet undetected MDS or AML cells.
Allogeneic HSCT is the only curative option for severe bone marrow
failure, MDS, and AML. Long-­term survival, even with sibling HLA-­
matched HSC donors, has traditionally been poor at about 50%. Morbidity and mortality result from transplant-­related complications such
as graft failure, GVHD, sepsis, or venoocclusive disease or from emergence of DC-­related complications, such as pulmonary fibrosis and GI
bleeding related to vascular anomalies. The high morbidity and mortality rate after HSCT is likely caused by ongoing tissue sensitivity and
aging because of the telomere maintenance defect.

Prognosis

Considerable heterogeneity exists in DC, and some data about
genotype-­phenotype correlations are available. Patients with certain
genetic groups (e.g., monoallelic TERC, TERT) may develop severe
aplastic anemia or fibrosis of the liver and lungs, but these complications may appear later on in life and may not be accompanied by
multisystem involvement. Patients with other genetic groups (e.g.,
monoallelic pathogenic variants in DKC1 or TINF2 and biallelic pathogenic variants in PARN, ACD, RTEL1, TERC or TERT) appear to have
more physical anomalies and a higher incidence and earlier onset of
aplastic anemia and cancer. The mean age of death for patients with
DC who are diagnosed in childhood is approximately 30 years. However, patients who are diagnosed during adulthood may have a mild
disease or be completely asymptomatic. The main causes of death are
bone marrow failure, complications of HSCT, cancer, fatal pulmonary
problems, and GI bleeding.

CONGENITAL AMEGAKARYOCYTIC
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Etiology and Epidemiology

Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT) is less common than FA, SDS, and DC. It is transmitted in an autosomal recessive
manner. CAMT typically manifests in infancy as isolated thrombocytopenia caused by reduction or absence of bone marrow megakaryocytes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3008 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
with initial preservation of granulopoietic and erythroid lineages.
Pancytopenia due to aplastic anemia often ensues in the first few years
of life. Development of MDS and AML was reported in patients with
CAMT, as well as persistent aplastic anemia.
The defect in CAMT is directly related to pathogenic variants in
MPL, the gene for the receptor of thrombopoietin (THPO). THPO is a
growth factor that promotes HSC survival and stimulates megakaryocyte proliferation and maturation. Heterozygotes of the pathogenic
variant gene have normal hematology, whereas affected individuals
have pathogenic variants in both alleles. Genotype-­phenotype correlations predict disease course and prognosis. Nonsense pathogenic variants cause a complete loss of function of the THPO receptor, resulting
in persistently low platelet counts in early infancy due to absence of
megakaryocytes and a fast progression to pancytopenia and aplastic
anemia (CAMT type I). Impaired stem cell survival with MPL nonsense pathogenic variants explains the evolution of CAMT into aplastic anemia because THPO also has an antiapoptotic and cell survival
effect on HSCs. Missense pathogenic variants of MPL are associated
with a milder disease course, a later presentation, a partial and transient increase in platelets during the first year of life after presentation, and a delayed onset, if any, of pancytopenia, indicating residual
receptor function (CAMT type II). Biologically active plasma THPO
is consistently elevated in all patients with CAMT. A small proportion
of patients with the clinical picture of CAMT have no pathogenic variants in MPL, but more recently have been found to have homozygous
pathogenic variants in THPO.

Clinical Manifestations

Intracranial hemorrhage is a major risk; about 25% of the patients
develop this complication either in utero (13%), at birth (4%), or within
the first 4 weeks of life (7%). Patients with CAMT commonly have a
petechial rash, bruising, or bleeding. Onset of symptoms may depend
on the severity of pathogenic variants and ranges from birth to the first
year of life. Most patients with CAMT have normal physical and imaging
features. About 10–20% of published phenotypic CAMT cases involved
physical anomalies. The most common anomalies are neurologic. Findings related to cerebellar and cerebral atrophy are frequent, and developmental delay is a prominent feature. Congenital heart disease is rare but
includes atrial and ventricular septal defects, patent ductus arteriosus,
tetralogy of Fallot, and coarctation of the aorta. Some of these occur in
combinations. Other anomalies include abnormal hips or feet, kidney
malformations, eye anomalies, and cleft or high-­arched palate. Some
patients have microcephaly and abnormal facies.

Laboratory Findings

Thrombocytopenia is the major laboratory finding in CAMT. At birth,
most patients present with thrombocytopenia but not all. Typically, at
first, thrombocytopenia appears with normal hemoglobin levels and
WBC counts. Peripheral blood platelets are reduced or totally absent.
As in other IBMFSs, RBCs may be macrocytic. Hemoglobin F may
be elevated, and there may be increased expression of i antigen. Initial bone marrow aspirates and biopsy specimens show normal cellularity with marked reduction or absence of megakaryocytes. Most
patients develop pancytopenia between 6 months to 2 years of age. In
patients in whom aplastic anemia develops, bone marrow cellularity is
decreased, with fatty replacement; erythropoietic and granulopoietic
lineages are also symmetrically reduced.

Diagnosis

If thrombocytopenia persists beyond the neonatal period or is associated with adequate platelet transfusion response and no obvious precipitating cause such as infections or immunologic reactions, a bone
marrow aspirate and biopsy are indicated. Deficient megakaryocytes
in such cases suggest the diagnosis, and genetic analysis will confirm
it. If CAMT occurs at birth or shortly after, it must be distinguished
from other causes of inherited and acquired neonatal thrombocytopenia. Thrombocytopenia with absent radii (TAR syndrome) is distinguished from CAMT because radii are absent in TAR. The distinction
from DC may be evident by a lack of mucocutaneous, neurologic, and

immunologic findings that are characteristic of the early-­onset forms
of DC. Telomere lengths below the first percentile matched for age to
healthy controls is characteristic of DC and not CAMT. CAMT blood
lymphocytes do not show increased chromosomal breakage when
exposed to DEB, distinguishing the disease from FA.

Cancer Predisposition

CAMT can evolve into MDS and AML, but the true risk cannot be
defined because most patients undergo early transplantation. Typical
course in patients with transformation includes thrombocytopenia,
aplastic anemia, followed by MDS (e.g., with monosomy 7 or trisomy
8) and leukemia.

Therapy and Prognosis

The mortality rate from thrombocytopenic bleeding, complications of
aplastic anemia, or leukemic transformation in patients with MPL nonsense pathogenic variants is close to 100% if bone marrow function is
not improved. Patients with missense pathogenic variants have a milder
course but may still have serious complications. HSCT is the only curative option. The majority of patients with CAMT who undergo HSCT are
cured, especially if the procedure is performed with HLA-­matched sibling donors. Before transplantation, platelet transfusion should be used
carefully. Platelet count should not always be the sole indication for treatment, but symptoms such as clinical bleeding are an appropriate trigger.
Single-­donor, leuko-­reduced platelets are preferred to minimize sensitization. In a patient who is a candidate for HSCT, all blood products
should be irradiated and cytomegalovirus safe. The role of thrombomimetic agents such as eltrombopag or romiplostim might be suitable for
some patients (CAMT type II) and need to be studied further. However,
the promotion of fibrosis by these agents and the risk of MDS and leukemia in CAMT render HSCT the preferred treatment for patients with
severe cytopenia. Romiplostim has shown good and sustained response
in those with pathogenic variants in THPO, and there have been no
reports of acute leukemia or MDS in this subgroup of CMPL patients,
but the numbers of patients with pathogenic variants in THPO are small.

GATA2-­RELATED DISORDERS

The GATA2 gene codes for a hematopoietic transcription factor that is
crucial for the proliferation and maintenance of early hematopoietic cells.
Heterozygous germline pathogenic variants, inherited in an autosomal
dominant fashion and that are spontaneous in the majority of cases, result
in various phenotypes that range from mild cytopenia to severe immunodeficiency and myeloid neoplasia. Approximately two thirds of pathogenic variants in GATA2 are null, and one third are missense substitutions.
Germline pathogenic variants in GATA2 have been recognized as a major
MDS and AML predisposition syndrome. Approximately 150 unique
GATA2 germline pathogenic variants have been identified in about 550
patients.
Clinical manifestations include monocytopenia and Mycobacterium
avium complex (MonoMAC syndrome) infections, MDS with lymphedema (Emberger syndrome), familial MDS/AML, primary MDS,
and chronic neutropenia and dendritic cell, monocyte, and B and
NK lymphoid deficiency (DCML deficiency). Hematologic presentation is variable. Some patients present with cytopenia, a hypocellular
marrow and monocytopenia, whereas others have severe immunodeficiency, and others still present with MDS/AML and no preexisting
relevant medical history or cytopenia. Immune deficiency results in
HPV-­related infections such as warts or generalized verrucosis, disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterial, and systemic bacterial and
fungal infections. Recurrent respiratory tract infections can result in
lung disease, such as pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Few patients
have autoimmune dysregulation manifesting as autoimmune cytopenia, arthritis, lupus, and others. Constitutional abnormalities, such as
lymphedema, hydrocele, and congenital deafness, as well as abnormalities in pulmonary, CV, urogenital, and neurological systems have been
observed in approximately 50% of patients (Fig. 517.3).
In children and adolescents with primary MDS, pathogenic variants in
GATA2 are a predominant germline predisposition accounting for 7% of
all MDS cases, 15% of patients with advanced MDS, and 37% of patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia
Head & neck:
Embolic stroke
Sensorineural hearing loss

Hypothyroidism

HSV ulcers

Thorax:
Pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis
Ventilatory and diffusion
defects

Bone marrow:

Culture-negative
endocarditis
Solid organ tumors

Abdomen:
Disseminated NTM
infection

Cytopenias
MDS/AML

Severe C. difficile infection

Upper extremities:

Pelvis:
Miscarriage

Chronic
arthralgias

Genital dysplasia
Genital warts

Clubbing
Extragenital warts

Lower extremities:

Bony infarcts

Panniculitis/
Erythema nodosum

Deep venous thrombosis
Lymphedema

3009

Multiple organs can be affected in those with germline SAMD9/9L
pathogenic variants, including the hematologic, immunologic, endocrine, and neurologic systems (see Table 517.2). The term MIRAGE
syndrome was given to a constellation of abnormalities that include
MDS, infection, restriction of growth (starting in utero), adrenal
hypoplasia/insufficiency (with early onset), genital phenotypes (such
as 46XY females and testicular dysgenesis), and enteropathy (often
with reflux). Thrombocytopenia and anemia are often present at birth.
In some patients, the anemia and thrombocytopenia resolve during infancy. Patients with SAMD9L pathogenic variants might show
disease-­specific neurological findings with very variable age of onset.
Severe cerebellar ataxia is observed in some, whereas others have cerebellar atrophy, dysmetria, nystagmus, white matter abnormalities, and
loss of Purkinje cells. The majority of patients in both syndromes have
hematologic manifestations which range from single lineage cytopenia
to pancytopenia with hypocellular marrow, MDS with monosomy 7,
or deletion 7q. Some patients have nonsyndromic SAMD9/9L related
MDS.
SAMD9/9L pathogenic variants are seen in 8–17% of pediatric MDS.
The median age of presentation with SAMD9/9L related MDS is approximately 10 years. Ninety percent of children present in the early stage
of MDS (refractory cytopenia of childhood), and another 10% present
with advanced MDS. Transient monosomy 7 syndrome, the disappearance of monosomy 7 clones from the bone marrow, has been described
in a few young children. It was hypothesized that pathogenic variants
in the growth inhibitory genes, SAMD9/9L, confer gain of function that
further suppress cell growth. Hence, monosomy 7, which depletes one
allele of SAMD9/9L, reduces the growth inhibitory effect of the pathogenic variants. Somatic revertant mosaicism with expansion of benign,
corrected hematopoiesis, has also been reported with normalization of
blood counts and marrow cellularity for up to 20 years from diagnosis.
Monitoring and treatment depend on the degree of blood count
abnormalities, the presence of MDS, and the presence of syndromic
disease. Children who received HSCT for SAMD9/9L–related MDS
showed an overall survival of 85% in one study.

OTHER INHERITED APLASTIC ANEMIAS

Fig. 517.3 Clinical features of GATA2 deficiency by organ system.

Common clinical problems are indicated in bold. AML, acute myelogenous leukemia; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; NTM, non-tuberculous mycobacterium. (From National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases [NIAID] Health Information Fact Sheet. https://www.niaid.nih.
gov/sites/default/files/GATA2-­Factsheet.pdf.)

with MDS and monosomy 7. Among children with MDS, the prevalence
of GATA2 pathogenic variants increases with age; 66% of adolescents
with MDS and monosomy 7 carry germline GATA2 pathogenic variants.
Median age of diagnosis with GATA2-­related MDS is approximately 10
years.
Patients should be followed by a hematologist with expertise in bone
marrow failure/MDS and by an immunologist. Blood counts should
be done every 3 months, and bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with
cytogenetics should be carried out annually. HSCT is the only curative
option for MDS and carries an overall survival ranging from 60–85%
depending on donor type and MDS disease severity.

SAMD9/9L-­RELATED DISORDER

Sterile alpha motif domain-­containing protein 9 (SAMD9) and the paralogue gene SAMD9-­like (SAMD9L) are located side-­by-­side on chromosome 7q21. They are interferon and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α
responsive proteins that play a role in antiviral response, tumor suppression, inflammation, development, and endosomal fusion. Gain of function
pathogenic variants, mostly missense, in these genes have variable penetrance. Thirty-­eight pathogenic variants have been identified in approximately 110 patients.

A substantial number of genes that are associated with bone marrow failure with pancytopenia have been identified with the emergence of whole
genome screening methods (see Table 517.1). The specific gene-­associated
disorders may vary by phenotype but frequently include physical malformations, familial distribution, early age of disease onset, pancytopenia,
and a risk of MDS and AML. Significant overlap exists between inherited
pancytopenia syndromes and familial MDS and AML syndromes.

SRP72-­Related Disorder

This autosomal dominant disorder is characterized by familial aplastic
anemia and MDS. Some patients also have deafness. SRP72 encodes for a
signal recognition particle 72 protein. SRP72 is part of a ribonucleoprotein
complex that mediates targeting of secretory proteins to the endoplasmic
reticulum.

ERCC6L2-­Related Disorder

This autosomal recessive disorder features multilineage cytopenia,
MDS, and physical malformations. Neurological and cranial abnormalities are common in ERCC6L2-­related disorder and include developmental delay, microcephaly, ataxia, dysmetria, generalized brain
volume loss, retinal dystrophy, and low-­set ears. ERCC6L2 regulates
transcription by RNA Pol II through an interaction with DNA-­PK;
thereby, it promotes resolution of R loops and minimizes transcription-­
associated genome instability. The inherited BMF syndrome caused by
biallelic pathogenic variants in ERCC6L2 is thus a primary transcription deficiency and may not cause a DNA repair defect.

Dubowitz Syndrome

Dubowitz syndrome is characterized by a peculiar facies, infantile
eczema, small stature, and mild microcephaly. The face is small, with a
shallow supraorbital ridge, a nasal bridge at the same level as the forehead, short palpebral fissures, variable ptosis, and micrognathia. There

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3010 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
is a predisposition to cancer in these patients. Approximately 10% of
patients have hematopoietic disorders, including moderate pancytopenia, hypoplastic anemia, bone marrow hypoplasia, and full-­blown
aplastic anemia. Patients also have an increased risk of lymphoma
and neuroblastoma. In about one third of patients, a genetic cause
can be identified and includes biallelic pathogenic variants in NSUN2
(an RNA methyltransferase), biallelic pathogenic variants in LIG4 (a
nuclear DNA ligase), or one copy deletion in several chromosome sites
including 14q32, 17q24, -­14q32, -­17q24, and -­19q13.

Seckel Syndrome

Seckel syndrome, sometimes called “bird-­headed dwarfism,” is a developmental disorder characterized by marked growth failure and mental
deficiency, microcephaly, a hypoplastic face with a prominent nose,
and low-­set and/or malformed ears. Approximately 25% of patients
have aplastic anemia or malignancies. The syndrome is genetically
heterogeneous and is associated with biallelic pathogenic variants in
ATR, RBBP8, CENPJ, CEP152, CEP63, NIN, or ATRIP. A deletion at
the14q21-­q22 locus has also been described.

Reticular Dysgenesis

Reticular dysgenesis is a severe form of immunodeficiency. It is mainly
characterized by severe lymphopenia and neutropenia. Patients typically
present with severe infections at birth or shortly thereafter. On physical
examination, lymph nodes and tonsils are absent, and a thymic shadow
on radiographs cannot be seen. Laboratory tests show absence of cellular
and humoral immunity. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and aplastic anemia
may be evident. Bone marrow specimens show markedly reduced myeloid
and lymphoid elements. Clonogenic assays of hematopoietic progenitors consistently show reduced to absent colony growth, suggesting that
the disorder has its origins at the HSC level. The disease is inherited in an
autosomal recessive fashion and is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants
in mitochondrial AK2. The only curative therapy is HSCT.

Schimke Immunoosseous Dysplasia

Schimke immunoosseous dysplasia is an autosomal recessive disorder
caused by pathogenic variants in the chromatin remodeling gene SMARCAL1. Patients have spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with exaggerated
lumbar lordosis and a protruding abdomen. There are pigmentary skin
changes and abnormally discolored and configured teeth. T-­cell immunodeficiency, progressive renal insufficiency, nephrotic syndrome, and
early atherosclerosis are common causes of morbidity and mortality.
Approximately 50% of patients have hypothyroidism; 50% have cerebral
ischemia; 10% have bone marrow failure with neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia; and about 5% are predisposed to non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma. Eighty percent of patients have lymphopenia and altered
cellular immunity. Bone marrow transplantation has been successfully
applied to patients with bone marrow failure or immunodeficiency.

Cartilage Hair Hypoplasia

Cartilage-­
hair hypoplasia features metaphyseal dysostosis, short-­
limbed dwarfism, and fine sparse hair. Skeletal abnormalities may
also include scoliosis, lordosis, chest deformity and varus lower limbs.
GI abnormalities such as aganglionic megacolon have been reported.
Most reported cases are of Finnish or Amish descent. In over 80% of
patients, biallelic causal pathogenic variants in the noncoding RNA
gene RMRP (RNA Component of Mitochondrial RNA Processing
Endoribonuclease) can be found. Recently, biallelic pathogenic variants in POP1 and in NEPRO have also been found to be associated
with the disease. POP1 is a component of the RNAse-­MRP endoribonuclease complex. NEPRO is a nucleolar and neural progenitor protein
that interacts with multiple subunits of the RNase MRP complex. The
complex plays a role in rRNA and in mitochondrial RNA processing by
cleavage at a priming site during replication.
The hematological abnormalities include macrocytic anemia. In
most cases the anemia is mild and self-­limited, but a proportion of
patients have severe and persistent anemia that requires regular RBC
transfusions. Lymphopenia occurs in 65% of patients. Severe immunodeficiency can occur, often with severe anemia. Neutropenia has

been reported in 25% of patients. HSCT has been used successfully to
reconstitute the hemato/immunological system. Lymphomas and basal
cell carcinoma occur at an increased frequency among these patients.

Pearson Syndrome

Pearson syndrome is a mitochondrial metabolic disorder with various
bone marrow impairments. Insufficiency of the exocrine pancreas, caused
by acinar cell atrophy and fibrosis, develops in 30% of cases. The syndrome is caused by a maternally inherited deletion of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) that encodes enzymes that are critical to oxidative phosphorylation. Severe macrocytic anemia requiring transfusions is commonly present within the first year of life, sometimes at birth. Bone marrow aspirate
typically shows ringed sideroblasts and prominent vacuolization of erythroid and myeloid precursors. However, cases with pure red cell aplasia
mimicking Diamond Blackfan anemia have been reported. Pancytopenia
may occur alone or in association with hepatic failure, renal tubulopathy,
and lactic acidosis. In such cases, platelet transfusions may also be required.
Erythropoietin has been used for the anemia of renal failure. G-­CSF is
indicated to prevent infections in patients with severe neutropenia. HSCT
is traditionally not recommended for the hematopoietic complications
of Pearson syndrome due to their tendency to improve spontaneously in
most cases; nonetheless, HSCT has been used in rare cases with Pearson
syndrome, and engraftment was achieved. Interestingly, HSCT was associated not only with improved hematopoiesis but also with resolution of lactacidemia and acidosis. Patients may need pancreatic enzyme replacement
if they develop malabsorption due to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.

Immune-­Related Pancytopenias

Primary immunodeficiency, autoimmune, lymphoproliferative, and
hemophagocytic disorders can be associated with pancytopenia. Autoantibodies, hypersplenism, and bone marrow involvement are potential mechanisms. Recognizable disorders include common variable
immunodeficiency syndrome (Chapter 165), hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (Chapter 556.2), autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome (Chapter 174.7), and other lymphoproliferative disorders.

UNCLASSIFIED INHERITED BONE MARROW
FAILURE SYNDROMES

Unclassified IBMFSs are heterogeneous disorders that in many cases were
shown to present as new syndromes. In other cases, they may be atypical presentations of already characterized diseases. Unbiased approaches,
such as study of comprehensive genetic panels of all known IBMFS genes
regardless of the specific hematologic (e.g., isolated neutropenia or pancytopenia) or nonhematologic manifestations, or WES/genome sequencing,
have proved this to be true. These disorders do not fit into classic genetic
bone marrow failure diseases because all features of any one disease may
not be evident at presentation. All are characterized by various cytopenias
caused by underproductive bone marrow with or without physical manifestations. Compared with patients with classical disorders who present at
a median age of 1 month, patients with unclassified disorders present later,
at a median age of 9 months. Patients with unclassified IBMFSs can manifest single or multilineage cytopenia, aplastic anemia, MDS, or malignancy
with variable expression of malformations. Table 517.5 lists criteria for the
diagnosis, which include evidence of chronic bone marrow failure, in addition to factors that indicate a high likelihood of inherited disease (e.g., family history, congenital anomalies, young age at presentation).
When patients present later and without physical malformations,
an acquired etiology cannot be ruled out. Detailed genetic testing for
known IBMFS genes followed by approaches to discover novel genes
and novel syndromes by WES/genome sequencing may identify an
inherited etiology and define the disease.
Determining the actual genetic cause helps group patients according to diseases and guides counseling and proper medical care. Implementing a treatment plan is urgent in many cases. In such patients, the
management should be according to the type of complications that the
patient has at presentation and the lessons that can be learned from
published experience on unclassified cases in the literature.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 518 u Acquired Pancytopenias
Table 517.5  The Canadian Inherited Marrow Failure
Registry Criteria for Unclassified Inherited
Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes
FULFILLS CRITERIA 1 AND 2:
1.	Does not fulfill criteria for any categorized inherited bone marrow
failure syndrome*
2.	Fulfills both of the following:
FULFILLS AT LEAST TWO OF THE FOLLOWING:
a.	Chronic cytopenia(s) detected on at least two occasions over at
least 3 months†
b.	Reduced marrow progenitors or reduced clonogenic potential
of hematopoietic progenitor cells or evidence of ineffective
­hematopoiesis‡
c.	High fetal hemoglobin for age‡
d.	Red blood cell macrocytosis (not caused by hemolysis or a
­nutritional deficiency)
FULFILLS AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:
a.	Family history of bone marrow failure
b.	Presentation at age <1 year
c.	Anomalies involving multiple systems to suggest an inherited
syndrome
*The criteria for most common syndromes are described in Tsangaris E, Klaasen R, Fernandez CV, et al. Genetic analysis of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes from
one prospective, comprehensive, and population-­based cohort and identification of
novel mutations. J Med Genet. 2011;48:618–628.
†Cytopenia is defined according to the affected cell: neutropenia, neutrophil count of
<1.5 × 109/L; thrombocytopenia, platelet count of <150 × 109/L; anemia, hemoglobin
concentration of >2 standard deviations below mean, adjusted for age.
‡Hemoglobinopathies with ineffective erythropoiesis and high fetal hemoglobin should
be excluded by clinical or laboratory testing.
Modified from Teo JT, Klaassen R, Fernandez CV, et al. Clinical and genetic analysis of
unclassifiable inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. Pediatrics. 2008;22:e139–e148.

Table 518.1

3011

Etiology of Acquired Aplastic Anemia

Radiation, Drug, and Chemicals
Predictable: chemotherapy, benzene
Idiosyncratic: chloramphenicol, antiepileptics, gold, 3,4-­methylenedioxymethamphetamine, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), antibiotics
See also Table 518.2
Viruses
Cytomegalovirus
Epstein-­Barr
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis non-­A, non-­B, non-­C (seronegative hepatitis)
HIV
COVID-19
Immune Diseases
Eosinophilic fasciitis
Hypoimmunoglobulinemia
Thymoma
Common variable immunodeficiency syndrome (NFKB1)
Pregnancy
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
Marrow Replacement
Leukemia
Myelodysplasia
Myelofibrosis
Autoimmune
Nutritional
Vitamin B12
Folate
Copper
Other
Cryptic dyskeratosis congenita (no physical stigmata)
Telomerase reverse transcriptase haploinsufficiency
Atypical presentation of genetic marrow failure syndromes
Leishmaniasis

Chapter 518

Acquired Pancytopenias
John H. Fargo and Jeffrey D. Hord
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Therapeutic and recreational drugs, environmental toxins, infectious
agents, radiation, and immune disorders can result in pancytopenia
by direct destruction of hematopoietic progenitors, disruption of the
marrow microenvironment, or immune-­mediated suppression of marrow elements (Tables 518.1 and 518.2). A careful history of exposure
to known risk factors should be obtained for every child presenting
with pancytopenia. Even in the absence of the classic associated physical findings, the possibility of a genetic predisposition to bone marrow failure must also be considered (see Chapter 517). Many cases of
acquired marrow failure in childhood are idiopathic, in that no causative agent is identified. Many are probably immune mediated through
cytotoxic T lymphocytes and cytokine destruction of marrow stem and
progenitor cells. Patients with an initial diagnosis of acquired aplastic anemia may have developed somatic pathogenic variants in genes
associated with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Clonal hematopoiesis resulting from these acquired
somatic genetic variants may over time lead to the development of
MDS or AML. The overall incidence of acquired aplastic anemia is
relatively low, with an approximate incidence in both children and

adults in the United States and Europe of 2–6 cases per 1 million population per year. The incidence is higher in Asia, with as many as 14 cases
per 1 million per year in Japan.
Severe bone marrow suppression can develop after exposure to
many different therapeutic drugs and environmental chemicals,
including certain chemotherapeutic agents, insecticides, antibiotics, anticonvulsants, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
and recreational drugs. Some of the most notable agents are benzene,
chloramphenicol, gold, and 3,4-­
methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA, or “ecstasy”).
A number of viruses can either directly or indirectly result in
bone marrow failure. Parvovirus B19 is classically associated with
isolated red blood cell (RBC) aplasia, but in patients with sickle cell
disease or immunodeficiency, it can result in transient pancytopenia (see Chapter 298). Prolonged pancytopenia can occur after
infection with many of the hepatitis viruses, herpesviruses, Epstein-­
Barr virus (see Chapter 301), cytomegalovirus (see Chapter 302),
and HIV (see Chapter 322).
Immune-­mediated acquired pancytopenia is also found to be
prominent among acute, sporadic cases of aplastic anemia. Immunologic conditions, such as seronegative hepatitis, eosinophilic fasciitis, and thymoma, have been implicated in aplastic anemia.
Patients with evidence of bone marrow failure should also be
evaluated for inherited forms of marrow failure, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH; see Chapter 510), and collagen
vascular diseases. Pancytopenia without peripheral blasts may be
caused by bone marrow replacement by malignant cells including
leukemia and solid tumor cells, such as neuroblastoma.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3012 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 518.2  Drugs and Toxins Associated with Aplastic
Anemia
DOSE DEPENDENT
Antineoplastic Agents
Antimetabolites: fluorouracil, mercaptopurine, 6-­thioguanine,
methotrexate, cytosine arabinoside, gemcitabine, fludarabine,
cladribine, pentostatin, hydroxyurea
Alkylating and cross-­linking agents: busulfan, cyclophosphamide,
chlorambucil, nitrogen mustard, melphalan, cisplatin, carboplatin,
ifosfamide, nitrosoureas (BCNU and CCNU), mitomycin C
Cytotoxic antibiotics: daunorubicin, doxorubicin, mitoxantrone
Plant alkaloids: vinblastine, paclitaxel
Topoisomerase inhibitors: etoposide
Antimicrobial Agents
Chloramphenicol, dapsone, fluorocytosine
Antiinflammatory and Antirheumatic Agent
Colchicine
Insecticides
Chlordane, chlorophenothane (DDT), lindane, parathion
Other Chemicals
Benzene
Benzene-­containing chemicals: kerosene, chlorophenols, carbon
tetrachloride
DOSE INDEPENDENT*
Idiosyncratic, likely immune mediated
Antimicrobial Agents
Chloramphenicol, dapsone, sulfonamides, tetracycline, methicillin,
amphotericin, quinacrine, chloroquine, pyrimethamine
Anticonvulsants
Hydantoins, carbamazepine, phenacemide, primidone, ethosuximide
Antiinflammatory Agents
Phenylbutazone, indomethacin, ibuprofen, oxyphenbutazone,
­sulindac, naproxen
Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Quinidine, tocainide, procainamide
Metals
Gold, arsenic, mercury, bismuth
Antihistamines
Cimetidine, ranitidine, chlorpheniramine, pyrilamine, tripelennamine
Diuretics
Acetazolamide, furosemide, chlorothiazide, methazolamide
Hypoglycemic Agents
Chlorpropamide, tolbutamide
Antithyroid Drugs
Propylthiouracil, potassium perchlorate, methylthiouracil,
­methimazole, carbimazole
Antihypertensive Agents
Methyldopa, enalapril, captopril
Sedatives
Chlordiazepoxide, chlorpromazine, meprobamate, prochlorperazine
*Most agents listed in this group should be considered to be possibly associated with
aplastic anemia.
From Bagby GC. Aplastic anemia and related bone marrow failure states. In: Goldman
L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine, 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2020: Table
156.2.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The hallmark of aplastic anemia is peripheral pancytopenia,
coupled with hypoplastic or aplastic bone marrow. The severity of the clinical course is related to the degree of myelosuppression. Severe aplastic anemia is defined as a condition in
which ≥2 cell components have become seriously compromised
(absolute neutrophil count <500/mm3, platelet count <20,000/
mm3, reticulocyte count <1% after correction for hematocrit) in
a patient whose bone marrow biopsy material has <30% cellularity. Approximately 65% of patients who first present with moderate aplastic anemia (absolute neutrophil count 500–­1,500/mm3,

platelet count 20,000–100,000/mm3, reticulocyte count <1%) eventually progress to meet the criteria for severe disease if they are simply observed. Bone marrow failure may be a consequence of a direct
cytotoxic effect on hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from a drug
or chemical or may result from either cell-­mediated or antibody-­
dependent cytotoxicity. There is strong evidence that many cases of
idiopathic aplastic anemia are caused by an immune-­mediated process, with increased circulating cytotoxic T lymphocytes producing
cytokines (interferon-­γ) that suppress hematopoiesis. Abnormal
telomere length and telomerase activity in granulocytic precursors of patients with aplastic anemia suggest that early apoptosis
of hematopoietic progenitors may play a role in the pathogenesis
of this disease.
Cytogenetic abnormalities associated with aplastic anemia include
uniparental disomy of 6p, monosomy 7/deletion of 7q, and trisomy 8,
6, or 15. Genes associated with aplastic anemia include telomere complex genes (TERT, TERC) and BCOR/BCORL, PIGA, DNMT3A, and
ASXL1.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS, LABORATORY
FINDINGS, AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Pancytopenia results in increased risks of cardiac failure, fatigue,
infection, and bleeding. Acquired pancytopenia is typically characterized by anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia in the setting of elevated serum cytokine values. Other treatable disorders,
such as cancer, collagen vascular disorders, PNH, and infections,
that may respond to specific therapies (IV immunoglobulin for parvovirus), should be considered in the differential diagnosis. Careful
examination of the peripheral blood smear for RBC, leukocyte, and
platelet morphologic features is important. A reticulocyte count
should be performed to assess erythropoietic activity. In children,
the possibility of congenital pancytopenia must always be considered, and chromosomal breakage analysis should be performed to
evaluate for Fanconi anemia (see Chapter 517) and telomere length
to evaluate for telomeropathies. The presence of fetal hemoglobin
suggests congenital pancytopenia but is not diagnostic. To assess for
possible PNH, flow cytometric analysis of erythrocytes and granulocytes for CD55 and CD59 is the most sensitive test. Bone marrow examination should include both aspiration and biopsy, and
the marrow should be carefully evaluated for morphologic features,
cellularity, and cytogenetic abnormalities.

TREATMENT

The treatment of children with acquired pancytopenia requires
comprehensive supportive care coupled with an attempt to treat the
underlying etiology for marrow failure. For patients with a human
leukocyte antigen (HLA)–matched family member donor, allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) offers a 90%
chance of long-­term survival. Preparative regimens vary but typically consist of cyclophosphamide, fludarabine, and horse antithymocyte globulin (ATG). Preliminary data also suggest that children
with severe aplastic anemia can be successfully transplanted using
alemtuzumab (humanized monoclonal antibody against CD52 on
lymphocytes)–based conditioning. The risks associated with bone
marrow transplantation include the immediate complications of
transplantation, graft failure, and graft-­versus-­host disease. Late
adverse effects associated with transplantation may include secondary cancers, cataracts, short stature, hypothyroidism, and gonadal
dysfunction (see Chapters 179 and 180). Only approximately 20% of
patients have an HLA-­matched family member donor, so matched-­
related HSCT is not an option for the majority of patients.
For patients without a sibling donor, the major form of therapy
is immunosuppression with horse ATG and cyclosporine, with a
response rate of 60–70%. The median time to response is 6 months.
As many as 30–60% of patient responders experience relapse after
discontinuation of immunosuppression, and some patients must
continue cyclosporine for several years to maintain a hematologic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 518 u Acquired Pancytopenias
response. Among those who relapse after immunosuppression,
approximately 50% show response to a second course of ATG and
cyclosporine. To accelerate neutrophil recovery, a hematopoietic
colony-­
stimulating factor (e.g., granulocyte CSF, granulocyte-­
macrophage CSF) is sometimes added to ATG and cyclosporine
for treatment of patients with very severe neutropenia (absolute
neutrophil count <200/mm3), but there is no clear evidence that
this treatment influences response rate or survival. Higher baseline
reticulocyte count correlates with a higher probability of response
to immunosuppression and survival. There is an inverse correlation between telomere length and the probability of relapse after
immunosuppression.
For patients who show no response to immunosuppression or who
experience relapse after immunosuppression, matched-­unrelated
HSCT and T-­cell–depleted haploidentical family member–donor
HSCT are treatment options, with a response rate approaching 90%.
Cord blood transplants have been performed in this refractory group
of pediatric patients, with survival approximating 90%. Ongoing studies using eltrombopag (an oral thrombopoietin mimetic agent) have
shown promise in patients ≥15 years of age (mostly adults) with refractory disease. The use of eltrombopag resulted in a hematologic response
with improvements in platelet and neutrophil counts and hemoglobin
levels in over half the patients. In patients who responded, bone marrow biopsies demonstrated trilineage normalization of hematopoiesis,
with some showing a durable response. High-­dose cyclophosphamide
has been used successfully in the treatment of patients who are not
good candidates for HSCT and have not had an adequate response to
immunosuppression. This therapy leads to prolonged severe pancytopenia, increasing the risk of life-­threatening infection, especially fungal
infections. Other therapies that have been used in the past with inconsistent results include androgens, corticosteroids, and plasmapheresis.
Alemtuzumab as monotherapy in relapsed disease showed improved
response rates and 3-­year survival compared to additional courses of
ATG and cyclosporine.

COMPLICATIONS

The major complications of severe pancytopenia are predominantly
related to the risk of life-­threatening bleeding from prolonged thrombocytopenia or to infection secondary to protracted neutropenia.
Patients with protracted neutropenia as a result of bone marrow failure
are at risk not only for serious bacterial infections but also for invasive
mycoses. Patients who have been transfused with RBCs regularly over
a long period are at increased risk of developing alloantibodies to RBC
antigens and may require iron chelation therapy for transfusional iron
overload. The general principles of supportive care that have evolved
from the use of chemotherapy-­
related myelosuppression to treat
patients with cancer should be fully extended to the care of patients
with acquired pancytopenia.

PROGNOSIS

Spontaneous recovery from pancytopenia rarely occurs. If left
untreated, severe pancytopenia has an overall mortality rate of
approximately 50% within 6 months of diagnosis and of >75% overall, with infection and hemorrhage being the major causes of morbidity and mortality. The majority of children with acquired severe
aplastic anemia show response to allogeneic marrow transplantation or immunosuppression, leaving them with normal or near-­
normal blood cell counts.

3013

malignancy (classically, neuroblastoma or leukemia) or result from
myelofibrosis, MDS, or osteopetrosis. Although uncommon, evidence of hypoplastic anemia can precede the onset of acute leukemia, generally by a few months. This relationship is important to
appreciate in evaluating and monitoring children who present with
what appears to be acquired aplastic anemia. Morphologic examination of the peripheral blood and bone marrow and marrow cytogenetic studies are critically important in making the diagnoses of
leukemia, myelofibrosis, and MDS.
Myelodysplasia is very rare in children, but when it occurs, its
clinical course is more aggressive than the same category of MDS
in adults. Pediatric MDS can be subdivided into refractory cytopenia of childhood (peripheral blasts <2% and marrow blasts <5%)
and MDS with excess blasts (peripheral blasts 2–19% and/or marrow blasts 5–19%). Disease in children with >20% blasts is usually
defined as AML.
Myelodysplastic syndromes are a heterogeneous group of bone
marrow failure disorders that have in common ineffective hematopoiesis that leads to pancytopenia over time. In one group, there are
somatic variants (in >25 genes) leading to MDS. In another group,
usually in younger patients (<55 years), there is autoimmune suppression of hematopoiesis by clonal expansion of T lymphocytes,
particularly in those patients who look similar to patients with
idiopathic aplastic anemia. In all patients, other causes of MDS
(medications and vitamin B12, folate, or copper deficiencies) must
be ruled out.
A number of inherited conditions are associated with an increased
risk for development of MDS, including Down syndrome, severe
congenital neutropenia, Noonan syndrome, Fanconi anemia, trisomy 8 mosaicism, neurofibromatosis, Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome, and some familial MDS syndromes caused by pathogenic
variants in ANKRD26, CEBPA, DDX41, ETV6, GATA2, RUNX1, and
SRP72 genes. Significant clonal abnormalities are found within the
marrow of approximately 50% of patients with MDS, with monosomy 7 being most common but prognostically neutral. Those with
a structurally complex karyotype have a very poor outcome (see
Chapter 517).
The transition time from pediatric MDS to acute leukemia is relatively short, 14–­26 months, so aggressive treatment such as HSCT
must be considered shortly after diagnosis. With allogeneic HSCT,
the survival rate is approximately 60%. One exception to such an
aggressive therapeutic approach is MDS and AML in children with
Down syndrome because these diseases in this specific population
are very responsive to conventional chemotherapy, with long-­term
survival rates >80%.
The decision on how to treat a child with MDS who lacks a suitable HSC donor should be made with the specific clonal abnormality
found within the child’s marrow taken into consideration. Lenalidomide produces the best responses among patients who have the
chromosomal abnormality 5q−. Immunosuppressive therapy with
ATG and cyclosporine is most effective in patients with trisomy 8,
especially in the presence of a PNH clone. Imatinib mesylate targets mutations in the tyrosine kinase receptor family of genes found
in patients with t(5;12) and del(4q12). The DNA hypomethylating
agents azacitidine and decitabine have also been used in treating
MDS without a known molecular target and have some effect.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

PANCYTOPENIA CAUSED BY MARROW
REPLACEMENT

Processes that either infiltrate or replace the bone marrow can
manifest as acquired pancytopenia. Infiltration can be caused by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3014 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Section 6

Blood Component
Transfusions
Chapter 519

Red Blood Cell
Transfusions and
Erythropoietin Therapy
Patricia E. Zerra and Cassandra D. Josephson

Red blood cells (RBCs) are transfused to increase the oxygen-­
carrying capacity of the blood, with the goal to increase or maintain
satisfactory tissue oxygenation. This goal may not be achieved simply by increasing the hemoglobin (Hb) concentration or hematocrit
(Hct) by an RBC transfusion because tissue oxygenation depends on
several additional factors, including oxygen off-­loading from RBCs,
microvascular blood flow, and diffusion of oxygen into tissue cells.
Although some attempts have been made to accurately relate posttransfusion Hb or Hct values to changes in posttransfusion tissue
oxygenation (e.g., improvements in the ratio of cerebral vs mesenteric oxygenation patterns assessed by serial near-­infrared spectroscopy measurements), decisions to transfuse RBCs per physiologic
indications, rather than degree of anemia, remain investigational.
This information can be applied to approaches for transfusion in
both preterm infants/neonates and children/adolescents. However,
neonates, especially extremely low birthweight infants (≤1,000 g),
are not “small” children (i.e., RBC physiology and pathophysiology
of anemia of prematurity are unique); thus RBC transfusions for neonates and children are considered separately.

RBC TRANSFUSION IN CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS

Guidelines for RBC transfusions in children and adolescents are based
on maintaining a specified Hb or Hct level considered to be optimal
(per the best evidence available) for the clinical condition present at the
time of transfusion. The guidelines are similar to those for adults (Table
519.1). Transfusions may be given more stringently to children because
normal Hb levels are lower in healthy children than in adults and, as
is often the case, most children do not have the underlying multiorgan, cardiorespiratory, and vascular diseases that develop with aging
in adults to suggest a need for RBC transfusions. As a result, children
may compensate better for RBC loss than elderly adults, thus requiring
less RBC transfusion support. In general, there is increasing enthusiasm for applying patient blood management strategies, encompassing
conservative transfusion practices (i.e., accepting lower pretransfusion
Hct values to “trigger” an RBC transfusion) to all patient ages with
evidence-­based support.
In the perioperative period, it is unnecessary for most children to
maintain Hb of ≥8 g/dL, a level frequently desired for adults. Instead,
Hb of ≥7 g/dL is an acceptable level, although the optimal value for
individual patients is based on clinical and laboratory circumstances,
as influenced by the following factors. The desired preoperative Hb
level should consider the estimated blood loss for the surgical procedure planned and the rate of bleeding. There should be a compelling reason to prescribe any postoperative RBC transfusion, such as

Table 519.1  Guidelines for Pediatric Red Blood Cell
Transfusions*†
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
1.	Maintain stable status with acute loss of >25% of circulating blood
volume.
2.	Maintain hemoglobin >7.0 g/dL† in the perioperative period.
3.	Maintain hemoglobin >12.0 g/dL with severe cardiopulmonary
disease.
4.	Maintain hemoglobin >12.0 g/dL during extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation.
5.	Maintain hemoglobin >7.0 g/dL with symptomatic chronic anemia.
6.	Maintain hemoglobin >7.0 g/dL with marrow failure.
INFANTS ≤4 MO OLD
1.	Maintain hemoglobin >12.0 g/dL with severe pulmonary disease.
2.	Maintain hemoglobin >12.0 g/dL during extracorporeal
­membrane oxygenation.
3.	Maintain hemoglobin >10.0 g/dL with moderate pulmonary
disease.
4.	Maintain hemoglobin >12.0 g/dL with severe cardiac disease.
5.	Maintain hemoglobin >10.0 g/dL preoperatively and during major
surgery.
6.	Maintain hemoglobin >7.0 g/dL postoperatively.
7.	Maintain hemoglobin >7.0 g/dL with symptomatic anemia.
*Words in italics must be defined for local transfusion guidelines.
†Pretransfusion blood hemoglobin (Hb) level (convert to hematocrit values if preferred
by multiplying Hb values by 3) “triggering” an RBC transfusion. Hb values to maintain
vary among published reports, and the guideline values to maintain should be determined locally to fit the practices judged to be optimal by local physicians.

continued bleeding with hemodynamic instability because most children (without continued bleeding) can restore their RBC mass with
iron therapy (in a relatively short time).
The most important measures in the treatment of acute hemorrhage
are to control the hemorrhage and, if blood loss is modest, to restore
the circulating blood volume and tissue perfusion with crystalloid or,
less often, colloid solutions. If the estimated blood loss is >25% of the
circulating blood volume (>15 mL/kg of an estimated 60 mL/kg total
estimated blood volume) and the patient’s condition is unstable despite
initial intravenous (IV) fluids, RBC transfusions should be given without undue hesitation, along with plasma transfusions at a 1:1 ratio of
RBC/plasma volumes. Some experts recommend transfusing platelets early if bleeding is sustained or “massive” (i.e., approximating one
blood volume or 60 mL/kg, which may occur very quickly in infants
and small pediatric patients). Details of combined RBC and plasma
transfusions, the volume ratio transfused, and considerations for adding platelet transfusions to treat bleeding patients are controversial.
Accordingly, each hospital should develop and follow a “massive transfusion” protocol to ensure consistent practices.
In critically ill children with severe cardiac or pulmonary disease
requiring assisted ventilation, it is common practice to maintain the
Hb level close to the normal range, although the efficacy of this practice
has not been well documented. A similar approach is used for children
with acute cardiac, pulmonary, or cardiopulmonary disorders managed with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO).
The pretransfusion Hb level or Hct that should “trigger” an RBC
transfusion remains controversial (i.e., restrictive or a low pretransfusion level vs liberal or a high pretransfusion level) despite a substantial
amount of published information, including randomized clinical trials.
The current trend in critical care settings is to transfuse RBCs conservatively, following restrictive guidelines, and to permit modest anemia
because there appears to be no disadvantage to conservative/restrictive transfusion practices, and some patients with Hb levels maintained
close to the normal range by RBC transfusions (i.e., liberal guidelines)
have poorer outcomes. Studies in critically ill adults demonstrated better outcomes when Hb level was maintained at 7–9 g/dL vs 10–12 g/dL.
Anemic adults with significant cardiac disease did better with Hb level
maintained at 13 g/dL rather than 10 g/dL. A similar study in children admitted to intensive care units found no inferiority when RBC

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 519 u Red Blood Cell Transfusions and Erythropoietin Therapy
transfusions were given by restrictive guidelines (transfusion threshold
of 7 g/dL). It must be remembered that the children studied were in
stable clinical status and needed few transfusions. Therefore, results of
the trial cannot be automatically generalized to all patients admitted to
ICUs because unstable critically ill children (who were not included in
the study) may need more liberal RBC transfusion approaches.
With chronic anemia, the decision to transfuse RBCs should not
be based solely on blood Hb levels because children compensate well
and may be asymptomatic despite low Hb levels. Patients with iron-­
deficiency anemia are often treated successfully with oral iron alone,
even at Hb levels <5 g/dL. Factors other than Hb concentration to be
considered in the decision to transfuse RBCs include (1) the patient’s
symptoms, signs, and compensatory capacities; (2) the presence of
underlying cardiorespiratory, vascular, and central nervous system disease; (3) the cause and anticipated course of the anemia; and (4) alternative therapies, such as recombinant human erythropoietin (EPO)
therapy, which is known to reduce the need for RBC transfusions and
to improve the overall condition of children with chronic renal insufficiency (see Chapter 572.2). In anemias that are likely to be permanent,
it is also important to balance the detrimental effects of the degree of
long-­standing anemia on growth and development against the potential toxicity associated with repeated transfusions (i.e., iron overload
and risks of transfusion-­transmitted diseases) given to maintain the Hb
concentration at a specified level. RBC transfusions for disorders such
as sickle cell anemia and thalassemia are discussed in Chapters 511.1
and 511.10.

RBC TRANSFUSION IN PRETERM INFANTS AND
NEONATES

For neonates, almost all aspects of RBC transfusions remain controversial—the accepted indications for RBC transfusions, restrictive
vs liberal pretransfusion Hb/Hct levels, optimal RBC product to be
transfused, and fresh vs stored RBC units—and clinical practices vary
greatly. Generally, RBCs are given to maintain an Hb value believed
to be the most desirable for each neonate’s clinical status. Restrictive
guidelines (i.e., lower pretransfusion Hb/Hct levels) have been compared to more liberal transfusion practices, but both short-­term and
long-­term results and outcomes have been inconsistent and controversial, particularly as to neurodevelopmental status. Two multicenter
randomized controlled trials showed no difference in survival or neurodevelopmental outcome in premature infants receiving RBC transfusion based on liberal versus restrictive Hb thresholds. Importantly,
a lower Hb threshold was not inferior to a higher threshold for RBC
transfusion. However, these studies had limitations, and accordingly,
conventional guidelines are recommended to avoid problems caused
by undertransfusion or overtransfusion (see Table 519.1).
During the first few weeks of life, all neonates experience a decline in
circulating RBC mass caused by physiologic factors and, in sick premature infants, by phlebotomy blood losses. In healthy term infants, the
nadir Hb value rarely falls to <11 g/dL at age 10-­12 weeks. This benign
drop in Hb does not require transfusions. In contrast, the decline
occurs earlier and is more pronounced in premature infants, in whom
the mean Hb concentration falls to approximately 7 g/dL in infants
weighing <1 kg at birth, resulting in the anemia of prematurity, for
which there often is need for RBC transfusions, particularly when the
anemia is worsened by blood draws for laboratory testing.
A key reason that the nadir Hb values of premature infants are lower
than those of term infants is the premature infant’s relatively diminished plasma EPO level in response to anemia (see Chapters 139 and
496). Another factor is the rapid disappearance of EPO from infant
plasma (i.e., accelerated metabolism). Low plasma EPO levels provide
a rationale for the possible use of recombinant EPO in the treatment of
anemia of prematurity; treatment with EPO and iron effectively stimulate neonatal erythropoiesis. Recombinant EPO has not been widely
accepted as a treatment for anemia of prematurity (see Chapter 139).
Many low birthweight preterm infants need RBC transfusions (see
Table 519.1). Although the practice to maintain a very high Hb level
>13 g/dL (or Hct >40%) was once widely recommended, currently

3015

more restrictive guidelines have been suggested. However, one prospective, observational, multisite, birth cohort study of very low birthweight infants (≤1500 g) found a sixfold increased risk of necrotizing
enterocolitis (NEC) when an infant’s hemoglobin was ≤8 g/dL. Importantly, RBC transfusion in a given week did not significantly increase
the rate of NEC in this population. Consistent with the rationale for
oxygen delivery in neonates with severe respiratory disease, it also
seems appropriate to keep the Hb value relatively high in neonates with
severe cardiac disease leading to either cyanosis or congestive heart failure, but convincing and consistent data are lacking.
The optimal Hb level for neonates facing major surgery has not been
established. However, it seems reasonable to begin surgery in neonates
with the Hb level no lower than 10 g/dL (hematocrit >30%) and to
maintain that value during major surgery because even modest blood
loss will have a relatively large effect on the small blood volume of the
neonate. Neonates with underlying pulmonary problems have limited
ability to compensate for anemia due to the inability to increase ventilation and the inferior off-­loading of oxygen because of the diminished
interaction between fetal Hb and 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate. Postoperatively, a lower pretransfusion Hb value should be followed to “trigger”
a transfusion.
Stable neonates do not require RBC transfusion, regardless of their
blood Hb levels, unless they exhibit clinical symptoms attributable to
anemia. Proponents of RBC transfusions for symptomatic anemia in
preterm neonates believe that the low RBC mass contributes to tachypnea, dyspnea, tachycardia, apnea and bradycardia, feeding difficulties,
and lethargy, which can be alleviated by transfusion of RBCs. However,
anemia is only one of several possible causes of these problems, and
RBC transfusions should only be given when clinical benefit seems
likely.

RBC PRODUCT AND DOSE

The RBC product of choice to transfuse neonates, infants, children,
and adolescents is prestorage leukocyte-­reduced RBCs suspended in
an anticoagulant/preservative storage solution at Hct of approximately
60–70% for storage up to 35–42 days. For those infants with birthweight <1,500 g, irradiation is recommended to prevent transfusion-­
associated graft-­versus-­host disease. Additionally, both leukoreduction
and cytomegalovirus-­seronegative RBC units have been recommended
by some (estimated risk of transfusion-­transmission cytomegalovirus
[TT-­CMV] infection: 0–0.3% per unit) as first-­line therapy to prevent
TT-­CMV. However, given the low risks of TT-­CMV with improvements
in modern leukoreduction techniques, others have recommended use
of leukoreduced blood without need for CMV antibody testing as an
acceptably safe and low-­risk alternative. RBC transfusion should not
be delayed if CMV-­negative blood is unavailable, and CMV-­untested
leukoreduced blood should be used because the risk of TT-­CMV is
relatively low, with possibly more harm to the patient if transfusion is
withheld or delayed. The usual dose is 10–15 mL/kg, but transfusion
volumes vary greatly depending on clinical circumstances (continued
vs arrested bleeding, hemolysis). For neonates, some prefer a centrifuged RBC concentrate (Hct 70–90%). Unless transfusions are being
given to treat rapid bleeding, RBCs are infused slowly (over 2–4 hours)
at a dose of approximately 10–15 mL/kg. In this small-­volume setting,
because of the small quantity of extracellular fluid transfused and the
slow rate of infusion, the type of RBC anticoagulant/preservative solution does not pose any risk for premature infants when the dose does
not exceed 20 mL/kg. However, the additive solutions (e.g., AS-­1, AS-­3,
AS-­5) have not been studied by comparative randomized clinical trials
in the setting of >20 mL/kg dosing or massive transfusion settings such
as cardiopulmonary bypass, ECMO, or massive transfusion for trauma.
Although a few anecdotal reports suggest RBCs in additive solutions
are safe for large-­volume transfusions while awaiting more definitive
information, some hospitals that manage these complex neonates
and children maintain separate inventories of different RBC products
earmarked either for neonates and infants (e.g., citrate-­phosphate-­
dextrose or citrate-­phosphate-­dextrose-­adenine) or for older children
(e.g., additive solutions).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3016 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
STORAGE AGE OF RBC UNITS

The historical practice of transfusing fresh RBCs (<7 days of storage) for
the small-­volume (15 mL/kg) transfusions commonly given was supplanted several years ago in most centers by reserving a single unit of RBCs
for an infant, from which multiple aliquots were obtained for transfusions
as needed throughout the 42 days of storage. Concerns about high concentrations of extracellular potassium, loss of 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate, altered
RBC shape and deformability, and nitric oxide quenching were found not
to pose clinically significant problems. Preterm neonates allocated to “fresh
RBC” (<7 days’ storage) transfusions vs “stored RBC” (up to 42 days’ storage) transfusions have no advantage for fresh RBC transfusions in altering
the composite clinical outcome of mortality, plus NEC, retinopathy of prematurity, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and intraventricular hemorrhage,
or of the individual disorders.
For children weighing >30 kg who are to undergo elective surgery for
whom RBC transfusions are likely to be needed, autologous RBC transfusions offer an alternative to donor allogeneic RBCs. Preoperative autologous blood collections from the patient occur up to 6 weeks before the
surgery and require careful considerations for the volume to be drawn,
vascular access, and use of EPO and iron to help restore the donated RBCs.
Acute normovolemic hemodilution occurs in the preoperative period,
in which blood is withdrawn from the patient and replaced with saline, a
task often difficult in centers without experience in the process. Salvaged
autologous blood is collected from blood loss during the operation but is
impractical unless the volume of blood salvaged is fairly large to permit
washing and transfusion of a significant number of RBCs. Because of all
these difficulties, plus the relative safety of the usual allogeneic blood supply, autologous RBC transfusions are not typically used in the pediatric
setting.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 520

Platelet Transfusions
Patricia E. Zerra and Cassandra D. Josephson
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS

Guidelines for platelet (PLT) support of children and adolescents with
quantitative and qualitative PLT disorders are similar to those for
adults, in whom the risk of life-­threatening bleeding occurring after
injury or spontaneously can be related to the severity of thrombocytopenia, although somewhat imprecisely (Table 520.1).
For children and adolescents with overt bleeding, therapeutic PLT
transfusions should be given when the blood PLT count falls below
50 × 109/L and repeated as needed to maintain the PLT count >50 ×
109/L during bleeding and for 48 hours after bleeding ceases to allow
the clot to “stabilize.” Similarly, for a major invasive procedure (e.g.,
surgical), the PLT count should be maintained >50 × 109/L until any
bleeding that occurs ceases and the patient is stable. For minor invasive
procedures (e.g., lumbar puncture, intravascular catheter placement),
practices vary. It is reasonable to maintain the PLT count >25 × 109/L,
although these procedures often are performed in children with cancer
or recent transplants, and it is important to be mindful of possible clotting abnormalities and anemia that may affect hemostasis beyond the
effects of thrombocytopenia. Historical studies of patients with thrombocytopenia resulting from bone marrow failure suggest that the risk
of spontaneous bleeding increases when blood PLT levels fall to <20
× 109/L, particularly when hemorrhagic risk factors (infection, organ
failure, clotting abnormalities, minor skin/mucosal bleeding, mucosal
lesions, severe graft-­versus-­host disease [GVHD], anemia) are present.
In this high-­risk setting, prophylactic PLT transfusions are given to
maintain a PLT count >20 × 109/L. This threshold has been challenged
by several studies of adult patients, who in many instances were carefully

Table 520.1  Guidelines for Pediatric Platelet (PLT)
Transfusion*
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
1.	Maintain PLT count >50 × 109/L with bleeding.
2.	Maintain PLT count >50 × 109/L with major invasive procedure;
>25 × 109/L with minor.
3.	Maintain PLT count >20 × 109/L and marrow failure WITH
­hemorrhagic risk factors.
4.	Maintain PLT count >10 × 109/L and marrow failure WITHOUT
hemorrhagic risk factors.
5.	Maintain PLT count at any level with PLT dysfunction PLUS
­bleeding or invasive procedure.
INFANTS ≤4 MO OLD
1.	Maintain PLT count >100 × 109/L with bleeding or during
­extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
2.	Maintain PLT count >50 × 109/L and an invasive procedure.
3.	Maintain PLT count >20 × 109/L and clinically stable.
4.	Maintain PLT count >50 × 109/L and clinically unstable and/or
bleeding or not when on indomethacin, nitric oxide, antibiotics,
etc., affecting PLT function.
5.	Maintain PLT count at any level with PLT dysfunction PLUS
­bleeding invasive procedure.
*Words in italics must be defined for local transfusion guidelines.

selected to be in relatively good clinical condition without hemorrhagic risk factors. Consequently, a lower PLT transfusion trigger of
10 × 109/L is recommended for stable (i.e., low-­risk) patients.
In practice, severe thrombocytopenia that is prolonged beyond
1 week usually becomes complicated by the development of risk factors,
including fever, antimicrobial therapy, GVHD, active bleeding, need for
an invasive procedure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and liver
or kidney dysfunction with clotting abnormalities. In these situations,
prophylactic PLT transfusions are given to maintain relatively high PLT
counts (e.g., at least >30 × 109/L). Despite the desire by some physicians
to elevate the blood PLT count to 80 × 109/L or 100 × 109/L, there are no
definitive data to justify a true benefit of PLT transfusions given at a PLT
count >50 × 109/L, unless bleeding is ongoing despite a PLT count between
50 and 100 × 109/L and thrombocytopenia seems to be the only cause for
the bleeding.
Qualitative PLT disorders may be inherited or acquired, as in advanced
hepatic or renal insufficiency or when blood flows through an extracorporeal circuit, such as during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) or cardiopulmonary bypass. In patients with inherited disorders, PLT transfusions are justified only if the risk of significant bleeding is
quite high or if bleeding is overt because inherited PLT dysfunction often
is lifelong and repeated transfusions may lead to alloimmunization and
refractoriness (i.e., poor response to PLT transfusions). Accordingly, prophylactic PLT transfusions are rarely justified unless an invasive procedure
is planned, and therapeutic PLT transfusions must be given judiciously.
When managing patients with PLT dysfunction, it is important to
remember that an abnormal test result with a modern PLT function device
or, historically, a bleeding time more than twice the upper limit of normal
provides diagnostic evidence of PLT dysfunction. However, an abnormal
bleeding time or any other abnormal laboratory test is poorly predictive of
hemorrhagic risk or the need to transfuse PLTs. Alternative therapies, particularly desmopressin acetate, should be considered to avoid PLT transfusions. Antiplatelet medications (nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs)
should also be avoided.

INFANTS AND NEONATES

In neonates, thrombopoiesis and the risks of bleeding are substantially
different from that in older children; the approach to thrombocytopenia
and PLT transfusions likewise differs (see Table 520.1). Thrombopoietin
(TPO) levels are higher in healthy neonates than in older individuals. Relative to adult PLT progenitors, megakaryocyte progenitors of neonates are
more sensitive to TPO, have higher proliferative potential, and give rise
to larger megakaryocyte colonies. Fetal/neonatal megakaryocytes are
smaller in size and have lower ploidy than do their adult counterparts; this

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 520 u Platelet Transfusions
information is important because small megakaryocytes of low ploidy produce fewer PLTs than do larger megakaryocytes of higher ploidy. Presumably, this allows the expanding marrow of the growing fetus and neonate
to be supplied with sufficient numbers of megakaryocytes, yet not allowing
blood PLT counts to become excessively high during proliferation because
of the lower numbers of PLTs produced by each megakaryocyte.
An important contrasting point is that older children and adults
respond to situations of increased demand for PLTs by first increasing
megakaryocyte size and ploidy, which is followed in 3–5 days by increased
megakaryocyte number. In thrombocytopenic neonates, megakaryocyte
numbers but not size increase. Moreover, although cytoplasmic maturation is achieved per TPO stimulation, increases in ploidy are relatively
diminished and actually appear to be inhibited by TPO, resulting in large
numbers of small megakaryocytes that are cytoplasmically mature but
with low ploidy and, consequently, lower PLT production.
PLT counts ≥150 × 109/L are present after 17 weeks’ gestational age, and
it is accepted that neonates have PLT counts in the same range as older
children and adults (150,000–450,000/μL). However, other data suggest a
lower limit of 120,000/μL for extremely small preterm infants. Approximately 1% of term infants demonstrate PLT counts <150 × 109/L, but
bleeding in such infants is rare. In contrast, 18–35% of preterm neonates
treated in intensive care units (ICUs) exhibit PLT counts <150 × 109/L at
some time during admission, with approximately 4% overall receiving
PLT transfusions. Notably, when only extremely low birthweight preterm
infants (<1 kg) were considered in one report, 70% had PLT counts <150 ×
109/L, and 5–9% of infants received platelet transfusions.
Debate continues in the United States as to the appropriate prophylactic
platelet transfusion threshold for neonates, with a wide range in practice
patterns. Multiple pathogenetic mechanisms underlie thrombocytopenia
in these sick neonates, including predominantly accelerated PLT destruction plus diminished PLT production, as evidenced by decreased numbers
of megakaryocyte progenitors and relatively low upregulation of TPO levels during thrombocytopenia, when compared with thrombocytopenic
children and adults.
PLT counts <100 × 109/L pose significant clinical risks for premature
neonates. Bleeding time may be prolonged at PLT counts <100 × 109/L in
infants with birthweight <1,500 g, and PLT dysfunction is suggested by
bleeding times (a test no longer performed) that are disproportionately
long for the degree of thrombocytopenia. The risk of hemorrhage may be
increased in thrombocytopenic infants. However, in a randomized trial,
transfusing PLTs prophylactically whenever the PLT count fell to <150 ×
109/L (i.e., at the lower limit of normal range) to maintain the average PLT
count at >200 × 109/L, compared to not transfusing PLTs until the PLT
count fell to <50 × 109/L to maintain the average PLT count at approximately 100 × 109/L, did not result in a lower incidence of intracranial hemorrhage (28% vs 26%, respectively). A U.S. multicenter observational study
of very low birthweight infants in six neonatal ICUs found wide variation
in PLT thresholds for transfusion, ranging from 10,000 to 139,000/μL in
the first week of life and <10,000/μL to >50,000/μL after the first week.
The most common thresholds were 80,000–89,000/μL in the first 7 days of
life and 40,000–49,000/μL after the first 7 days. Furthermore, after controlling for severity of thrombocytopenia, the authors found PLT transfusions
were not associated with a lower risk of intraventricular hemorrhage. Thus,
there is no documented benefit for prophylactic PLT transfusions to maintain PLT counts within the normal range or to correct moderate thrombocytopenia (PLT count >50 × 109/L). As an exception, infants with inherited
PLT dysfunction disorders and bleeding, as well as infants at high risk of
bleeding because of acquired PLT dysfunction, such as during ECMO,
typically receive transfusions to keep their PLT counts >100 × 109/L.
One randomized clinical trial reported a significantly higher rate of new
major hemorrhage or death within 28 days of randomization in very low
birthweight neonates given prophylactic PLT transfusions at a pretransfusion PLT count of 50,000/μL (26%) vs a pretransfusion PLT count of
25,000/μL (19%), irrespective of their baseline risk of bleeding. Results are
too preliminary to permit changes in practice but support other published
findings indicating no need to maintain normal PLT counts and add to the
belief that a PLT count of 50,000/μL is too high to serve as the pretransfusion PLT count for transfusions in stable low birthweight neonates.
Table 520.1 lists pediatric PLT transfusion guidelines that are acceptable to many neonatologists. One particularly contentious issue is how to

3017

manage critically ill neonates receiving agents known to adversely affect
PLT function (e.g., indomethacin, nitric oxide, antibiotics). Some reports
suggest increased risk of bleeding for these neonates, but the efficacy of
PLT transfusions has not been convincingly proven, particularly when
given prophylactically. For optimal PLT transfusion practices, each hospital should modify their guidelines to comply with local practices, with
audits and reviews done to avoid violations of the recommended practices.

PLATELET PRODUCTS AND DOSING

In the United States, two types/sources of PLT units are available, although
any one blood bank or hospital may stock only one of these types. Whole
blood–derived PLT units (PLT concentrates) and PLT units collected by
apheresis (apheresis PLTs) differ in their PLT content and plasma volume.
Although a PLT concentrate contains approximately 5.5-­10 × 1010 PLTs in
approximately 50 mL, and 1 apheresis PLT unit contains at least 3 × 1011
PLTs in 300–600 mL, the PLT content may vary considerably among different blood suppliers. Accordingly, it is prudent for hospital blood banks
to confirm the composition of the PLT units they issue for transfusion, at
the very least by contacting their blood supplier. It is often easier to use
PLT concentrates for infants and small children because apheresis PLTs
usually need to be prepared as aliquots to provide the correct dose (10–15
mL/kg). However, many blood centers exclusively provide only one type
of PLT component. Platelet products generally have a 5-­day expiration
time, although 7-­day storage has been approved for apheresis platelet units
within certain stipulations to reduce the risk of bacterial contamination
and are stored at room temperature with constant agitation.
The posttransfusion goal of most PLT transfusions is to raise the
PLT count well above 50 × 109/L, hopefully to ≥100 × 109/L. These
increases can be achieved consistently in children weighing up to
30 kg by infusion of 5–10 mL/kg of standard (unmodified) PLT concentrates, obtained either from PLT concentrates or apheresis PLTs. For
larger children, the appropriate dose is 4-­8 pooled PLT concentrates or
1 apheresis unit. Because PLT concentration/quantity varies in different
PLT products made available for transfusion, each hospital should monitor
posttransfusion PLT counts to determine the dose that works best locally.
PLT concentrates may be transfused as rapidly as the patient’s overall
condition permits, certainly within 2 hours, but not longer than 4 hours.
Neonates/infants requiring repeated PLT transfusions should receive
leukocyte-­reduced blood products to diminish HLA alloimmunization
and PLT refractoriness and to reduce the risk of transfusion-­transmission
cytomegalovirus infection (TT-­CMV). For those infants weighing <1,500
g at birth, irradiation is recommended to prevent transfusion associated
GVHD. Additionally, some recommend both leukoreduction and CMV-­
seronegative RBC units (estimated risk of TT-­CMV infection: 0–0.3%
per unit) as first-­line therapy to prevent TT-­CMV. However, given the
low risks of TT-­CMV with improvements in modern leukoreduction
techniques, others have recommended use of leukoreduced blood from
CMV-­untested donors as an acceptably safe and low-­risk alternative. PLT
transfusion should not be delayed if CMV-­negative units are unavailable;
CMV-­untested leukoreduced units should be used because the risk of TT-­
CMV is relatively low and more harm may come to the patient if transfusion is withheld or delayed.
Routinely reducing the volume of PLT concentrates for infants and
small children by additional centrifugation steps is both unnecessary and
unwise. Transfusion of 10–­15 mL/kg of an unmodified PLT concentrate is
adequate because it adds approximately 10 × 109 PLTs to 70 mL of blood
(estimated intravascular blood volume of 1 kg neonate), a dose/volume
calculated to increase the PLT count by 100 × 109/L. This calculated increment is consistent with actual posttransfusion increment reported in
patients. Moreover, 10–15 mL/kg is not an excessive transfusion volume,
provided that the intake of other IV fluids, medications, and nutrients is
monitored and adjusted.
It is important to select PLT units for transfusion with the donor
ABO group identical to that of the neonate/infant and to avoid repeated
transfusion of group O PLTs to group A or B recipients, because passive
transfusion anti-­A or anti-­B in group O plasma can occasionally lead to
intravascular hemolysis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3018 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 521

Neutrophil (Granulocyte)
Transfusions
Patricia E. Zerra and Cassandra D. Josephson
Table 521.1 lists guidelines for granulocyte transfusion (GTX). GTX has
been used sparingly in older infants and children. The current ability
to collect markedly higher numbers of neutrophils from donors stimulated with combined recombinant granulocyte colony-­
stimulating
factor (G-­CSF) plus dexamethasone has led to renewed interest for
patients with neutropenic infections, particularly when severe neutropenia is prolonged (e.g., in the setting of placental/cord blood hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation). As a result, higher neutrophil
yields are collected with this approach, making the addition of GTX to
antibiotics a therapeutic consideration. This is especially true at institutions where neutropenic patients continue to die of progressive bacterial and fungal infections or to suffer substantial morbidity despite
optimal antiinfection measures, including antibiotics and recombinant
myeloid growth factors.

GRANULOCYTE TRANSFUSIONS FOR CHILDREN

The use of GTX added to antibiotics for children with severe neutropenia (neutrophil count <0.5 × 109/L) because of bone marrow failure is
similar to that for adults. Unfortunately, two randomized clinical trials
comparing antibiotics plus GTX from donors stimulated with G-­CSF
plus dexamethasone vs antibiotics without GTX to treat neutropenic
infections in children have not provided definitive guidelines. However, in practice, neutropenic patients with bacterial infections usually
show response to antibiotics alone, provided bone marrow function
recovers within the first 7–10 days of infection onset, so that severe
neutropenia is relatively brief. Children with newly diagnosed acute
lymphoblastic leukemia show rapid response to induction chemotherapy and are rarely candidates for GTX. In contrast, infected children with more sustained bone marrow failure and consequent severe
neutropenia (e.g., acute myeloblastic leukemia, malignant neoplasms
resistant to treatment, severe aplastic anemia, placental/cord blood
hematopoietic progenitor cell transplant recipients) may benefit when
GTX is added to antibiotics.
Currently, the efficacy of GTX obtained from G-­CSF plus dexamethasone–stimulated donors for bacterial sepsis unresponsive to antibiotics in patients with severe neutropenia (neutrophil count <0.5 × 109/L)
Table 521.1  Guidelines for Pediatric Granulocyte
Transfusions*
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
1.	Severe neutropenia (blood neutrophil count <0.5 × 109/L) and
infection (bacterial, yeast, or fungal) unresponsive or progressive
despite appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
2.	Qualitative neutrophil defect, neutropenia not required, and
infection (bacterial or fungal) unresponsive or progressive to
­appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
INFANTS ≤4 MO OLD†
Blood neutrophil count <3.0 × 109/L in first week of life or <1.0 ×
109/L thereafter and fulminant bacterial infection.
*Words in italics must be defined for local transfusion guidelines.
†No longer commonly used.

is not well supported by trials in children. Furthermore, GTX efficacy
for yeast and fungal infections remains unproven, despite transfusing
GTX with relatively large numbers of neutrophils.
Children with qualitative neutrophil defects (neutrophil dysfunction) usually have adequate or even increased numbers of blood
neutrophils but develop serious infections because their neutrophils
kill pathogenic microorganisms inefficiently. Neutrophil dysfunction syndromes are rare; accordingly, no definitive studies have
established GTX efficacy. However, several patients with progressive
life-­threatening infections have shown striking improvement with
the addition of GTX, often given for long periods, to antimicrobial
therapy. These disorders are chronic and thus associated with an
increased risk of alloimmunization to leukocyte antigens, specifically to Kell system antigens on the red blood cells in some patients
with chronic granulomatous disease, and GTX is recommended
only when serious infections are clearly unresponsive to antimicrobial drugs.

GRANULOCYTE TRANSFUSION FOR NEONATES

Neonates are unusually susceptible to severe bacterial infections, and
a number of defects of neonatal defenses contribute to this susceptibility, including actual or “relative” neutropenia. Neonates with fulminant
sepsis who exhibit relative neutropenia (blood neutrophil count <3.0
× 109/L during the first week of life and <1.0 × 109/L thereafter) and
a severely diminished neutrophil marrow storage pool (with <10% of
nucleated marrow cells being postmitotic neutrophils) are at risk of
dying if treated only with antibiotics. Despite this risk, GTX has not
provided the solution. GTX is rarely used in neonates because the
results of clinical trials are mixed and not uniformly convincing, and
it is difficult to obtain neutrophil apheresis concentrates in a timely
fashion.
Current data are insufficient to conclude that recombinant myeloid
growth factors have a role in treating septic neonates, despite demonstration that both G-­CSF and granulocyte-­macrophage CSF enhance
myelopoiesis and raise neutrophil counts in infants. In contrast to
the uncertain role of G-­CSF and GM-­CSF to treat infections in many
clinical settings, it is important to remember that G-­CSF is efficacious for the long-­term treatment of several types of severe congenital
neutropenias.

GRANULOCYTE PRODUCT

If the decision to provide a GTX has been made, an adequate dose of
neutrophils/granulocytes collected by leukapheresis must be transfused as shortly after collection as possible. To facilitate this goal, experienced donors with recently performed negative testing for HIV and
hepatitis (usually within the past 30 days) are selected. Granulocyte
donors should be documented to be cytomegalovirus antibody negative (seronegative). These donors should also be ABO/Rh crossmatch
compatible with the recipient because there is a large volume of red
blood cells in the granulocyte product.

Granulocyte Product Dosing

Neonates and infants weighing <10 kg should receive 1-­2 × 109/kg
neutrophils per each GTX. Larger infants and small children should
receive a minimal total dose of 1 × 1010 neutrophils per each GTX. The
preferred dose for adolescents is 5-­8 × 1010 neutrophils per each GTX,
a dose requiring donors to be stimulated with G-­CSF plus dexamethasone. GTX should be given daily until either the infection resolves or
the blood neutrophil count is sustained above 1.5 × 109/L for a few
days. Because neutrophils transfused through the GTX often passively
increase the blood neutrophil count, it may be necessary to skip 1-­2
days of GTXs to accurately assess whether endogenous myelopoiesis
and neutrophil production have recovered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 522 u Plasma Transfusions

Chapter 522

Plasma Transfusions
Patricia E. Zerra and Cassandra D. Josephson
Guidelines for plasma transfusion in pediatric patients are similar to those
for adults but with the understanding that plasma levels of coagulant and
anticoagulant proteins can be developmentally low in preterm infants
(Table 522.1). Therefore transfusions of plasma and plasma-­derived commercial concentrates should be determined by actual bleeding or a significant risk of bleeding, not simply by prolonged clotting time results. Plasma
is transfused to replace clinically significant congenital or acquired deficiencies of plasma proteins for which more highly purified protein concentrates, treated to reduce infectious disease risks, or recombinant products
are not available. Plasma and plasma derivatives are required to provide
clotting proteins when bleeding is actually occurring or in settings when
prevention of bleeding is deemed critical.

PLASMA PRODUCTS AND PATIENT TESTING

Two interchangeable plasma products are available for transfusion, plasma
frozen within 8 hours of collection (fresh-­frozen plasma [FFP]) and
plasma frozen within 24 hours of collection (F24). Although levels of factors V and VIII are modestly reduced in F24 (generally, not more than 25%
lower), they are equally efficacious for all indications for which plasma is
transfused in infants and children (see Table 522.1). Recommendations for
the volume of plasma to be transfused vary with the specific protein being
replaced and the severity of the deficiency, but a starting dose of 15 mL/kg
is usually sufficient to elevate plasma levels satisfactorily.
Transfusion of plasma is efficacious for the treatment of deficiencies of
clotting factors II, V, X, and XI. Deficiencies of factor XIII and fibrinogen
are treated either with cryoprecipitate or specific commercial concentrates;
for patients being given large doses of plasma (e.g., in massive transfusion
settings or to treat bleeding in liver failure), however, additional sources of
fibrinogen may not be necessary because plasma contains large amounts of
fibrinogen. It is always useful to include a measurement of plasma fibrinogen (a separate test) when performing clotting assays, including prothrombin time (PT)/international normalized ratio (INR) and activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT).

PLASMA TRANSFUSION IN CHILDREN

Transfusion of plasma is not recommended for the treatment of patients
with severe hemophilia A or B, von Willebrand disease, or factor VII deficiency because safer plasma-­derived and recombinant factor products for
VII, VIII, IX, and von Willebrand factor are available. Moreover, mild to
moderate hemophilia A and certain types of von Willebrand disease can
be treated with intranasal or intravenous desmopressin (see Chapter 526).
An important use of plasma is for rapid reversal of the effects of warfarin

Table 522.1  Guidelines for Children and Infants for
Plasma Transfusions*
1.	Severe clotting factor deficiency AND bleeding.
2.	Severe clotting factor deficiency AND an invasive procedure.
3.	Emergency reversal of warfarin effects.
4.	Dilutional coagulopathy and bleeding (e.g., massive transfusion).
5.	Anticoagulant protein (antithrombin III, proteins C and S)
replacement.
6.	Plasma exchange replacement fluid for thrombotic thrombo­
cytopenic purpura or for disorders with overt bleeding or in which
there is risk of bleeding because of clotting protein abnormalities
(e.g., liver failure).
*Words in italics must be defined for local transfusion guidelines.

3019

in patients who are actively bleeding or who require emergency surgery (in
whom functional deficiencies of vitamin K–dependent factors II, VII, IX,
and X cannot be rapidly reversed by vitamin K administration). Plasma-­
derived and virally inactivated prothrombin “complex” concentrates can
also be used for this purpose.
Results of screening coagulation tests (PT/INR, aPTT, thrombin time,
and plasma fibrinogen level) should not be assumed to reflect the integrity
of the coagulation system or be regarded as indications for plasma transfusions. This is particularly true for neonates. To justify plasma transfusions,
coagulation test results must be related to the patient’s clinical condition
in regard to bleeding and the risk of bleeding. Transfusion of plasma in
patients with chronic liver disease and prolonged clotting times is not recommended unless bleeding is present, or an invasive procedure is planned
because prophylactic correction of the clotting factor deficiencies is brief
and of questionable benefit.
Plasma also contains several anticoagulant proteins (antithrombin III,
protein C, and protein S) whose deficiencies have been associated with
thrombosis. In select situations, plasma as replacement therapy along
with anticoagulant treatment may be appropriate in patients with these
disorders; when available, purified concentrates are preferred. Other indications for plasma include replacement fluid during plasma exchange in
patients with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (i.e., thrombotic
microangiopathies) or other disorders for which plasma is likely to be
beneficial. This includes plasma exchange in a patient with overt bleeding
caused by the underlying disorder (e.g., Goodpasture syndrome, vasculitis) or disorders with significant severe coagulopathy that would substantially worsen with replacement by albumin solutions only. Plasma is not
indicated for correction of hypovolemia or as immunoglobulin replacement
therapy because safer alternatives exist (albumin or crystalloid solutions and
IV immunoglobulin, respectively).

PLASMA TRANSFUSION IN NEONATES

In neonates, clotting times are “physiologically” prolonged because of
developmental deficiency of clotting proteins; plasma should be transfused
only after reference to normal values is adjusted for the birthweight and
age of the infant (not to normal ranges for older children and adults). The
indications for plasma in neonates include (1) reconstitution of red blood
cell (RBC) concentrates to simulate whole blood for use in massive transfusions (exchange transfusion, cardiac bypass surgery, and extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation), (2) hemorrhage secondary to vitamin K deficiency, (3) disseminated intravascular coagulation with bleeding, and (4)
bleeding in congenital coagulation factor deficiency when more specific
treatment is either unavailable or inappropriate. The use of prophylactic
plasma transfusion to prevent intraventricular hemorrhage in premature
infants is not recommended. Plasma should not be used as a suspending
agent to adjust the hematocrit values of RBC concentrates before small-­
volume RBC transfusions to neonates because it offers no apparent medical benefit over the use of sterile solutions such as crystalloid and albumin.
Similarly, the use of plasma in partial exchange transfusion for the treatment of neonatal hyperviscosity syndrome is unnecessary because safer
crystalloid or colloid solutions are available.
In the treatment of bleeding infants, cryoprecipitate is often considered
because of its small infusion volume. However, cryoprecipitate contains
significant quantities of only fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, and factors
VIII and XIII. Thus it is not effective for treating the usual clinical situation in bleeding infants with multiple clotting factor deficiencies. However,
cryoprecipitate is an excellent source of fibrinogen (much more concentrated than frozen plasma), and with a dose of 1–2 units/kg, the patient’s
fibrinogen level can be quickly raised by 60–­100 mg/dL.
In preliminary studies, infusions of very small volumes of recombinant activated factor VII have been lifesaving in patients with hemorrhage caused by several mechanisms. Because the efficacy and toxicity
of factor VIIa have not been fully defined in these “off-­label” uses (not
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration), it must be considered “experimental” therapy at this time.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3020 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 523

Risks of Blood
Transfusions

Table 523.1  Estimated Risks in Transfusion per Unit
Transfused in the United States
ADVERSE EFFECT (INFECTIOUS)

ESTIMATED RISK

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-­1 and HIV-­2 1:2 million
Hepatitis B

1:2 million

Hepatitis C

1:2 million

Human T-­cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV) I and II

1:3 million

Bacterial contamination (usually platelets)

1:100,000

The greatest risk of a blood transfusion is mistakenly receiving a
transfusion intended for another patient. Misidentification is usually a
result of mistakes made in labeling the patient's blood sample sent to
the blood bank or not accurately matching the unit with the patient at
the bedside when the blood is transfused. This risk is particularly high
for infants, especially if ABO type-­specific or type-­compatible blood
is transfused, because (1) identification bands may not be attached
directly to their bodies, (2) difficulties in drawing blood samples for
pretransfusion compatibility testing may lead to deviations from usual
policies, and (3) infants cannot speak to identify themselves. Thus particular care must be taken to ensure accurate patient and blood sample
identification.

Malaria

<1:3 million

Hepatitis A

Unknown

Parvovirus

Unknown

Dengue fever

Unknown

Cytomegalovirus

<1:3 million

Babesiosis

Unknown

West Nile virus

<1:3 million

Trypanosoma cruzi

<1:3 million

Leishmania spp.

Unknown

Variant Creutzfeldt-­Jakob prion disease

Unknown

INFECTIOUS RISKS OF TRANSFUSION

Zika virus

<1:3 million

Syphilis

Unknown

ADVERSE EFFECT (NONINFECTIOUS)

ESTIMATED RISK

Febrile nonhemolytic reaction

1:800

Mild-­moderate allergic reaction

1:1,000

Severe allergic reactions

1:40,000

Transfusion-­associated circulatory overload
(TACO)

1:8,500

Hypotensive

1:11,000

Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction

1:95,000

Transfusion-­associated dyspnea

1:15,000

Transfusion-­related acute lung injury (TRALI)

1:70,000

Delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction

1:20,000

Transfusion-­associated graft-­versus-­host
disease

Uncommon

Immunomodulation

Unknown

Posttransfusion purpura

1:30,000

Life-­threatening reactions, requiring major
medical intervention

1:20,000

Patricia E. Zerra and Cassandra D. Josephson

Although the infectious disease risks of allogeneic blood transfusions
are extremely low, transfusions must be given judiciously because
“emerging infections,” such as Ebola or Zika virus, when they first
arise, pose a potential threat until they are studied definitively and,
accordingly, are of constant concern, and testing is not done for every
microorganism possibly transmitted by blood transfusions (Table
523.1 and Fig. 523.1). Taking nucleic acid amplification testing (NAT)
and all other donor-­screening activities (antibody and epidemiology
screening) into account, a current estimate of the risk of transfusion-­
associated HIV infection is approximately 1 per every 2 million donor
exposures. Similarly, with NAT, the risk of hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection is 1 per every 1.5-­2 million donor exposures (see Table 523.1).
NAT identifies circulating microbial nucleic acids that appear in the
window before antibodies develop, and NAT is used routinely to detect
HIV, HCV, West Nile virus, hepatitis B virus, Trypanosoma cruzi, Babesia microti, and Zika virus.
Transfusion-­associated cytomegalovirus (CMV) has been nearly
eliminated by transfusion of leukocyte-­reduced cellular blood products or by selection of blood collected from donors who are seronegative for antibody to CMV. Although it is logical to hypothesize that
first collecting blood components from CMV-­seronegative donors and
then removing the white blood cells (WBCs) might further improve
safety, little data are available to document the superior efficacy of this
combined approach. However, in a recent prospective birth cohort
study of premature infants with birthweight ≤1,500 g, a combined
approach of leukoreduction and CMV-­
seronegative cellular blood
components yielded 0% transfusion transmission of CMV (15.3%
cumulative incidence at 12 weeks of maternal breast milk transmission
from CMV-­seropositive mothers) in >300 transfused infants studied.
Similar uncontrolled reports of hematopoietic stem cell transplant
patients found 0% transmission of CMV from leukoreduced blood
products from donors of unknown CMV antibody status. Therefore
considerable care must be taken not to place children at risk of delayed
or missed transfusions while awaiting/searching for blood from CMV-­
seronegative donors, then to leukoreduce (i.e., risks must not be taken
for practices with no established benefits).
Further data on these two mitigation strategies revealed that large
quantities of CMV viral material are present “free” in the plasma of
healthy-­appearing donors during the early phase of primary infection (while CMV antibodies are either absent [“window” phase] or are
newly emerging and at low, inconsistently detected levels in plasma),
rather than being leukocyte associated, as occurs with CMV as substantial quantities of IgG antibodies appear. As a result of this biology

Adapted from Busch MP, Bloch EM, Kleinman S. Prevention of transfusion-­transmitted
infections. Blood 2019;133:1854–1864; and Savinkina AA, Haass KA, Sapiano MRP, et al.
Transfusion-­associated adverse events and implementation of blood safety measures
– findings from the 2017 National Blood Collection and Utilization Survey. Transfusion
2020;60:S10–S16.

of CMV primary infection, plasma “free” virus will not be removed by
leukoreduction during early infection, and CMV-­seronegative donors
who may be asymptomatic or deny symptoms of infection during blood
donor screening will be misclassified as being CMV safe. They are not
necessarily as safe because antibody is below the limits of detection,
while plasma “free” CMV is plentiful during early infection. Because
almost all plasma “free” CMV disappears and becomes almost exclusively cell associated, once donors are CMV seropositive with antibody
present for several months, some propose that the best method to
reduce CMV risk may be leukoreduction of blood from donors known
to be CMV seropositive for at least 1 year. However, data to prove the
efficacy of this proposal are lacking, and in practice, several studies
have shown that the most efficacious method currently available to prevent transfusion-­transmitted CMV is to perform leukoreduction in the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 523 u Risks of Blood Transfusions
Risk per Unit

3021

Emerging Infectious Disease Threats

1:10,000

CHIKV
XMRV

influenza

DENV
Babesia

SARS

WNV

SFV

PTLVs

T cruzi

bacteria

HBV

vCJD

1:1000

ICL

HCV

Monkey Pox
Leishmania

1:100

HIV

1:100,000

1:1,000,000

<1984 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010
Revised
Donor
Deferral
Criteria

HBsAg
Screening

HIV Ab
Screening

HCV Ab
Screening

NANB Hepatitis Surrogate Testing

p24 Ag
Testing

HCV and
HIV NAT

WNV NAT

T cruzi Ab
Screening

HBV NAT

vCJD Deferral Criteria

Fig. 523.1 Risks of major transfusion-­transmitted viruses related to interventions and accelerating rate of emerging infectious diseases of concern

to blood safety. Evolution of the risks of transmission by blood transfusion for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and
hepatitis C virus (HCV). Major interventions to reduce risks are shown below the timeline on the x axis. Emerging infectious disease threats in the
past 20 years are shown above in the top right quadrant of the figure. Ab, Antibody; Ag, antigen; CHIKV, chikungunya virus; DENV, dengue virus;
HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; ICL, idiopathic CD4 T-­lymphocytopenia; NANB, non-­A, non-­B hepatitis; NAT, nucleic acid amplification testing;
PTLVs, primate T-­lymphotropic viruses; SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome; SFV, simian foamy virus; vCJD, variant Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease;
WNV, West Nile virus; XMRV, xenotropic murine leukemia virus–related virus. (From Busch MP. Transfusion-­transmitted viral infections: Building
bridges to transfusion medicine to reduce risks and understand epidemiology and pathogenesis. 2005 Emily Cooley Award Lecture. Transfusion.
2006;46:1624–1640.)

blood center/bank without regard for the CMV antibody status of the
donor/unit (i.e., leukoreduction alone performed by the blood center/
bank, not at the bedside, is sufficient in most cases).
Additional infectious risks include other types of hepatitis (A, B,
E) and retroviruses (human T-­cell lymphotropic virus types I and
II, HIV-­2), syphilis, parvovirus B19, Epstein-­Barr virus, human herpesvirus 8, West Nile virus, yellow fever vaccine virus, malaria, babesiosis, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Chagas disease, and Zika virus.
Variant Creutzfeldt-­Jacob disease has also been transmitted by blood
transfusions in humans. All are reported very infrequently, but nonetheless provide the rationale to transfuse only when true benefits are
likely.

NONINFECTIOUS RISKS OF TRANSFUSION

Transfusion-­associated risks of a noninfectious nature that may occur
include hemolytic and nonhemolytic transfusion reactions, circulatory fluid overload, graft-­versus-­host disease (GVHD), electrolyte and
acid-­base imbalances, iron overload if repeated red blood cell (RBC)
transfusions are needed long term, increased susceptibility to oxidant
damage, exposure to plasticizers, hemolysis with T-­antigen activation of
RBCs, posttransfusion purpura, transfusion-­related acute lung injury
(TRALI), posttransfusion immunosuppression and immunomodulation, and alloimmunization (Fig. 523.2; see Table 523.1). The risk of
TRALI may be reduced by avoiding transfusion of plasma or platelets
from female donors, who were possibly alloimmunized to leukocyte
antigens during pregnancy or by selecting donors (e.g., males) who are
likely to be negative for human leukocyte antigen (HLA) antibodies.
Immunologic adverse effects, including immunosuppression,
immunomodulation, and alloimmunization, may be reduced by leukoreduction. Transfusion reactions and alloimmunization to RBC and
leukocyte antigens seem to be uncommon in infants, perhaps because
of developmental immaturity of the immune system or deficient cytokine production. When they do occur, adverse effects are seen primarily in massive transfusion settings, such as exchange transfusions and
trauma or surgery, in which relatively large quantities of blood components are needed but are rare when small-­volume transfusions are
usually given.

Premature infants are known to have immune dysfunction, but
their relative risk of posttransfusion GVHD is controversial. The
postnatal age of the infant, the number of immunocompetent lymphocytes in the transfusion product, the degree of HLA compatibility
between donor and recipient, and other, poorly described phenomena determine which infants are truly at risk for GVHD. Regardless,
many centers caring for preterm infants transfuse exclusively irradiated cellular products. As an alternative, pathogen-­reduction technology has been documented to prevent GVHD and can substitute
for irradiation. Directed donations with blood drawn from blood
relatives must always be irradiated because of the risk of engraftment
with transfused HLA-­homozygous, haploidentical lymphocytes. Cellular blood products given as intrauterine or exchange transfusions
should be irradiated, as should transfusions for patients with severe
congenital immunodeficiency disorders (severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome and DiGeorge syndrome requiring heart surgery) and transfusions for recipients of hematopoietic progenitor cell
transplants. Other groups who are potentially at risk but for whom
no conclusive data are available include patients given T-­cell antibody therapy (antithymocyte globulin or OKT3), those with organ
allografts, those receiving immunosuppressive drug regimens, and
those infected with HIV.
As an alternative, pathogen-­reduction technology has been documented to prevent T-­cell proliferation, and thus TA-­GVHD may be
used as a substitute for irradiation. Current practice uses irradiation
from a cesium, cobalt, or linear acceleration source at doses ranging
from 1,500 to 2,500 centigray (cGy); a maximum dose of 2,500 cGy
is required to hit the center of the irradiation field and a minimum of
1,500 cGy delivered to any other portion of the cannister. All cellular
blood components should be irradiated, except those frozen without a
cryoprotectant agent and to be rendered as “acellular” products, such as
plasma and cryoprecipitate, which do not require irradiation. Leukocyte reduction cannot be substituted for irradiation to prevent GVHD.
However, as mentioned, pathogen-­reduction technologies have been
demonstrated to be efficacious.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3022 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
All transfusions must be stopped when a patient is experiencing a reaction and assessed by a provider
Provide supportive therapy to support vital organ function (cardiac, pulmonary, renal)
For questions regarding transfusion reaction diagnosis or management, call the transfusion service, or other appropriate physician
Reaction

Symptoms

Interventions

Increase in temperature
Possible febrile nonhemolytic reaction

Possible bacterial
contamination

Possible hemolysis

Incremental increase <1°C above
baseline and no other new symptoms

• Close observation, frequent vital signs
• If stable and no other new symptoms then continue with transfusion

Incremental increase 1°C above
baseline, or incremental increase
<1°C with any other new symptoms
(chills or rigors, hypotension,
nausea or vomiting)

• Stop transfusion, keep intravenous line open, assess patient, check patient ID and
unit ID and compatibility
• Antipyretic drug
• Consider blood cultures (patient); empirical antibiotics if neutropenic
• Do not resume transfusion
• Strongly consider culturing blood product if 2°C increase in temperature or if high
clinical suspicion of sepsis
• Notify blood transfusion laboratory; return unit (with administration set) plus
post-transfusion patient sample to blood transfusion laboratory

For consistently febrile patient due to underlying disease or treatment, when possible:
• Avoid starting transfusion if patient’s temperature is increasing
• Treat fever with antipyretic drug before starting transfusion
• If incremental increase in temperature 1°C above baseline treat as per above (stop and do not resume transfusion,
cultures if indicated)
• Notify blood transfusion laboratory, return unit (with administration set) plus post-transfusion patient sample to blood transfusion
laboratory

Allergic symptoms

Urticaria

Mild hives, rash, or skin itching only

• Stop transfusion, keep intravenous line open, and assess patient
• Antihistamines
• Notify patient clinician and blood transfusion laboratory; sample not required
• If symptoms resolve, then can resume transfusion
• If symptoms do not improve or worsen or recur then discontinue transfusion; return unit
(with administration set) to blood transfusion laboratory

Possible allergic
reaction

Hives, rash, itching, and or any other
new symptoms (throat, eye, and
tongue swelling, etc)

• Stop transfusion, keep intravenous line open, assess patient, check patient ID and
unit ID and compatibility
• Antihistamines
• Do not resume transfusion
• Notify blood transfusion laboratory; return unit (with administration set) plus
post-transfusion patient sample to blood transfusion laboratory

Respiratory symptoms

Possible anaphylaxis,
transfusionBronchospasm, dyspnea, tachypnoea
associated circulatory
and hypoxemia, copious frothy
overload, septic
transfusion reaction, pink-tinged fluid (from endotracheal tube)
or transfusion-related
acute lung injury

• Stop transfusion, keep intravenous line open, assess patient, check patient ID and
unit ID and patient compatibility
• Treat symptoms as indicated (adrenaline, antihistamines, steroids; oxygen and
respiratory support, diuretics; fluid, blood pressure, and renal support)
• Chest radiograph for presence of bilateral interstitial infiltrate, if suggestive of
transfusion-related acute lung injury
• Blood cultures (patient and product), if high clinical suspicion of sepsis
• Do not resume transfusion
• Notify blood transfusion laboratory; return unit with administration set, plus
post-transfusion patient sample. Associated products can be quarantined

All other symptoms

Possible anaphylaxis,
hemolytic
transfusion reaction,
fluid overload, or
transfusion-related
acute lung injury

Chills, rigors, hypotension, nausea or
vomiting, feeling of impending doom,
back or chest pain, intravenous site
pain, cough, dyspnea, hypoxia

• Stop transfusion, keep intravenous line open, assess unit, check patient ID and unit ID
and patient compatibility
• Treat symptoms as indicated (adrenaline, antihistamines, steroids; oxygen and
respiratory support, diuretics; fluid, blood pressure, and renal support)
• Blood cultures (patient and product) if high clinical suspicion of sepsis
• Do not resume transfusion
• Notify blood transfusion laboratory; return unit with administration set, plus
post-transfusion patient sample. Associated products can be quarantined

Fig. 523.2 Transfusion reaction decision tree. Algorithm to guide assessment and actions to take when a transfusion reaction is initially identified.

Actions should proceed from left to right. (From Delaney M, Wendel S, Bercovitz RS. Transfusion reactions: prevention, diagnosis, and treatment.
Lancet 2016;388:2825–2836. Fig 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 524 u Hemostasis 3023

Section 7

Hemorrhagic and
Thrombotic Diseases
Chapter 524

Hemostasis
Brian R. Branchford, Benjamin J. Samelson-­
Jones, Leslie J. Raffini, and Veronica H.
Flood
Hemostasis is the biological process that limits hemorrhage after blood
vessel injury. An initial platelet plug (primary hemostasis) is bolstered
by the product of the coagulation cascade: a factor XIII-­cross-­linked
fibrin clot (secondary hemostasis). Extraneous fibrin is lysed by plasmin (fibrinolysis), and normal blood flow is restored through the previously damaged vessel. If hemostasis is impaired, varying degrees of
bleeding may occur depending on the hemostatic defect and the site
of injury. Excess coagulation activity can lead to thrombotic complications. The hemostatic response therefore needs to be rapid and locally
regulated, such that trauma neither results in hemorrhage nor triggers
a systemic thrombotic reaction. When a platelet adheres to a site of vascular injury, the activated platelet surface provides a phospholipid reaction surface where clotting factors bind and create a “thrombin burst.”
Active clotting is controlled by negative feedback loops that inhibit the
clotting process when procoagulant products come in contact with
intact endothelium. The main components of the hemostatic process
are the vessel wall, platelets, coagulation factors, anticoagulant proteins, and fibrinolytic system. Many components of the hemostasis
system are multifunctional. Fibrinogen serves as the ligand between
platelets during platelet aggregation and as the substrate for thrombin
to produce fibrin. Platelets provide the reaction surface on which clotting reactions occur, form the plug at the site of vessel injury, release
procoagulant compounds from their granules, and contract to constrict and limit clot size.

THE HEMOSTATIC PROCESS

The intact vascular endothelium is the primary barrier against hemorrhage and thrombosis. The endothelial cells that line the vessel wall
normally inhibit coagulation and provide a smooth surface that permits rapid blood flow.
After vascular injury, vasoconstriction occurs, and flowing blood
comes in contact with the subendothelial matrix. Von Willebrand
factor (VWF) tethers platelets to the site of injury by binding subendothelial matrix components such as collagen and platelets, via the glycoprotein Ib complex on platelet membranes. Platelet binding of VWF
initiates complex cellular signaling, activating the platelets and triggering secretion of storage granules containing adenosine diphosphate
(ADP), serotonin, and stored plasma and platelet membrane proteins.
On activation, the platelet receptor for fibrinogen, αIIbβ3, is switched
on (“inside out” signaling) to bind fibrinogen and triggers the aggregation and recruitment of other platelets to form the platelet plug. Multiple physiologic agonists can trigger platelet activation and aggregation,
including ADP, collagen, thrombin, and arachidonic acid. Aggregation
involves the interaction of specific receptors on the platelet surface
with plasma hemostatic proteins, primarily fibrinogen.
One of the subendothelial matrix proteins that is exposed after vascular injury is tissue factor. Exposed tissue factor binds to factor VII

and activates the clotting cascade (Fig. 524.1). The activated clotting
factor then initiates the activation of the next sequential clotting factor
in a systematic manner. During the process of platelet activation, internalized platelet phospholipids (primarily phosphatidylserine) become
externalized supporting membrane binding of the principal enzyme
complexes of coagulation: the extrinsic and intrinsic Xase complexes
and the prothrombinase complex. These complexes are localized to the
platelet surface and bring together the active proteolytic enzyme, an
activated cofactor, and the zymogen substrate that will form the next
active enzyme in the cascade. This sequence of the coagulation cascade
serves as a biochemical amplifier where a small amount of activated
proteolytic enzyme can rapidly produce a large amount of downstream
components, in a temporally and spatially controlled manner. In vivo,
small amounts of activated factor VII (VIIa) are present, so the system
is always poised to act. Near the bottom of the cascade, the multipotent
enzyme thrombin is formed. Thrombin converts fibrinogen into fibrin,
activates factors V, VIII, and XI, and aggregates platelets. Activation
of factor XI by thrombin amplifies further thrombin generation and
contributes to inhibition of fibrinolysis. Thrombin also activates factor
XIII. The stable fibrin-­platelet plug is ultimately formed through clot
retraction and cross linking of the fibrin clot by factor XIIIa.
Virtually all procoagulant proteins are balanced by anticoagulant
proteins that regulate or inhibit procoagulant function. Four clinically
important, naturally occurring anticoagulants regulate the extension
of the clotting process: antithrombin (AT), protein C, protein S, and
tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI). AT is a serine protease inhibitor (SERPIN) that regulates primarily factor Xa and thrombin and to
a lesser extent, factors IXa, XIa, and XIIa. When thrombin encounters
intact endothelium, thrombin binds to thrombomodulin, its endothelial
receptor. The thrombin-­thrombomodulin complex then converts protein C into activated protein C. In the presence of the cofactor protein
S, activated protein C proteolyzes and inactivates factor Va and factor VIIIa. Inactivated factor Va is also a functional anticoagulant that
inhibits clotting. TFPI limits activation of factor X by factor VIIa and
tissue factor and shifts the activation site of tissue factor and factor VIIa
to that of factor IX (Fig. 524.2).
Once a stable fibrin-­platelet plug is formed, the fibrinolytic system
limits its extension and proteolyzes the clot (fibrinolysis) to reestablish vascular integrity. Plasmin, generated from plasminogen by either
urokinase-­
like or tissue-­
type plasminogen activator, degrades the
fibrin clot. In the process of dissolving the fibrin clot, fibrin degradation products are produced. The fibrinolytic pathway is regulated by
plasminogen activator inhibitors and α2-­antiplasmin, as well as by the
thrombin-­activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI).

PATHOLOGY

Congenital deficiency of an individual procoagulant protein leads to a
bleeding disorder, whereas deficiency of an anticoagulant (clotting factor
inhibitor) predisposes the patient to thrombosis. In acquired hemostatic
disorders, there are frequently multiple problems with homeostasis that
perturb and dysregulate hemostasis. A primary illness (sepsis) and its
secondary effects (shock and acidosis) activate coagulation and fibrinolysis and impair the host's ability to restore normal hemostatic function.
When sepsis triggers disseminated intravascular coagulation, platelets, procoagulant clotting factors, and anticoagulant proteins are consumed, leaving the hemostatic system unbalanced and prone to bleeding
or clotting (see Chapter 532). Similarly, newborn infants and patients
with severe liver disease have synthetic deficiencies of both procoagulant and anticoagulant proteins. Such dysregulation causes the patient to
be predisposed to both hemorrhage and thrombosis with mild or moderate triggers that result in major alterations in the hemostatic process.
In the laboratory evaluation of hemostasis, parameters are manipulated to allow assessment of isolated aspects of hemostasis and limit the
multifunctionality of some of its components. The coagulation process
is studied in plasma anticoagulated with citrate to bind calcium, with
added phospholipid to mimic the reaction surface normally provided
by the platelet membrane and with a stimulus to trigger clotting. Calcium is added to restart the clotting process. This process does not necessarily reflect the in vivo pathways of clot formation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3024 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Procoagulants

524.1 Clinical and Laboratory Evaluation of
Hemostasis

Anticoagulants

kallikrein
F XII

XIIa

Brian R. Branchford, Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones,
Leslie J. Raffini, and Veronica H. Flood

HMWK
prekallikrein

F XI

XIa

F IX

IXa

VIIa

VII

in vivo
TF
PL

TFPI

VIIIa

F VIII

For most hemostatic disorders, the clinical history provides the most
useful information. To evaluate for a bleeding disorder, the history
should determine the sites of bleeding, the severity and duration of
hemorrhage, and the age at onset. Was the bleeding spontaneous, or
did it occur after trauma? Was there a previous personal or family history of similar problems? Did the symptoms correlate with the degree
of injury or trauma? Does bruising occur spontaneously? Are there
lumps with bruises for which there is minimal trauma? If the patient
had previous surgery or significant dental procedures, was there any
increased bleeding? If a child or adolescent has had surgery that affects
the mucosal surfaces, such as a tonsillectomy or major dental extractions, the absence of bleeding usually rules out a hereditary bleeding
disorder. Delayed or slow healing of superficial injuries may suggest a
hereditary bleeding disorder. In postpubertal females, it is important
to take a careful menstrual history. Because some common bleeding
disorders, such as von Willebrand disease (VWD), have a fairly high
prevalence, mothers and family members may have the same mild
bleeding disorder and may not be cognizant that the child’s menstrual
history is abnormal. Females with mild VWD who have a moderate
history of bruising frequently have a reduction in symptoms during
pregnancy or after administration of oral contraceptives. Some medications, such as aspirin and other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), inhibit platelet function and increase bleeding symptoms in
patients with a low platelet count or abnormal hemostasis. Standardized bleeding scores have been developed but have not been widely
adopted in pediatrics.
Outside the neonatal period, thrombotic disorders are relatively rare
until adulthood. In the neonate, physiologic deficiencies of procoagulants and anticoagulants place the hemostatic mechanism at greater
risk for imbalance, and clinical events can lead to either hemorrhage or
thrombosis. If a child or teenager presents with deep vein thrombosis

P-C/S
FX

von Willebrand
factor

CLINICAL HISTORY

Ca

Xa

AT-III
FV

PL
Ca Va
prothrombin (F II)

P-C/S

thrombin (IIa)

fibrinogen (I)

AT-III

fibrin
F XIII
clot

Fig. 524.1 The clotting cascade, with sequential activation and am-

plification of clot formation. Many of the factors (F) are activated by the
clotting factors shown above them in the cascade. The activated factors
are designated by the addition of an a. On the right side, the major
anticoagulants and the sites that they regulate are shown. Tissue factor
pathway inhibitor (TFPI) regulates tissue factor (TF); factor VIIa, protein
C, and protein S (P-­C/S) regulate factors VIII and V; and antithrombin
III (AT-­III) regulates factor Xa and thrombin (factor IIa). The dotted line
shows that, in vivo, TF and factor VIIa activate both factors IX and X,
but that, in vitro, only the activation of factor X is measured. Unactivated factor VIII, when bound to its carrier protein, von Willebrand factor (VWF), is protected from protein C inactivation. When thrombin, or
factor Xa activates factor VIII, it becomes unbound from VWF, at which
point it can participate with factor IXa in the activation of factor X in
the presence of phospholipid (PL) and Ca++ (the “tenase” complex).
Factor XIIIa cross-­links the fibrin clot and thereby makes it more stable. Prekallikrein, high-­molecular-­weight kininogen (HMWK), and factor
XII are shown in purple because they do not have a physiologic role
in coagulation, although they contribute to the clotting time in partial
thromboplastin time (PTT).

Vessel injury
Tissue factor
VIIa

VWF

Tissue factor
pathway inhibitor

XIa

Subendothelial
matrix

IXa

ThrombinXa Thrombomodulin

VIIIa

Va
Thrombin
Platelet
adhesion
PGI2
Collagen
ADP
NO
TXA2
ADPases

Fibrinogen

I

F
TA

Fibrin

Platelet aggregation

ina

t re

Fig. 524.2 The hemostatic mechanism.

ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; GAGs, glycosaminoglycans; NO, nitric oxide; PGI2,
prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2); PAI, plasminogen activator inhibitor; TAFI, thrombin-­
activated fibrinolytic inhibitor; TXA2, thromboxane A2; VWF, von Willebrand factor.

Plasminogen

)

se

Clo
Antiplasmin
PAI

Heparin
or GAGs

am

tra

s

ctio

n

Plasmin

t
glu

Hemostatic plug

IIa
XI

ran

(T

F

Fibrinolysis
Limit of clot extension
Recanalization

Cell migration and
proliferation
Healing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Protein C and S

Antithrombin III

Chapter 524 u Hemostasis 3025
(DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE), a detailed family history must be
obtained to evaluate for DVT, PE, myocardial infarction (MI), or cerebrovascular accident (stroke) in other family members. The presence of
thrombosis, especially in the absence of a provoking agent in the child
or teenager, should induce the clinician to take a careful family history
and consider an evaluation for a hereditary or acquired predisposition
to thrombosis.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

The physical examination should focus on whether bleeding symptoms
are associated primarily with the mucous membranes or skin (mucocutaneous bleeding) or with the muscles and joints (deep bleeding). The
examination should determine the presence of petechiae, ecchymoses,
hematomas, hemarthroses, or mucous membrane bleeding. Patients
with defects in platelet–blood vessel wall interaction (VWD or platelet
function defects) usually have mucocutaneous bleeding, which may
include epistaxis, menorrhagia, petechiae, ecchymoses, occasional
hematomas, and less frequently, hematuria and gastrointestinal bleeding. Individuals with a clotting deficiency of factor VIII or IX (hemophilia A or B) have symptoms of deep bleeding into muscles and joints,
with much more extensive ecchymoses and hematoma formation.
Patients with mild VWD or other mild bleeding disorders may have no
abnormal findings on physical examination. Individuals with disorders
of the collagen matrix and vessel wall may have loose joints and lax
skin associated with easy bruising (Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome).
Patients undergoing evaluation for thrombotic disorders should
be asked about swollen, warm, tender extremities (venous thrombosis), unexplained dyspnea or persistent “pneumonia,” especially in the
absence of fever (PE), and skin changes suggestive of chronic thrombosis (dilated collateral veins). Arterial thrombi usually cause an acute,
dramatic impairment of organ function, such as stroke, MI, or a painful, white, cold extremity (Table 524.1).

LABORATORY TESTS

In patients who have a positive bleeding history or who are actively
hemorrhaging, a platelet count, prothrombin time (PT), and partial
thromboplastin time (PTT) should be performed as screening tests
(Fig. 524.3). In individuals with abnormal screening tests, further
evaluation should be based on those results (Table 524.2). In a patient
with an abnormal bleeding history and a positive family history, normal screening tests should not preclude further laboratory evaluation,
which may include a thrombin time, VWF testing, and platelet function studies. Historically, bleeding time and platelet function analysis
(PFA-­100) have been used as screening tests, but neither has proved to
be useful in diagnosis of mild bleeding disorders.
There are no useful routine screening tests for hereditary thrombotic disorders. If the family history is positive or clinical thrombosis
is unexplained, specific thrombophilia assays should be performed.

Thrombosis is rare in children, and when it is present, the possibility
of a hereditary predisposition should be considered (see Chapter 527).

Platelet Count

Platelet count is essential in the evaluation of the child with a positive bleeding history because thrombocytopenia is the most common acquired cause of a bleeding diathesis in children. Patients with
a platelet count of >50 × 109/L rarely have significant clinical bleeding.
Thrombocytosis in children is usually reactive and is not associated
with bleeding complications. Persistent, severe thrombocytosis in the
absence of an underlying illness may require evaluation for the very
rare pediatric presentation of essential thrombocythemia or polycythemia vera.

Prothrombin Time and Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time

Because clotting (coagulation) factors were named in the order of discovery, they do not necessarily reflect the sequential order of activation
(Table 524.3; see also Table 524.2). Only two factors have commonly
used names: fibrinogen (factor I) and prothrombin (factor II). The
dual mechanisms of activating clotting have been termed the intrinsic
(surface activation) and extrinsic (tissue factor–mediated) pathways.
PT measures the activation of clotting by tissue factor (thromboplastin) in the presence of calcium. The tissue factor–factor VIIa complex
activates factor X. Whether factor X is activated by the intrinsic or the
extrinsic pathway, factor Xa on the platelet phospholipid surface complexes with factor Va and calcium (the “prothrombinase” complex) to
activate prothrombin to thrombin (also referred to as factor IIa). Once
thrombin is generated, fibrinogen is converted to a fibrin clot, the endpoint of the reaction (see Fig. 524.2). PT is not prolonged with deficiencies of factors VIII, IX, XI, and XII. In most laboratories, the normal
PT value is 10-­13 seconds. PT has been standardized using the international normalized ratio (INR) so that values can be compared from one
laboratory or instrument to another. This ratio is used to determine
similar degrees of anticoagulation with vitamin K antagonists, such as
warfarin.

Partial Thromboplastin Time

The intrinsic pathway involves the initial activation of factor XII, which
is accelerated by two other plasma proteins, prekallikrein and high-­
molecular-­weight kininogen. In the clinical laboratory, factor XII is
activated using a surface (silica or glass) or a contact activator, such as
ellagic acid. Factor XIIa, in turn, activates factor XI to factor XIa, which
then catalyzes factor IX to factor IXa. On the platelet phospholipid surface, factor IXa complexes with factor VIIIa and calcium to activate
factor X (“tenase” complex).
This process is accelerated by interaction with phospholipid and calcium at the steps involving factors V and VIII. An isolated deficiency of

Table 524.1  	 Signs and Symptoms of Thrombosis
LOCATION OF CLOT

PRESENTING SYMPTOMS

RADIOGRAPHIC DIAGNOSIS

Venous thrombus in limbs

Swelling, pain, and/or redness

Venous ultrasonography with Doppler

Arterial thrombus in limbs

Cool limbs, diminished or absent pulse

Arterial ultrasonography with Doppler

Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis

Headache, nausea and/or vomiting, lethargy,
change in mental status

CT venography or MR venography of head/brain

Pulmonary embolism

Chest pain, shortness of breath, pleuritis

CT angiography

Thrombus in the heart

Chest pain, shortness of breath, pleuritis

Echocardiogram

Portal vein thrombosis

Abdominal pain, nausea and/or vomiting, anorexia

Right upper quadrant ultrasonography with
Doppler

Renal vein thrombosis

Hematuria, abdominal mass, abdominal pain,
thrombocytopenia

Renal ultrasonography with Doppler or CT
abdomen/pelvis with IV contrast

CT, Computed tomography; IV, intravenous; MR, magnetic resonance.
Modified from Han H, Hensch L, Hui SKR, Teruya J. Evaluation and management of coagulopathies and thrombophilias in pediatric patients. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:83–100. Table 5.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3026 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Patient presents for laboratory investigation of bleeding

Routine screening: PT, aPTT, fibrinogen, platelet count
Consider von Willebrand testing for patients with appropriate
history

Isolated
prolonged PT

Prolonged PT
and aPTT

Isolated
prolonged aPTT

Assess factor VII

Assess common
pathway
deficiencies:
factors II, V and X

Assess intrinsic
pathway
deficiencies:
factors VIII, IX
and XI

Check for mild
deficiency of:
factors II, V and X

Assess acquired
multiple factor
deficiency

Low factors V
and VII
Normal factor VIII

Low factor VII
Normal factors V
and VIII

Evaluate for liver
disease

Consider vitamin
K deficiency should correct with
vitamin K therapy

von Willebrand
testing

Low factors V, VII
and VIII*

Low fibrinogen
Consider acquired
causes (DIC, liver
disease)
If suspected
dysfibrinogenemia:
thrombin time,
reptilase time and
fibrinogen antigen

Platelet
aggregation
assay

DIC
Dilutional
coagulopathy

If abnormal,
consider platelet
glycoprotein
studies or electron
microscopy

Normal
screening tests
with high
suspicion for
bleeding
disorder
Perform
second-line
testing

Low von
Willebrand
factor/activity or
ratio
Perform
secondary von
Willebrand testing
as indicated
(See discussion
below)

Fibrinolysis
studies

Mild factor
deficiencies

Consider testing
for factor XIII,
2-antiplasmin,
plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1
(PAl-1), and tissue
plasminogen
activator (tPA)

Consider testing
for mild factor
deficiency,
particularly factors
VIII and IX

Fig. 524.3 Testing algorithm based on the screening tests (PT, aPTT, fibrinogen, and platelet count). DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation.

*Note: Factor VIII can be normal or increased in these settings secondary to the acute phase response. (From Han H, Hensch L, Hui SKR, Teruya J.
Evaluation and management of coagulopathies and thrombophilias in pediatric patients. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:83–100. Fig. 1.)

a single clotting factor may result in isolated prolongation of PT, PTT,
or both, depending on the location of the factor in the clotting cascade. This approach is useful in determining hereditary clotting factor
deficiencies; however, in acquired hemostatic disorders encountered in
clinical practice, more than one clotting factor is frequently deficient,
so the relative prolongation of PT and PTT must be assessed.
Measurement of PTT as performed in the clinical laboratory is actually “activated” PTT; most refer to it as PTT. This test measures the
initiation of clotting at the level of factor XII through sequential steps
to the final clot endpoint. It does not measure factor VII, factor XIII,
or anticoagulants. PTT uses a contact activator (silica, kaolin, or ellagic
acid) in the presence of calcium and phospholipid. Because of differences in reagents and laboratory instruments, the normal range for
PTT varies among hospital laboratories. Normal ranges for PTT have
much more interlaboratory variability than those for PT.
Thus the mechanisms studied by PT and PTT allow the evaluation
of clotting factor deficiencies, even though these pathways may not be
the same as those occurring physiologically. The PTT can be prolonged
by deficiencies of factor XII, prekallikrein, and high-­molecular-­weight
kininogen, yet these deficiencies do not result in bleeding,

Thrombin Time

Thrombin time (TT) measures the final step in the clotting cascade, in
which fibrinogen is converted to fibrin. The normal TT varies between

laboratories but is usually 11-­15 seconds. Prolongation of TT occurs
with reduced fibrinogen levels (hypofibrinogenemia or afibrinogenemia), with dysfunctional fibrinogen (dysfibrinogenemia), or in the
presence of substances that interfere with fibrin polymerization, such
as heparin and fibrin split products. If heparin contamination is a
potential cause of prolonged TT, a reptilase time can be ordered.

Reptilase Time

Reptilase time uses snake venom to clot fibrinogen. Unlike thrombin
time, reptilase time is not sensitive to heparin and is prolonged only by
reduced or dysfunctional fibrinogen and fibrin split products. Therefore, if TT is prolonged but reptilase time is normal, the prolonged TT
is caused by heparin and does not indicate the presence of fibrin split
products or reduced concentration or function of fibrinogen.

Mixing Studies

If there is unexplained prolongation of PT or PTT, a mixing study is
usually performed. Normal plasma is added to the patient's plasma,
and the PT or PTT is repeated. Correction of PT or PTT by 1:1 mixing
with normal plasma suggests deficiency of a clotting factor because a
50% level of individual clotting proteins is sufficient to produce normal
PT or PTT. If the clotting time is not corrected or only partially corrected, an inhibitor is usually present. An inhibitor of clotting may
be either a chemical similar to heparin that delays coagulation or an

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 524 u Hemostasis 3027
Table 524.2  	 Causes of Bleeding Associated with Prolonged Prothrombin Time and Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time
PROLONGED PT AND aPTT

CAUSES OF BLEEDING WITHOUT
PT/aPTT PROLONGATION

ISOLATED PROLONGED PT

ISOLATED PROLONGED aPTT

FVII deficiency

Hemophilia A (FVIII deficiency)

Disseminated intravascular
­coagulation

FXIII deficiency

Mild common pathway ­factor
­deficiency (II, V, and X),
­fibrinogen deficiency

Hemophilia B (FIX deficiency)

Dilutional coagulopathy

von Willebrand disease

Early vitamin K deficiency

Hemophilia C (FXI deficiency)

Liver synthetic dysfunction

Platelet dysfunction

Early liver synthetic dysfunction

von Willebrand disease

Marked vitamin K deficiency

Mild deficiency of FVIII, FIX, and
FXI

Direct Xa inhibitor

Acquired FVIII, FIX, or FXI
­inhibitors

Common pathway factor
­deficiency (FII, FV, and FX),
severe fibrinogen deficiency

α2-­antiplasmin deficiency and
other causes of hyperfibrinolysis

—

Heparin

Warfarin or direct thrombin
­inhibitor, DOAC (not always)

Collagen vascular diseases
(i.e., Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome)

—

—

Increased tissue factor pathway
inhibitor, FV Amsterdam or East
Texas bleeding disorder

DOAC

DOAC, Direct oral anticoagulant.
From Han H, Hensch L, Hui SKR, Teruya J. Evaluation and management of coagulopathies and thrombophilias in pediatric patients. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:83–100. Table 1.

Table 524.3  	 Coagulation (Clotting) Factors
CLOTTING FACTOR

SYNONYM

DISORDER

I

Fibrinogen

Congenital deficiency (afibrinogenemia) or dysfunction
(dysfibrinogenemia)

II

Prothrombin

Congenital deficiency or dysfunction

V

Labile factor, proaccelerin

Congenital deficiency (parahemophilia)

VII

Stable factor or proconvertin

Congenital deficiency

VIII

Antihemophilic factor

Congenital deficiency is hemophilia A (classic hemophilia)

IX

Christmas factor

Congenital deficiency is hemophilia B (sometimes referred to as
Christmas disease)

X

Stuart-­Prower factor

Congenital deficiency

XI

Plasma thromboplastin antecedent

Congenital deficiency (sometimes referred to as hemophilia C)

XII

Hageman factor

Congenital deficiency is not associated with clinical symptoms

XIII

Fibrin-­stabilizing factor

Congenital deficiency

antibody directed against a specific clotting factor or the phospholipid used in clotting tests. In the inpatient setting the most common
cause of a prolonged PTT is heparin contamination of the sample.
The presence of heparin in the sample can be ruled in or out by adding
heparinase to the sample and repeating the PTT. If the mixing study is
not corrected or if its result becomes more prolonged and the patient
has clinical bleeding, an inhibitor of a specific clotting factor (antibody
directed against the factor), most often factor VIII, factor IX, or factor
XI, may be present. If the patient has no bleeding symptoms and both
PTT and the mixing study are prolonged, a lupus-­like anticoagulant
(see Chapter 531) is often present. Patients with these findings usually
have a long PTT but do not bleed.

Platelet Aggregation

When a qualitative platelet function defect is suspected, platelet aggregation testing is usually ordered. Platelet-­rich plasma from the patient
is activated with a series of agonists (ADP, epinephrine, collagen,
thrombin or thrombin-­receptor peptide, and ristocetin). Some platelet
aggregometers measure specific adenosine triphosphate release from

the platelets, as measured by the generation of luminescence via lumiaggregometry, and are more sensitive in detecting abnormalities of the
platelet release reaction from storage granules. Repeat testing or testing of other symptomatic family members can help to determine the
hereditary nature of the defect. Many medications, especially aspirin,
other NSAIDs, and valproic acid, alter platelet function testing. Figure
524.1 provides an approach to the differential diagnosis of many common bleeding disorders based on screening tests.

Factor XIII

The PT and PTT reflect only fibrin formation and do not measure
cross-­linking by factor XIII. Therefore specific testing is required to
identify factor XIII deficiency. Clot solubility testing can be performed
but only identifies the most severely affected individuals. Quantitative
measurement of factor XIII levels can also be performed.

Testing for Thrombotic Predisposition

Hereditary predisposition to thrombosis is associated with a reduction
of anticoagulant function (protein C, protein S, AT III); the presence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3028 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 524.4

Reference Values for Coagulation Tests in Healthy Children
15 D-­4 WK

1-­5 MO

6-­11 MO

1-­5 YR

6-­10 YR

11-­17 YR

ADULT
RANGES

SCREENING TESTS
PT (sec)
11.2 (9.5-­12.6)

11.0 (9.7-­12.8)

11.0 (9.8-­13.0)

11.3 (9.9-­13.4)

11.7 (10.0-­14.6)

11.8 (10.0-­14.1)

10.9 (9.2-­12.2)

PTT (sec)

PARAMETER

35.4 (27.6-­45.6)

33.5 (24.8-­40.7)

32.4 (25.1-­40.7)

31.6 (24.0-­39.2)

31.6 (26.9-­38.7)

31.0 (24.6-­38.4)

31.7 (27.8-­36.3)

COAGULATION PROTEINS
Fibrinogen (g/L)
2.54 (1.43-­4.02)

2.26 (1.50-­3.76)

2.33 (1.57-­3.60)

2.73 (1.88-­4.13)

2.78 (1.89-­4.75)

2.66 (1.77-­4.20)

2.75 (2.17-­3.42)

FII (IU/mL)

56 (45-­74)

75 (47-­111)

92 (74-­117)

99 (49-­130)

90 (68-­132)

94 (48-­119)

101 (75-­132)

FV (IU/mL)

100 (69-­124)

100 (60-­147)

102 (59-­160)

111 (73-­188)

101 (82-­141)

97 (62-­125)

99 (61-­142)

FVII (IU/mL)

76 (55-­108)

88 (43-­141)

88 (52-­128)

82 (48-­124)

77 (55-­135)

82 (55-­133)

95 (59-­151)

FVIII (IU/mL)

96 (65-­153)

85 (50-­187)

75 (53-­132)

95 (59-­167)

87 (61-­154)

93 (43-­155)

97 (56-­146)

FIX (IU/mL)

44 (30-­77)

53 (29-­105)

77 (51-­107)

84 (53-­129)

80 (55-­156)

97 (60-­138)

112 (70-­131)

FX (IU/mL)

85 (66-­92)

89 (68-­122)

100 (76-­134)

99 (60-­153)

99 (71-­162)

93 (64-­131)

106 (73-­150)

FXI IU/mL)

56 (33-­75)

64 (28-­126)

86 (61-­126)

92 (58-­154)

83 (32-­154)

84 (55-­139)

105 (49-­139)

FXII (U/mL)

69 (25-­81)

76 (38-­137)

109 (48-­156)

107 (50-­175)

84 (49-­154)

92 (49-­154)

108 (47-­157)

FXIII (IU/mL)

86 (78-­100)

83 (55-­133)

92 (51-­137)

97 (49-­137)

97 (54-­142)

106 (64-­133)

100 (68-­138)

Von Willebrand
antigen (IU/mL)

163 (46-­220)

102 (36-­217)

79 (48-­199)

89 (41-­186)

80 (45-­141)

92 (56-­123)

91 (43-­144)

ANTICOAGULANT PROTEINS
Antithrombin
41 (33-­63)
(IU/mL)

80 (29-­120)

96 (63-­122)

67 (61-­128)

97 (64-­136)

97 (64-­136)

112 (83-­126)

Protein C (IU/mL)

38 (30-­115)

82 (28-­128)

85 (44-­151)

86 (61-­144)

91 (39-­170)

95 (66-­127)

119 (69-­149)

Protein S (IU/mL)

90 (29-­115)

82 (33-­154)

88 (52-­1138)

97 (60-­149)

105 (67-­162)

99 (53-­147)

102 (58-­138)

Plasminogen
(U/mL)

53 (41-­83)

69 (38-­110)

81 (49-­126)

92 (60-­178)

92 (52-­158)

92 (58-­131)

94 (63-­135)

D-­dimer (ng/mL)

530 (445-­1200)

515 (90-­878)

270 (133-­844)

280 (88-­780)

275 (60-­567)

245 (69-­580)

277 (109-­560)

PT, Prothrombin time; PTT, partial thromboplastin time.
Data expressed as median (95% confidence interval).
Data adapted from Toulon P, Berruyer M, Brionne-­François M, et al. Age dependency for coagulation parameters in paediatric populations. Results of a multicentre study aimed at
defining the age-­specific reference ranges. Thromb Haemost. 2016;116:9–16.

a factor V molecule that is resistant to inactivation by protein C (factor
V Leiden); elevated levels of procoagulants (a pathogenic variant of the
prothrombin gene); or a deficiency of fibrinolysis (plasminogen deficiency); and the rare metabolic disease homocystinuria (see Chapter
527).

Tests of the Fibrinolytic System

Euglobulin clot lysis time is a screening test used in some laboratories
to assess fibrinolysis. More specific tests are available in most laboratories to determine the levels of plasminogen, plasminogen activator, and
inhibitors of fibrinolysis. An increase in fibrinolysis may be associated
with hemorrhagic symptoms, and a delay in fibrinolysis is associated
with thrombosis.

DEVELOPMENTAL HEMOSTASIS

The normal newborn infant has reduced plasma concentrations of several procoagulants and anticoagulants compared to adults (see Table
524.4), and this is even more pronounced in preterm infants. During
gestation, there is progressive maturation and increase of the clotting factors synthesized by the liver. The extremely premature infant

has prolonged PT and PTT values, as well as a marked reduction in
anticoagulant protein levels (protein C, protein S, and AT). Levels of
fibrinogen, factors V and VIII, VWF, and platelets are near-­normal
throughout the later stages of gestation (see Chapter 142). Because
protein C and protein S are physiologically reduced, factors V and
VIII, which are present at normal levels at birth, are not balanced with
their regulatory proteins. In contrast, the physiologic deficiency of vitamin K–dependent procoagulant proteins (factors II, VII, IX, and X) is
partially balanced by the physiologic reduction of AT. The net effect
is that newborns (especially premature infants) are at increased risk
for complications of bleeding, clotting, or both. Establishing absolute
cutoff values for normal ranges of coagulation proteins in newborn and
preterm infants is challenging because of the age-­dependent variation
and heterogeneity among laboratory instruments and reagents. Repeat
testing (or testing parents) may be necessary to confirm a diagnosis of
an inherited deficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 525 u Hereditary Clotting Factor Deficiencies (Bleeding Disorders)

Chapter 525

Hereditary Clotting Factor
Deficiencies (Bleeding
Disorders)
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R.
Branchford, and Veronica H. Flood
Inherited deficiencies in the coagulation factors responsible for forming
cross-­linked fibrin clots (as detailed in Chapter 524) can result in bleeding disorders. Hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency) and hemophilia
B (factor IX deficiency) are the most common and serious congenital
coagulation factor deficiencies. The clinical findings in hemophilia A
and hemophilia B are virtually identical. Factor XI deficiency is a rare
autosomal bleeding disorder discussed in Chapter 525.2. Reduced levels of the contact factors (factor XII, high molecular weight kininogen,
and prekallikrein) are associated with significant prolongation of activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT; also referred to as PTT) but
are not associated with clinical bleeding, as discussed in Chapter 525.3.

525.1 Factor VIII or Factor IX Deficiency
(Hemophilia A or B)
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency) and hemophilia B (factor IX
deficiency) are the most common severe inherited bleeding disorders.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The activated forms of factors VIII and IX participate in the enzyme
complex responsible for the sustained proteolytic activation of factor
X during coagulation. Together with phospholipids and calcium, they
form the intrinsic tenase (or factor X activating) complex. Hemophilia
A and hemophilia B have similar clinical manifestations because,
molecularly, both disorders result in a deficiency of factor X activation,
which, in turn, results in insufficient thrombin generation (see Fig.
524.1 in Chapter 524 for a depiction of the in vitro clotting process as it
occurs in the test tube). In hemostatically normal individuals, hemorrhage after an injury is constrained by the initial formation of the platelet plug, which is stabilized by the generation of a cross-­linked fibrin
clot. In people with hemophilia A or B, clot formation is delayed and
ineffectual. Inadequate thrombin production leads to failure to form a
tightly cross-­linked fibrin to support the platelet plug. When untreated
bleeding occurs in a closed space, such as a joint, bleeding may stop as
the result of tamponade. With open wounds, in which tamponade cannot occur, even minor injuries may result in significant blood loss, with
a highly friable clot forming slowly; rebleeding occurs during physiologic thrombolysis or with minimal new traumas.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The severity of the bleeding phenotype in hemophilia A and B is
strongly associated with the amount of residual factor VIII or factor
IX, respectively. Severe hemophilia is characterized by having <1%
normal factor activity, and bleeding is frequent and often spontaneous.
Patients with moderate hemophilia have factor levels of 1–5% normal
and bleed excessively with mild trauma. Individuals with mild hemophilia have factor levels 5–40% normal and usually only bleed abnormally after major trauma or surgery; people with mild hemophilia may
go many years before the condition is diagnosed.

3029

Because neither factor VIII nor factor IX crosses the placenta, bleeding symptoms may be present at birth. Between 1% and 4% of neonates
with hemophilia have intracranial hemorrhages, mostly from birth
trauma. However, about 35% and 70% of male infants with severe and
nonsevere hemophilia, respectively, do not bleed with circumcision.
Thus, in the absence of a positive family history (50% of cases), hemophilia may go undiagnosed in the newborn period. Obvious symptoms,
such as easy bruising, intramuscular hematomas, and hemarthroses,
begin when the child starts to cruise. Bleeding from minor traumatic
lacerations of the mouth (torn frenulum) may persist for hours or days
and may cause the parents to seek medical evaluation. Even in patients
with severe hemophilia, only 90% have evidence of increased bleeding
by a year of age.
Although bleeding may occur in any area of the body, the hallmark
of hemophilia bleeding is hemarthrosis, which can occur spontaneously or after minor trauma. The earliest joint hemorrhages appear
most often in the ankles. In the older child and adolescent, hemarthroses of the knees and elbows are also common. Whereas the child’s early
joint hemorrhages are recognized only after major swelling and fluid
accumulation in the joint space, older children are frequently able to
recognize bleeding before the physician does: patients report a warm,
tingling sensation in the affected joint as the first sign of a joint hemorrhage. Repeated bleeding episodes into the same joint may result in a
“target” joint, which becomes more susceptible to recurrent bleeding
because of the pathologic changes (see “Chronic Complications”).
Although most muscular hemorrhages are clinically evident
because of localized pain or swelling, bleeding into the iliopsoas muscle
requires specific mention. A patient may lose large volumes of blood
into the iliopsoas muscle, verging on hypovolemic shock, with only a
vague area of referred pain in the groin. The hip is held in a flexed,
internally rotated position because of irritation of the iliopsoas. The
diagnosis is made clinically from the inability to extend the hip but
should be confirmed with ultrasonography, CT, or MRI (Fig. 525.1).
Life-­threatening bleeding in the patient with hemophilia is caused by
bleeding into vital structures (central nervous system [CNS], upper airway) or by exsanguination (external trauma, gastrointestinal [GI] or iliopsoas hemorrhage). Prompt treatment with clotting factor concentrate
for these life-­threatening hemorrhages is imperative. If head trauma is
of sufficient concern to suggest radiologic evaluation, factor replacement should precede radiologic evaluation. Life-­threatening hemorrhages require replacement therapy to achieve a level equal to that of
normal plasma (100 IU/dL or 100%; see section below on “Treatment”).

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS

A reduced level of factor VIII or factor IX will often result in a prolonged
PTT. In severe hemophilia, the PTT value is usually 2-­3 times the upper
limit of normal. However, depending on the PTT reagents, people with
mild hemophilia can have a PTT in the normal range. Results of the
other screening tests of the hemostatic mechanism (platelet count,
bleeding time, prothrombin time [PT]) are normal. The specific activity assays for factors VIII and IX confirm the diagnosis of hemophilia.
One IU of each factor activity is defined as that amount in 1 mL of
normal plasma, referenced against a standard established by the World
Health Organization (WHO). Thus 100 mL of normal plasma has 100
IU/dL (100% normal activity) of each factor. The term % activity refers
to the percentage found in normal plasma (100% activity). Factor concentrates are also referenced against an international WHO standard,
so treatment doses are usually referred to in IU.
In the newborn period, factor VIII activity values may be artificially
elevated because of the acute-­phase response elicited by the birth process. This artificial elevation may cause an infant with mild hemophilia
A to have a normal or near-­normal measured level. Patients with severe
hemophilia A do not have detectable levels of factor VIII. In contrast,
factor IX levels are physiologically low in all newborns and only reach
adult values at about 6 months of age. If severe hemophilia is present
in the family, an undetectable level of factor IX is diagnostic of severe
hemophilia B. In some patients with mild factor IX deficiency, the
presence of low factor IX activity can be confirmed only after several
months of life.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3030 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

A

C

B

Fig. 525.1 Massive hematoma into the iliopsoas muscle in a patient with hemophilia B. A male with severe deficiency of factor IX (hemophilia B)
was admitted for right lower abdominal pain of progressively increasing severity and tenderness. He had had a common cold with severe cough
and loss of appetite for approximately 1 week. A, Abdominal radiograph shows presence of the psoas sign on the right side and left-­shifted colon
gas. B, CT scan shows massive hematoma in the right iliopsoas muscle, resulting in anterior translocation of the right kidney. C, Reconstructed
3-­dimensional image shows more clearly the kidney translocation and the extended, but intact, large vessels. These are useful findings for the
diagnostic procedures because progressive right lower abdominal pain may closely simulate acute appendicitis. The hemorrhage was successfully
managed by replacement of factor IX for 1 week without any recurrence. The patient did not have any inhibitors to factor IX. (From Miyazaki K,
Higashihara M. Massive hemorrhage into the iliopsoas muscle. Intern Med. 2005;44:158–159.)

The mixing of normal plasma with hemophilia plasma usually corrects PTT value, unless the patient has an inhibitor, as discussed later.
An inhibitor titer can be quantified by the Bethesda assay, where 1
Bethesda Unit (BU) neutralizes 1 IU/mL of factor.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

In young infants with severe bleeding manifestations, the differential
diagnosis includes severe thrombocytopenia; severe platelet function
disorders, such as Bernard-­Soulier syndrome and Glanzmann thrombasthenia; type 3 (severe) von Willebrand disease; and vitamin K
deficiency.

GENETICS

The genes for factor VIII and IX (F8 and F9, respectively) are carried near the terminus of the long arm of the X chromosome, making
hemophilia an X-­linked disorder. It occurs in approximately 1/5,000
males, with 80% having factor VIII deficiency and 20% having factor
IX deficiency. Hemophilia appears in all ethnic groups. A third of cases
are estimated to be the result of a spontaneous pathogenic variant.
Approximately 50% of cases of severe hemophilia A have a specific F8
change, in which there is an internal inversion within the factor VIII
gene (intron 22 inversion). Meanwhile, 98% of hemophilia patients
have an identified genetic cause of their hemophilia, which can facilitate diagnosis, prenatal testing, and identification of female carriers.
Some female carriers (heterozygotes) have sufficiently low factor
level to have abnormal bleeding. Factor levels should be determined in
all known or potential carriers to assess the need for treatment in the
event of surgery or clinical bleeding. Female carriers with factor levels
<40% normal are considered to have hemophilia and should be treated
as such. Notably, about 0.2% of people with severe and moderate hemophilia are female, mostly because of skewed lyonization or Turner syndrome. Female carriers with factor levels >40% normal can also have
abnormal bleeding and are termed symptomatic hemophilia carriers.
Historically, female carriers were thought to be asymptomatic, but
newer data prove these individuals can also have significant bleeding.

TREATMENT

Disease-­specific therapy started early in life is the hallmark of excellent hemophilia care (Table 525.1). Treatment can be divided into
on-­demand therapy (hemostatic interventions to stop bleeding) and
prophylaxis therapy to prevent bleeding. Prophylaxis is the standard
of care for children with severe hemophilia in countries with sufficient

medical resources. Prophylaxis decreases catastrophic bleeding, prevents hemarthrosis, and preserves joint health. The types of hemostatic agents available for hemophilia A and hemophilia B are rapidly
expanding, with several new classes of medications receiving regulatory approval (Table 525.2).

On-­Demand Treatment

To treat acute bleeding, nothing works better than replacing the deficient coagulation factor. When mild to moderate bleeding occurs,
values of factor VIII or factor IX must be raised to hemostatic levels,
approximately 50% of normal activity. For life-­threatening or major
hemorrhages, the dose should aim to achieve levels of 100% activity. Both plasma-­derived and recombinant factor VIII and factor IX
concentrates are available. Replacement therapy requires intravenous
administration, which patients and families often learn to do themselves. The half-­lives of standard factor VIII and factor IX are 8-­12
hours and 18-­24 hours, respectively, although there is wide variability between patients with younger children often having shorter half-­
lives. There are also bioengineered factor VIII and factor IX products
designed to have longer half-­lives (termed extended half-­life products),
which reduce the frequency of intravenous administrations necessary
to treat bleeds and provide prophylaxis.
Table 525.1 summarizes the treatment recommendations of some
common types of hemorrhage in a patient with hemophilia. The calculation of the factor replacement dose is as follows, with the difference between factor VIII and factor IX being because of their different
volumes of distribution:
Factor VIII dose (IU) = [ % desired raise] × [weight (kg)] × 0.5
Factor IX dose (IU) = [ % desired raise] × [weight (kg)] × 1.3

Therefore emergency dosing for factor VIII deficiency is approximately 50 units per kg and emergency dosing for factor IX deficiency is
approximately 100-­130 units/kg.
It is important to note that patients can have variable recoveries, and
different factor products also have slightly different recoveries. Many
patients will carry dosing cards detailing their recommended treatments. In general, doses are rounded up to vial size so as not to waste
product.
For some patients with mild factor VIII deficiency, desmopressin
acetate can be used to stimulate the cellular release of endogenously

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 525 u Hereditary Clotting Factor Deficiencies (Bleeding Disorders)

3031

Table 525.1  Treatment of Hemophilia Without Inhibitors
TYPE OF HEMORRHAGE

HEMOPHILIA A

HEMOPHILIA B

Hemarthrosis*

50-­60 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate† on day 1, then
20 IU/kg the following day. Consider every other day
until joint function is normal or back to baseline.
Consider prophylaxis.

80-­100 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡ on day 1; then
40 IU/kg the following day. Consider every other
day until joint function is normal or back to baseline. Consider prophylaxis.

Muscle or significant subcutaneous
hematoma

50 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate; 20 IU/kg every other
day treatment may be needed until resolved.

80 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡; 40 IU/kg every 2-­3
days may be needed until resolved.

Mouth, deciduous tooth, or tooth
extraction

20 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate†; antifibrinolytic
therapy§; remove loose deciduous tooth.

40 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡; antifibrinolytic
therapy§; remove loose deciduous tooth.

Epistaxis

Apply pressure for 15-­20 min; pack with petrolatum
gauze; give antifibrinolytic therapy§; 20 IU/kg factor
VIII concentrate† if this treatment fails.||

Apply pressure for 15-­20 min; pack with petrolatum
gauze; antifibrinolytic therapy§; 30 IU/kg factor IX
concentrate‡ if this treatment fails.#

Major surgery, life-­threatening
hemorrhage

50-­75 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate; then initiate 25 IU/
kg q8-­12h to maintain trough level >50 IU/dL for 5-­7
days; then 50 IU/kg q24h to maintain trough >25 IU/
dL for 7 days; monitor factor VIII levels.

80-­120 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡, then 50-­60 IU/
kg q12-­24h to maintain factor IX at >40 IU/dL for
5-­7 days, and then at >30 IU/dL for 7 days; monitor
factor IX levels.

Iliopsoas hemorrhage

50 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate; then 25 IU/kg q12h
until asymptomatic; then 20 IU/kg every other day,
for a total of 10-­14 days.**

100 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡; then 50-­60 IU/kg
q12-­24h to maintain factor IX at >40 IU/dL until
patient is asymptomatic; then 40-­50 IU every other
day, for a total of 10-­14 days.**

Hematuria

Bed rest; 1.5× maintenance fluids; if not controlled
in 1-­2 days, 20 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate; if not
controlled, give prednisone (unless patient is HIV-­
infected).

Bed rest; 1.5× maintenance fluids; if not controlled
in 1-­2 days, 40 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡; if not
controlled, give prednisone (unless patient is
HIV-­infected).

*For hip hemarthrosis, orthopedic evaluation for possible aspiration is advisable to prevent avascular necrosis of the femoral head.

†For mild or moderate hemophilia, desmopressin 0.3 μg/kg can be used instead of factor VIII concentrate if the patient is known to respond with a hemostatic level of factor VIII; if

repeated doses are given, monitor factor VIII levels for tachyphylaxis.

‡Stated doses apply for recombinant factor IX concentrate; different dosing may apply for long-­acting recombinant factor IX concentrates or plasma-­derived factor IX.
§Do not give antifibrinolytic therapy until 4-­6 hr after a dose of prothrombin complex concentrate.
#Nonprescription coagulation-­promoting products may be helpful.

**Repeat radiologic assessment should be performed before discontinuation of therapy.
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; IU, international units; q12-­24h, every 12 to 24 hours.
Adapted from Di Paola J, Montgomery RR, Gill JC, Flood VH. Hemophilia and von Willebrand disease. In: Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015: pp. 1028–1054.

Table 525.2  Strengths and Weaknesses of the Old and New Therapeutic Options for Hemophilia
STRENGTHS

WEAKNESSES

Standard half-­life clotting factor
concentrates

Effective for both bleeding control and prevention;
well established safety and effectiveness profile for
decades; measurable FVIII and FIX concentrations
as surrogate marker of effectiveness; can result in
normal concentrations of FVIII and FIX

Frequent intravenous injections; inhibitor
development

Extended half-­life clotting factor
concentrates

Effective for both bleeding control and prevention; a
reduced number of injections; higher trough
concentrations; measurable FVIII and FIX
concentrations as surrogate markers of
effectiveness; can result in normal concentrations of
FVIII and FIX

Intravenous route; inhibitor development

Nonreplacement therapies
(emicizumab, fitusiran, anti-­tissue factor
pathway inhibitor antibodies, SerpinPC)

Subcutaneous route; infrequent injections; standard
doses for all patients

Need for adjunctive hemostatic treatment;
steady state of coagulation activity not within
the normal range; thrombotic risk

Gene therapy

Single intravenous injection; restoration of
endogenous FVIII and FIX production

Preexisting immunity against adeno-­associated
viral vectors; immune response against
vectors and transfected cells; unknown
durability of transduction; need for
immunosuppressive therapy; unknown
long-­term safety

FVIII, factor VIII; FIX, factor IX.
From Mancuso ME, Mahlangu JN, Pipe SW. The changing treatment landscape in haemophilia: from standard half-­life clotting factor concentrates to gene editing. Lancet.
2021;397:630–640. Table 5.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3032 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
produced factor VIII to increase its plasma levels. In patients with moderate or severe factor VIII deficiency, the stored levels of factor VIII are
inadequate, and desmopressin treatment is ineffective. Desmopressin can
be administered intravenously or intranasally, with the latter facilitating
home treatment. The intranasal formulation is a higher concentration of
desmopressin than that used to treat enuresis or hypopituitarism; the dose
is 150 μg (1 spray) for children weighing <50 kg and 300 μg (2 sprays)
for children and young adults weighing >50 kg. Most centers administer a trial of desmopressin to determine if the factor VIII levels increase
sufficiently for hemostasis. Because desmopressin triggers the release of
cellularly stored factor VIII, usually it can only be given twice in a 1-­2
day period. The most serious complication is hyponatremia, which can
be mitigated by fluid restrictions for the 24 hours after administration.
Desmopressin is not effective in the treatment of factor IX deficiency.
Mucosal bleeding often benefits from antifibrinolytic agents such
as aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid that can be given orally or
intravenously.

PROPHYLAXIS

Many patients are given lifelong prophylaxis to prevent spontaneous
joint bleeding. The World Federation of Hemophilia recommends prophylaxis for children with severe hemophilia and for adults with joint
disease. Usually, such programs are initiated at the time of the first or
second joint hemorrhage. Young children often require the insertion of
a central catheter to ensure venous access for factor replacements. Such
regimens are expensive but highly effective in preventing or greatly
limiting the degree of joint pathology; complications include central
line infection and thrombosis.
The goal of prophylaxis is generally to maintain a measurable plasma
factor level (1–2%), when assayed just before the next infusion (trough
level); this converts patients from severe to moderate hemophilia. For
standard half-­life products, this typically requires intravenous administration 2-­4 times per week; this frequency is reduced with prophylaxis with extended half-­life products.
Another class of hemophilia drugs that promotes hemostasis without factor VIII or factor IX is termed nonfactor therapies. Emicizumab is approved for prophylaxis for hemophilia A. Emicizumab is
a bispecific, humanized monoclonal antibody that can bridge activated
factor IX and factor X to restore factor X activation. It is administered
subcutaneously and is given only 1-­4 times per month after four weekly
loading doses. Because emicizumab mimics some of the biochemistry
of activated factor VIII, it dramatically shortens PTT times. It is not
used to treat acute bleeds.
Efanesoctocog alfa, a modified extended half-life single recombinant
factor VIII protein that decouples recombinant factor VIII from endogenous von Willebrand factor, has demonstrated efficacy in patients with
severe hemophilia A. Fitusiran, a small interfering RNA molecule that
reduces antithrombin synthesis, has been used successfully for prophylaxis in patients with hemophilia A or B with or without inhibitors. Gene
therapy (valoctocogene roxaparvovec for hemophilia A; etranacogene
dezaparvovec for hemophilia B) has demonstrated efficacy in reducing
bleeding in adult patients with severe hemophilia.

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Effective measures to avoid trauma include anticipatory guidance,
including the use of car seats, seatbelts, and bike helmets and the avoidance of high-­risk behaviors. Older males should be counseled to avoid
violent contact sports, but this issue is admittedly a challenge; however,
active lifestyles are also encouraged to limit obesity. Early psychosocial
intervention helps the family achieve a balance between overprotection and permissiveness. Patients with hemophilia should avoid aspirin
and other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) that affect
platelet function.

Inhibitor Formation

The formation of neutralizing antibodies, termed inhibitors, is the
major complication of factor VIII or factor IX replacement therapy.
They develop in 20–30% of severe hemophilia A patients and 3–10% of
severe hemophilia B patients that receive factor therapy, usually within
20 exposures to factor. Inhibitors may be identified during routine

laboratory surveillance or become clinically apparent when bleeding
episodes fail to respond to appropriate replacement therapy. There are
both patient and product risk factors for inhibitor development, with
the underlying hemophilia-­causing gene pathogenic variant being the
most important with the majority of people with large-­gene deletions
developing inhibitors. Prophylaxis with plasma-­derived factor VIII
products decreases the risk of inhibitor development about 1.7-­fold
compared to recombinant factor VIII products. Intensive early factor
exposure during surgery or major trauma increases the risk of inhibitor
development, likely through initiating immunologic danger signaling.
Patients with inhibitors always require referral to a center that cares
for many such patients and has a comprehensive hemophilia program.
Clinically, inhibitor titers are demarcated as low-­titer (≤5 BU) and
high-­titer (>5 BU). Low-­titer inhibitors can often be overcome by large
amounts of factor, while high-­titers necessitate the use of bypassing
agents, which can circumvent the inhibitor to promote hemostasis. The
two bypassing agents available that can treat acute bleeds are activated
prothrombin complex concentrates and recombinant activated factor
VII, both of which are administered intravenously. Prophylaxis regimens for bypassing agents have been described, but most hemophilia A
patients with inhibitors currently use emicizumab prophylaxis because
of its efficacy and ease of administration.
Inhibitor eradication has been prioritized, and it is still recommended since the advent of emicizumab. Low-­titer or transient inhibitors often disappear with continued regular factor infusions. Higher
titer inhibitors often require immune tolerance induction regimens,
in which high doses of factor are administered to attempt to develop
immune tolerance. This procedure is successful in about two-­thirds of
severe hemophilia A patients. Immune tolerance induction with factor
IX products is complicated by allergic reactions and the development of
nephrotic syndrome in some patients. Rituximab, corticosteroids, and
other immunosuppressives have been used in patients with high-­titer
inhibitors in whom immune tolerance programs have failed, although
the use of immunosuppressive therapy has declined with the use of
emicizumab prophylaxis for factor VIII deficiency inhibitor patients.

CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS

Long-­term complications of hemophilia A and B include chronic
arthropathy and the risk of transfusion-­transmitted infectious diseases,
although both complications have been substantially mitigated with
modern hemophilia care, including early initiation of prophylaxis and
the use of recombinant protein products or plasma-­derived products
with advanced donor screening and highly active viricidal procedures.
Chronic arthropathy is the major long-­term disability associated
with hemophilia. The natural history of severe hemophilia without
prophylaxis is one of cyclic recurrent hemorrhages into specific joints,
including hemorrhages into the same (target) joint. In young children,
the joint distends easily, and a large volume of blood may fill the joint
until tamponade ensues or therapy intervenes. After joint hemorrhage,
proteolytic enzymes are released by white blood cells into the joint space,
and heme iron induces macrophage proliferation, leading to inflammation of the synovium. The synovium thickens and develops frondlike
projections into the joint that are susceptible to being pinched and may
induce further hemorrhage. The cartilaginous surface becomes eroded
and ultimately may even expose raw bone, leaving the joint susceptible to
articular fusion. In the older patient with advanced arthropathy, bleeding into the target joint, with its thickened synovium, causes severe pain,
because the joint has little space to accommodate blood. Once a target
joint develops, the patient is usually given short-­or long-­term prophylaxis to prevent progression of the arthropathy and reduce inflammation.
In the past, plasma-­derived products tragically transmitted hepatitis B
virus, hepatitis C virus, and HIV to large numbers of people with hemophilia. Modern plasma-­derived products pose a very low risk of spreading
identified bloodborne pathogens, but the risk of transmitting unidentified
pathogens or emerging agents such as prions remains largely undefined.

COMPREHENSIVE CARE

Patients with hemophilia are best managed through comprehensive
hemophilia care centers. Such centers are dedicated to patient and family education and the prevention and treatment of the complications of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 525 u Hereditary Clotting Factor Deficiencies (Bleeding Disorders)
hemophilia, including chronic joint disease and inhibitor development.
Such centers involve a team that includes physicians, nurses, orthopedists, physical therapists, and psychosocial workers, all focused on
hemophilia care. Education remains crucial in hemophilia care because
patients who are receiving prophylaxis may be less experienced in recognizing bleeding episodes than affected children from previous eras.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.2 Factor XI Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Factor XI deficiency (previously known as hemophilia C) is an autosomal disorder associated with mild to moderate bleeding symptoms.
Bleeding is usually after trauma and surgery, with bleeding most commonly occurring at sites of high fibrinolytic activity, such as the oropharynx and urogenital tract. This focality is likely secondary to the
role of factor XI in augmenting thrombin generation for the subsequent
activation of thrombin-­activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI). Heavy
menstrual bleeding is also common in females with factor XI deficiency.
Factor XI deficiency can occur in any ethnic group but is frequently
encountered in Ashkenazi Jews with a heterozygous frequency of 1 in
11 individuals. Factor XI deficiency usually (but not always) results in a
prolonged PTT; specific factor XI activity assays are diagnostic.
The bleeding phenotype is poorly predicted by the measured factor XI activity. Some patients with severe deficiency (<20% normal
activity) may have minimal or no symptoms, whereas other individuals with higher levels experience excessive surgical bleeding. Because
spontaneous bleeding is very rare, treatment is focused on perioperative management. Although factor XI concentrates are available in
other countries, in the United States, factor XI has to be replaced with
fresh-­frozen plasma (FFP). For minor surgeries or bleeds, antifibrinolytics such as aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid are frequently used.
For major surgeries, 15-­25 mL/kg of FFP in combination with antifibrinolytics is recommended. The factor XI half-­life is 50 hours.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.3 Deficiencies of the Contact Factors
(Nonbleeding Disorders)
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Deficiency of the “contact factors”—factor XII, prekallikrein, and high
molecular weight kininogen—causes a prolonged PTT but no bleeding
symptoms. Because these contact factors function at the step of initiation of the intrinsic clotting system by the reagent used to determine
PTT, the PTT is markedly prolonged when these factors are absent.
Thus there is the paradoxical situation in which PTT is extremely prolonged with no evidence of clinical bleeding. It is important that individuals with these findings be well informed about the meaning of their
clotting factor deficiency because they do not need treatment, even for
major surgery.

525.4 Factor VII Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Factor VII deficiency is a rare autosomal bleeding disorder that ranges
in its presentation from mild to severe bleeding. There is a poor

3033

correlation between the clinical severity and the measured factor VII
level, although major bleeding is more frequent in patients with <1%
activity. Epistaxis and menorrhagia are the most common symptoms,
although hemarthroses and intracranial hemorrhages also occur, with
the latter reported in 1% of symptomatic cases.
Patients with this deficiency have greatly prolonged PT but normal
PTT. Specific factor VII assays are diagnostic. Some recombinant factor
VIIa products are approved for the treatment of factor VII deficiency
at a dose of 15-­30 mcg/kg, which is lower than the dose approved for
hemophilia with inhibitors. The plasma half-­life of factor VII is 2-­6
hours and usually at least three doses at this frequency are required for
major bleeding or surgery. Prophylaxis regimens with 2-­3 administrations per week have been described in patients with severe bleeding.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.5 Factor X Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Factor X deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with variable severity. Mild deficiency results in mucocutaneous and posttraumatic bleeding, whereas severe deficiency (<1–10% normal activity) is
associated with joint, GI, and intracranial hemorrhages. Intracranial
and umbilical bleeding can be the presenting symptom for neonates.
Heterozygous carriers usually have activity >50% normal and are
asymptomatic.
A reduced factor X level is associated with prolongation of both PT
and PTT; factor X specific assays are diagnostic. Replacement treatment is with FFP or prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) or
plasma-­derived factor X concentrates. The plasma half-­life of factor X
is approximately 40-­60 hours, and prophylaxis regimens with PCC or
factor X concentrates administered 1-­2 times per week are described
for patients with severe bleeding.
Although it is rarely a problem in pediatric patients, about 10% of
cases of light-­chain amyloidosis are associated with factor X deficiency, resulting from the adsorption of factor X on the amyloid protein. In the setting of amyloidosis, replacement therapy often is not
successful because of the rapid clearance of factor X.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.6 Prothrombin (Factor II) Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Prothrombin (factor II) deficiency is caused either by a markedly
reduced prothrombin level (hypoprothrombinemia) or by functionally abnormal prothrombin (dysprothrombinemia). Laboratory testing
in homozygous patients shows prolonged PT and PTT; specific prothrombin assays are diagnostic. Mucocutaneous bleeding in infancy
and posttraumatic bleeding later are common. Patients are treated with
either FFP or PCC at doses of 15-­25 mL/kg or 20-­40 U/kg, respectively.
The half-­life of prothrombin is 3-­4 days, and once weekly prophylaxis
regimens with PCC are reported.
Acquired factor II deficiency can be seen with a small percentage
of patients with a lupus anticoagulant and is usually associated with
significant bleeding. It is distinguished from inherited prothrombin deficiency by clinical history and the laboratory identification of
antiphospholipid antibodies and abnormal PTT mixing studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3034 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

525.7 Factor V Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Deficiency of factor V is an autosomal recessive, mild to moderate
bleeding disorder. Factor V circulates with 80% in plasma and 20%
in platelet α-­granules; this platelet factor V pool has been suggested
to ameliorate the bleeding that might be expected from low plasma
factor V levels. The most common symptoms are epistaxis, oral cavity
bleeding, heavy menstrual periods, and postoperative bleeding; joint,
muscle, and intracranial hemorrhages occur rarely.
Laboratory evaluation shows prolonged PT and PTT. Specific assays
for factor V show a reduction in factor V levels. FFP is the only currently available therapeutic product that contains factor V. Factor V is
lost rapidly from stored FFP. Treatment for major surgery or bleeding
is usually 15-­25 mL/kg FFP followed by additional doses of 10 mL/kg
every 12 hours. Twice weekly FFP prophylaxis regimens are sometimes
used for patients with severe bleeding. Platelet transfusions are also
an option for acute or prophylactic treatment. Rarely, a patient with a
negative family history of bleeding has an acquired antibody to factor V,
which can be identified in laboratory mixing studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.8 Combined Deficiency of Factors V
and VIII
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Combined deficiency of factors V and VIII is an autosomal recessive
bleeding disorder that occurs secondary to the absence of intracellular
transporters responsible for the shuttling of factors V and VIII from
the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi compartments, as the result
of pathogenic variants in the genes LMAN1 or MCFD2. Factor V and
VIII levels are usually between 5–20% of normal. Bleeding symptoms
are often mild and most commonly mucocutaneous, traumatic, surgical
bleeding. Treatment for major bleeding or surgery is 15-­25 mL/kg of FFP.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.9 Congenital Fibrinogen Disorders
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Congenital fibrinogen disorders are a heterogenous group of rare autosomal recessive or dominant diseases because of qualitative (dysfibrinogenemia) or quantitative (hypofibrinogenemia or afibrinogenemia)
reductions in functional fibrinogen. Fibrinogen cleavage by thrombin into
fibrin is the final step of the coagulation cascade: polymerization follows
cleavage and results in fibrin clot formation. Fibrinogen is also the major
integrin ligand during platelet aggregation. Conversely, fibrin also sequesters thrombin to the site of clot formation and supports fibrinolysis by
enhancing the activation of plasminogen. The multiple roles of fibrinogen
and fibrin in hemostasis underlie the phenotypes of inherited fibrinogen
disorders, which can have bleeding and clotting clinical manifestations,
sometimes in the same patient. The most common bleeding symptoms
are mucocutaneous, soft-­tissue, joint, genitourinary, traumatic, surgical
bleeding, and heavy menstrual periods. Both venous and arterial thrombosis are rare in the quantitative defects but occur in about 20% of cases
of dysfibrinogenemia. Some congenital fibrinogen disorders also have
nonhematologic manifestations, including liver disease due to retention of
misfolded protein, poor wound healing, and splenic rupture.
Diagnosis is based on a decreased fibrinogen activity. Patients usually will also have a prolonged PT and PTT. Dysfibrinogenemia is
defined as a decreased ratio of fibrinogen activity compared to fibrinogen antigen. Treatment for bleeding or major surgery is with FFP, cryoprecipitate, or fibrinogen concentrates, depending on local availability.

Because of the variable clinical manifestations, including both bleeding
and clotting complications, treatment is tailored to the personal and
family history. The half-­life of fibrinogen is 2-­4 days.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.10 Factor XIII Deficiency (Fibrin-­Stabilizing
Factor or Transglutaminase Deficiency)
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Factor XIII deficiency is a rare autosomal bleeding disorder. Factor XIII
is a heterotetramer composed of two catalytic A subunits and two carrier B subunits; activation of factor XIII by thrombin frees the activated
A subunits, which covalently crosslink fibrin to increase clot strength
and constrain fibrinolysis. The different biochemical roles of the A and
B subunits result in distinct clinical manifestations. Inherited deficiencies in the factor XIII A-­subunit results in soft tissue, umbilical, surgical,
joint, and intracranial bleeding; the latter occurs in about a third of cases.
Deficiencies in the B-­subunit are associated with mild mucocutaneous
and surgical bleeding. Because of its role in stabilizing the fibrin clot,
factor XIII deficiency often presents with delayed abnormal bleeding or
bruising symptoms where patients may have mild trauma and then present with an excessive hematoma on the following day. Extrahematologic
clinical manifestation of factor XIII deficiency includes delayed umbilical cord separation, poor wound healing, and recurrent miscarriages.
Unlike the other severe inherited coagulation deficiencies, factor XIII
deficiency will have normal PTT and PT. Specific activity assays are diagnostic and should be considered in infants with delayed umbilical cord
separation, delayed bleeding symptoms, or unexplained intracranial hemorrhage. Treatment for bleeding or major surgery is 20-­40 U/kg of factor XIII concentrate. Recombinant A-­subunit protein is also available for
A-­subunit deficiencies. If specific factor XIII replacement therapies are not
available, cryoprecipitate is preferred over FFP because of the substantially
higher factor XIII content. The half-­life of factor XIII is 9-­12 days, which
facilitates prophylaxis. Because of the high prevalence of intracranial hemorrhage, prophylaxis of 20-­40 U/kg factor XIII concentrate every 4 weeks
is recommended for patients with <10% normal activity. Autoimmune
acquired factor XIII deficiency can be differentiated using specific mixing
studies or activity assays of platelet lysates.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.11 Antiplasmin or Plasminogen
­Activator Inhibitor Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Deficiency of either antiplasmin or plasminogen activator inhibitor,
both of which are antifibrinolytic proteins, results in increased plasmin
generation and premature lysis of fibrin clots. Affected patients have
a mild-­to-­moderate bleeding disorder characterized by delayed bleeding symptoms, typically associated with trauma or surgery. Mucocutaneous bleeding and heavy menstrual bleeding are the most described
symptoms, with rare reports of joint or intracranial hemorrhages.
Because results of the usual hemostatic tests are normal, further workup
of a patient with a positive bleeding history (especially delayed bleeding) should include euglobulin clot lysis time, which measures fibrinolytic
activity and yields a shortened result in the presence of these deficiencies.
Specific assays for α2-­antiplasmin and plasminogen activator inhibitor are
available, although the lower limit of normative values of these assays are
not well defined. Antifibrinolytic therapies such as aminocaproic acid or
tranexamic acid are the mainstay of treatments for controlling or preventing bleeding because they mitigate the hyperfibrinolysis. FFP can also be
used to replace the deficient proteins.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 526 u Von Willebrand Disease

Chapter 526

Von Willebrand Disease
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Von Willebrand disease (VWD) is the most common inherited bleeding disorder, with an estimated prevalence cited at 1 : 100 to 1 : 10,000
depending on the criteria used for diagnosis. Patients with VWD typically present with mucosal bleeding. A family history of either VWD
or bleeding symptoms and confirmatory laboratory testing are also
required for the diagnosis of VWD.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

VWD is caused by a defect in, or deficiency of, von Willebrand factor (VWF). VWF has several functions in coagulation. VWF serves to
tether platelets to injured subendothelium via binding sites for platelets
and for collagen. VWF also serves as a chaperone, or carrier protein,
for factor VIII (FVIII), protecting it from degradation in plasma. VWF
is stored in endothelial cell Weibel-­Palade bodies and platelet dense
granules and circulates as a large, multimeric glycoprotein. Shear stress
induces a conformational change in VWF that facilitates its ability to
bind platelets through an exposed binding site on platelet glycoprotein
Ib (GPIb). This enables VWF to recruit platelets to the site of clot formation, a function dependent on the high molecular weight (HMW)
multimer forms of VWF.
VWD typically presents with mucocutaneous bleeding, similar to that
seen with other platelet defects. Epistaxis, easy bruising, and menorrhagia in females are common complaints. However, symptoms are variable
and do not necessarily correlate well with VWF levels. Surgical bleeding, particularly with dental extractions or adenotonsillectomy, is another
common presentation. Severe type 3 VWD may present with joint and/
or muscle bleeds. Most patients will have a family history of bleeding, but
the VWD genetic variant demonstrates incomplete penetrance (not all
carriers of the variant express bleeding symptoms) and variable expressivity (different VWF levels can be found in individuals with the same gene
variant). Females are more likely to be diagnosed with VWD because of
the potential for symptoms with menorrhagia, but males and females
are equally likely to have VWD. However, diagnosis based on symptoms
may be difficult, since minor bruising and epistaxis are not uncommon
in childhood. Significant unexplained bruising, or bruising in unusual
areas (stomach, back, face), in infants and toddlers is more often from
nonaccidental trauma than from an underlying bleeding disorder. Gastrointestinal bleeding due to VWD may be complicated by associated
angiodysplastic lesions anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract.

CLASSIFICATION

VWD may be caused by quantitative or qualitative defects in VWF.
Mild to moderate quantitative defects are classified as type 1 VWD,
whereas severe quantitative defects, in which there is no detectable
VWF protein, are classified as type 3 VWD. The qualitative defects are
grouped together as type 2 VWD.
Type 1 VWD is by far the most common type, accounting for
60–80% of all VWD patients. Typical symptoms include mucosal
bleeding, such as epistaxis and menorrhagia, as well as easy bruising
and potentially surgical bleeding. Diagnostic guidelines use a VWF
level, as measured by the VWF antigen assay (VWF:Ag), of <30 IU/
dL for a clear diagnosis of VWD. Antigen and activity are usually symmetrically depressed in type 1 VWD. Patients with VWF:Ag <30 IU/dL
are most likely to have a genetic defect in VWF. Patients with VWF:Ag
between 30 and 50 IU/dL are said to have “low VWF.” Whether or
not this category truly represents VWD is a subject of some debate,
and the joint guidelines suggest that the resolution should be based
on presence or absence of bleeding symptoms. Because some patients
with VWF levels in this range do experience bleeding, many physicians
elect to treat them, especially perioperatively, for surgical procedures
such as tonsillectomy.

3035

Patients with type 1 VWD may have low VWF as a result of increased
clearance of their VWF, known as type 1C VWD. Diagnosis of this
subtype is important because treatment of these patients with desmopressin is likely to be ineffective, necessitating administration of VWF-­
containing products instead.
VWF levels can be influenced by external factors. Blood type has long
been known to affect VWF, with lower VWF levels seen in people with
blood group O. Stress, inflammation, exercise, menstrual cycle, and
pregnancy all increase VWF levels; therefore a single normal VWF level
does not necessarily rule out the presence of VWD. Certain diseases,
such as hypothyroidism (see Chapter 603), and medications, such as
valproic acid, can lower VWF levels in affected patients. Repeat testing
is often required to confidently rule out or confirm a diagnosis of VWD.
Type 3 VWD is the most severe form and presents with symptoms
similar to those seen in mild hemophilia. In type 3 VWD the VWF
protein is completely absent, and the activity and antigen are both
essentially zero. Type 3 VWD is seen at a frequency of approximately
1/1,000,000 members of the general population. In addition to mucosal bleeding, patients may experience joint bleeds, muscle bleeds, or
central nervous system (CNS) hemorrhage. Some physicians elect to
treat patients with prophylaxis, or modified prophylaxis, after injury,
given that these patients typically have very low FVIII (<10 IU/dL).
Because type 3 VWD is caused by a complete lack of VWF, desmopressin is ineffective and treatment with VWF-­containing concentrates
is required.
Type 2 VWD is often suspected when a discrepancy exists between
the VWF antigen level (often normal) and the VWF activity (often low)
because this type represents a qualitative defect, in which an abnormal
protein is produced in normal amounts. A ratio of activity to antigen of
less than 0.7 may raise concern for type 2 VWD, which itself has multiple subtypes. Multimer evaluation or other specialized testing can be
used to discriminate the type 2 subtypes.
Type 2A VWD is characterized by a defect in VWF multimerization and decreased VWF activity in terms of platelet binding. It is the
most common of the type 2 variants, accounting for approximately
10% of VWD cases. Type 2A VWD can result from variants that affect
multimer assembly and processing, or variants that result in increased
proteolysis of secreted VWF. Some variants affect both secretion and
clearance of the VWF. Regardless of the mechanism, all type 2A VWD
patients lack the HMW multimers, and therefore have reduced VWF
activity, which results in bleeding. Symptoms are typically more severe
than those seen in type 1 VWD. Desmopressin may have clinical efficacy for treatment of minor bleeding, but significant surgical challenges
or major bleeding symptoms generally require a VWF-­containing concentrate for treatment.
Type 2B VWD results from gain-­of-­function variants that increase
the ability of VWF to bind platelets. This leads to increased clearance
of both VWF and platelets from circulation and results in the loss of
HMW multimers and decreased VWF activity, similar to that seen in
type 2A VWD. Special testing is therefore required to diagnose type 2B
VWD, either by direct measurement of the increased platelet binding
or by an increased response to low dose ristocetin on platelet aggregation testing. Thrombocytopenia is not always present and may be
more prominent during times of stress such as surgery or pregnancy.
Desmopressin is relatively contraindicated in type 2B VWD because it
may accelerate VWF-­platelet binding and clearance, so treatment with
VWF-­containing product is necessary.
Platelet-­type pseudo-­VWD occurs when a variant in platelet GPIb
causes spontaneous binding to VWF and also presents with decreased
VWF activity, loss of HMW multimers, and thrombocytopenia similar to type 2B VWD. Specific testing is required to distinguish the two
conditions. Because the defect involves platelets, treatment generally
requires platelet transfusion.
Type 2M VWD includes those patients with decreased VWF activity
but normal (or near normal) multimer distribution. This is generally
caused by a defect in the ability of VWF to bind platelet GPIb, but this
category also includes patients with defects in VWF-­collagen interactions. Some minor bleeding in type 2M VWD may respond to desmopressin, but because type 2M VWD is a functional defect, treatment with
VWF-­containing concentrates is usually required.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3036 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 526.1

Laboratory Testing for von Willebrand Disease (VWD)

TEST

ABBREVIATION

VWF antigen

VWF:Ag

Measures total amount of VWF protein present.

PURPOSE

VWF activity

VWF:RCo*

Assesses interaction of VWF and platelets as
mediated by ristocetin.

VWF activity/antigen ratio

VWF:RCo/VWF:Ag

A decreased ratio (<0.7) is found in type 2A, type
2B, and type 2M VWD.

Factor VIII activity

FVIII

Measures circulating FVIII, which will be very low in
type 2N and type 3 VWD.

Multimer distribution

VWF multimers

Allows visualization of VWF multimers, used to
identify high molecular weight multimers, which
will be absent in types 2A and 2B VWD.

*In some laboratories a GPIb-­binding assay, the VWF:GPIbM, is available.
VWF, Von Willebrand factor; GPIb, glycoprotein Ib; RCo, ristocetin cofactor.

Table 526.2

Classification of von Willebrand Disease
TYPE 1

TYPE 3

TYPE 2A

TYPE 2B*

TYPE 2M

TYPE 2N

VWF:Ag

↓

Absent

↓

↓

↓

Normal or ↓

VWF:RCo

↓

Absent

↓↓

↓↓

↓↓

Normal or ↓

FVIII

Normal

↓↓

Normal or ↓

Normal or ↓

Normal or ↓

↓↓

Multimer distribution

Normal

Absent

Loss of HMWM

Loss of HMWM

Normal

Normal

*Platelet count is also usually decreased in type 2B VWD.
FVIII, factor VIII; HMWM, high molecular weight multimers; VWF:Ag, von Willebrand factor antigen; VWF:RCo, VWF ristocetin cofactor activity.

Type 2N VWD is characterized by a defect in the ability of VWF to
bind FVIII. Some patients with type 2N VWD may be misdiagnosed as
mild hemophilia; therefore a high index of suspicion for this diagnosis
is required in patients with low FVIII and an absent family history of
FVIII deficiency. Because the VWF in this case is dysfunctional, desmopressin is not usually helpful, and VWF-­containing product infusion is
typically required.

LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS

There are no reliable screening tests for VWD. Patients with significant
bleeding may present with anemia, and some patients with type 2B
VWD or platelet-­type pseudo-­VWD may have thrombocytopenia. The
partial thromboplastin time (PTT) may be prolonged if FVIII is low
but especially in type 1 VWD it is often normal, precluding use of the
PTT as a screening test. Platelet function analysis has been considered
as a screening test for VWD, but suboptimal sensitivity and specificity
render results difficult to interpret. Bleeding times are similarly unreliable in diagnosis of VWD.
Unfortunately, no single test can reliably diagnose VWD; therefore a panel of tests is usually required (Table 526.1). These include
VWF:Ag, which measures the total amount of VWF protein present,
and VWF activity test, typically using the ristocetin cofactor activity
assay (VWF:RCo), which provides a measure of the amount of functional VWF. FVIII activity is also usually included in the workup.
Another test measures VWF binding to platelet GPIb without ristocetin (VWF:GPIbM). This test is now FDA approved and its use is
increasing. Collagen binding measures an additional function of VWF.
Multimer distribution provides an assessment of HMW multimers
(Table 526.2; Fig. 526.1).
Additional specialized testing may be employed to help determine
the correct diagnosis. Specific testing for type 1C (clearance defects),
type 2B, and type 2N VWD can confirm these diagnoses. Genetic diagnosis is not typically performed, partly because of the large size of the

VWF gene and the high number of benign sequence variations. Large
gene deletions are responsible for some cases of VWD and will not be
detected on routine DNA sequencing. However, use of genetic diagnosis is increasing, particularly for types 2A, 2B, 2M, and 2N VWD.

TREATMENT

Treatment of VWD depends on the type of VWD present and the reason for treatment (Table 526.3). In general, type 1 VWD patients may
be treated with desmopressin, which increases the amount of circulating VWF (and FVIII) by release from storage in endothelial cells.
The exceptions are the rare type 1 patient who lacks a response to
desmopressin and patients with type 1C VWD who do respond with
an increase in VWF levels, but whose rapid clearance of circulating
endogenous VWF results in a rapid return to baseline levels. Treatment of types 2 and 3 VWD requires VWF-­containing concentrates,
similar to the treatment of hemophilia. Dosing depends on the type
of VWD and the reason for treatment. Careful monitoring of VWF
and FVIII levels is recommended to tailor treatment for surgeries and
major trauma. For all types of VWD, adjunct therapy should be considered when possible, such as the use of antifibrinolytics for oral surgery
or hormonal treatment for menorrhagia.
Alternate treatment strategies should also be considered, particularly
for difficult symptoms or severe VWD. Hormonal therapy for females
with menorrhagia, although not specific to VWD, can be very helpful
in managing symptoms and improving quality of life. Local treatment
of epistaxis, such as nasal cautery or packing, may be helpful in some
circumstances. Iron therapy for patients with iron-­deficiency anemia
may also be required.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 526 u Von Willebrand Disease

3037

Normal

Type 1

Type 1C
(Vicenza)

Type 3

Type 2A

Type 2B

Type 2N

Type 2M

PT-VWD

VWF:Ag

N

p

pp

absent

p

p

N or p

p or N

p

VWF:RCo

N

p

pp

absent

ppp

pp

N or p

pp

pp

FVIII:C

N

N or p

p

2-10 IU/dL

N or p

N or p

pp

N

N or p

VWFpp/VWF:Ag ratio

N

N

nn

absent

N or n

n

N

N

n

RIPA

N

often N

p

absent

p

often N

N

N or p

often N

LD-RIPA

absent

absent

absent

absent

absent

nnn

absent

absent

nnn

PFA'

N

N or n

n

nnn

n

n

N

n

n

BT'

N

N or n

n

nnn

n

n

N

n

n

Platelet count

N

N

N

N

N

p or N

N

N

p

VWF multimers

N

N but p

N but p

absent

abnormal

abnormal

N but p

N but p

abnormal

absent

Fig. 526.1 Specialized laboratory testing for von Willebrand disease (VWD). ↓, ↓↓, ↓↓↓, Relative decrease; ↑, ↑↑, ↑↑↑, relative increase; BT, bleeding

time; FVIII:C, factor VIII coagulant activity; LD-­RIPA, low-­dose ristocetin-­induced platelet aggregation; N, normal; N but ↓, normal but decreased in
intensity; PFA, platelet function analysis; PT-­VWD, platelet-­type VWD; RIPA, ristocetin-­induced platelet aggregation; VWF:Ag, von Willebrand factor
antigen; VWF:RCo, VWF activity by ristocetin cofactor; VWF pp, VWF propeptide. (Courtesy Dr. Robert R. Montgomery.)

Table 526.3

Treatment of Von Willebrand Disease

TREATMENT

VWD TYPES

ROUTE

DOSING

Desmopressin*

Type 1 VWD
Some type 2 VWD (use with caution)

IV or IN

0.3 μg/kg IV†

Von Willebrand factor (VWF)
concentrates‡

Type 3 VWD
Type 2 VWD
Severe type 1 VWD (or type 1
­clearance defects)

IV

40-­60 ristocetin cofactor activity units/
kg (adjust dose depending on baseline
VWF level and desired peak VWF level).
If recombinant VWF used, may need to
administer additional recombinant FVIII
for emergency treatment.

Antifibrinolytics

Mucosal bleeding, all types of VWD

PO or IV

Aminocaproic acid: 100 mg/kg PO loading
dose followed by 50 mg/kg every 6 hr§
Tranexamic acid: 1,300 mg PO 3 times
daily for 5 days

1 spray IN (<50 kg)
2 sprays IN (>50 kg)

*Recommended treatment with Stimate brand nasal spray because this form is concentrated to give 150 μg/spray. Other forms are much more dilute and will not result in desired
increase in VWF.
†Maximum recommended dose is 20-­30 μg/day.
‡Currently both Humate-­P and Wilate are approved for treatment of VWD. Vonvendi is a recombinant VWF that is also approved for treatment of VWD but does not contain FVIII.
§Maximum recommended dose is 24 g/day.
IN, Intranasal; IV, intravenous; PO, oral administration.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3038 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
The factor V Leiden pathogenic variant is the result of a single
base pair change at nucleotide 1765 within the factor V gene causing an R506Q amino acid substitution in the encoded protein. This
pathogenic variant causes activated factor V to become resistant to
inactivation by activated protein C. It is the most common inherited
risk factor for thrombosis, although its prevalence varies across ethnicities. Individuals who are heterozygous have a 5-­7–fold increased
relative risk of venous thrombosis, whereas homozygous individuals
have an even higher risk. There appears to be a synergistic prothrombotic risk enhancement with the inherited risk of factor V Leiden and
the acquired risk of estrogen-­containing contraceptives. The baseline
annual risk of thrombosis for females of reproductive age is approximately 1/10,000 and increases to 1/2,500 for those taking estrogen-­
containing contraceptives. For young females who are heterozygous
for the factor V Leiden pathogenic variant and on estrogen-­containing
contraceptives, the annual risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE)
increases to 1 in 200. The prothrombin 20210 gene pathogenic variant is a G-­to-­A transition in the 3’ untranslated region of the gene that
results in increased levels of prothrombin. It is a weaker risk factor for
venous thrombosis than factor V Leiden.
Deficiencies of the natural anticoagulation proteins (protein
C, protein S, and antithrombin) are less common than the specific
genetic pathogenic variants mentioned previously but are associated
with a stronger risk of thrombosis. Although heterozygous deficiencies do not often present during childhood, homozygous defects may
be embryonically lethal or result in significant symptoms in infancy.
Neonates with homozygous deficiencies of protein C or protein S may
present with purpura fulminans. This rare condition is characterized
by rapidly spreading purpuric skin lesions resulting from thromboses
of the small dermal vessels, followed by bleeding into the skin. In addition, these infants may also develop cerebral thrombosis, ophthalmic
thrombosis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and large-­vessel
thrombosis. An infant with purpuric skin lesions of unknown cause
should receive empiric replacement with fresh-­frozen plasma. Definitive diagnosis can be difficult in the sick premature neonate, who may
have undetectable levels of these factors but not have a true genetic
deficiency. Protein C and antithrombin concentrates are also available
and have been demonstrated to be effective.
Elevated levels of homocysteine have been associated with venous
and arterial thromboses, although the pathogenic mechanisms for
thrombosis in homocystinemia are poorly understood. Thromboembolic complications are well described in children with homocystinuria, a rare inborn error of metabolism caused by deficiency of
cystathione β-­synthase that results in plasma levels of homocysteine

Chapter 527

Hereditary Predisposition
to Thrombosis
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones and
Leslie J. Raffini
Most children that develop clots have multiple risk factors, which may
include inherited predispositions to thrombosis. The strength of the
inherited prothrombotic risk factors varies. An estimated 30–60% of
individuals with strong thrombophilias, such as antithrombin deficiency, protein C deficiency, and protein S deficiency, develop thromboembolic disease by age 60; in contrast, less than 10% of individuals
with weak thrombophilias, such as heterozygous factor V Leiden variant or prothrombin G20210A gene variant, develop thromboembolic
disease. The inherited thrombophilias with the best understood pathogenesis, population prevalence, and prothrombotic risks are listed in
Table 527.1. Some of these disorders may also be acquired or mixed
acquired and genetic (Table 527.2).
The inheritance of other thrombophilias is less well understood.
Elevated levels of factor VIII (FVIII) and homocysteine are associated with thrombosis, but their levels are not necessarily genetically
determined. Additional alterations in plasma proteins have also been
associated with increased thrombotic risk, such as elevated concentrations of factors IX and XI, heparin cofactor II deficiency, elevated
lipoprotein (a), and dysfibrinogenemia; however, these abnormalities
have not gained widespread acceptance in routine testing of children
for inherited thrombophilia.
In general, the prothrombotic tendency conferred by these defects
is either a result of an increased procoagulant effect (prothrombin
gene pathogenic variant, elevated FVIII, hyperhomocysteinemia) or a
decreased anticoagulant effect (factor V Leiden, deficiency of protein
C, protein S, or antithrombin). Although numerous inherited risk factors for thrombosis have been identified, the majority of individuals
who inherit one of these risk factors, even strong thrombophilias, do
not necessarily develop thrombosis during childhood. Before evaluating for these disorders, both the limitations of the testing and potential
benefits need to be considered.

Table 527.1  Clinically Relevant Inherited Thrombophilias and Accompanying Diagnostic Laboratory Studies
GENERAL
POPULATION
PREVALENCE (%)

VTE ADULT
PATIENT
PREVALENCE (%)

ANNUAL
INCIDENCE OF
VTE (%)

ODDS RATIO FOR
FIRST VTE
EPISODE IN
CHILDHOOD

ODDS RATIO FOR
RECURRENT
VTE EPISODE
IN CHILDHOOD

Antithrombin
deficiency

0.02-­0.04

1

1.8

9.4

3.4

Functional
coagulation
testing‡

Protein C
deficiency

0.2

3

1.5

7.7

2.5

Functional
coagulation
testing‡

Protein S
deficiency

0.03-­0.13

2

1.9

5.8

3.8

Functional
coagulation
testing‡

Factor V Leiden
variant*

3-­7

20

0.5

3.8

0.8

Gene testing

Prothrombin
20210 variant*

1-­4

5

0.3

2.6

2.2

Gene testing

THROMBOPHILIA

LABORATORY
STUDIES

*Values refer to heterozygous changes.
‡May be impacted by anticoagulation therapies.
VTE, Venous thromboembolism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 527 u Hereditary Predisposition to Thrombosis

3039

Table 527.2  Classification of Hypercoagulable States
HEREDITARY

MIXED

ACQUIRED

LOSS OF FUNCTION
Antithrombin deficiency

Hyperhomocysteinemia

Previous venous thromboembolism
Hepatic cirrhosis
Severe liver disease
Nephrotic syndrome
L-­asparaginase

Protein C deficiency

Obesity

Pregnancy, puerperium

Protein S deficiency

Cancer
Drug-­induced:
Heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia
Prothrombin complex concentrates
L -­asparaginase
Hormonal therapy

GAIN OF FUNCTION
Factor V Leiden

Postoperative

Prothrombin FII G20210A

Myeloproliferative disorders

Elevated factor VIII, IX, or XI
Modified from Hoffman R, Benz Jr. EJ, Silberstein LE, et al., eds. Hematology Basic Principles and Practice, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2018: Table 140.1, p. 2077.

that exceed 100 μmol/L. Much more common are mild to moderate
elevations of homocysteine, which may be acquired or associated with
a polymorphism in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR)
gene. Although moderate elevations of homocysteine have been associated with both venous and arterial thrombotic events, testing for
polymorphisms in the MTHFR gene is not indicated because these
polymorphisms are common and by themselves (without homocystinemia) are not associated with thromboembolism.
Increased plasma concentrations of FVIII appear to be regulated
by both genetic and environmental factors and are associated with an
increased risk of thrombosis. High FVIII levels are usually polygenic,
although rarely specific changes in the FVIII gene have been identified.
FVIII is also an acute-­phase reactant and may increase during periods
of inflammation.
Although interpretation of gene testing is fairly straightforward, several challenges in interpretation of thrombophilia studies are unique
to pediatric patients. Neonates have decreased concentrations of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin that increase rapidly over the first
6 months of life; protein C concentrations remain below adult levels
throughout much of childhood. It is important to use pediatric normal
ranges when evaluating these values and recognize that often the normal range overlaps with heterozygous defects and that retesting may
be required, particularly in young children. Several nongenetic factors may also influence the results of inherited thrombophilia testing,
including acute thrombosis, infection, inflammation, hepatic dysfunction, nephrotic syndrome, medication, and vitamin K deficiency. In
some patients the hereditary nature may be confirmed by testing the
parents.
Thrombophilia testing is considered during childhood when a child
develops thrombosis or if a child has relatives with thrombosis or
thrombophilia. Thrombophilia testing rarely influences the acute management of a child with a thrombotic event. The majority of children
who develop thrombosis have multiple, coexistent acquired risk factors
(see Table 528.1 in Chapter 528). More than 90% of thromboses in children are associated with indwelling intravascular catheters; inherited
thrombophilias are uncommon in this scenario, and testing is generally

not warranted. However, inherited thrombophilia is more common in
an otherwise healthy child or adolescent who develops a blood clot
or in a child who develops unusual or recurrent thrombosis. Thrombophilia testing may be useful in these situations because it may help
explain why the child developed a blood clot and inform on the duration of therapy. However, current treatment recommendations do not
differ based on the presence or absence of an inherited thrombophilia.
The identification of an inherited anticoagulant protein defect, such as
antithrombin or protein C deficiency, may allow for replacement therapies while off anticoagulation, such as in the perioperative setting.
The decision to perform thrombophilia testing in an otherwise
healthy child with a family history of thrombosis or thrombophilia
should be carefully considered, weighing the potential advantages and
limitations of such an approach. Given that the absolute risk of thrombosis in children is extremely low (0.07/100,000), it is unlikely that an
inherited thrombophilia will have any impact on clinical decision-­
making for a young child. The risk of thrombosis increases with age,
so identification of a thrombophilic defect in an adolescent may guide
primary thromboprophylaxis in high-­risk situations (lower-­extremity
casting or prolonged immobility), inform the discussion about
estrogen-­based contraceptives, and promote lifestyle modification to
avoid behavioral risk factors (sedentary lifestyle, dehydration, obesity,
and smoking). Limitations of such testing include the cost as well as the
potential for causing unnecessary anxiety or false reassurance.
In most patients with inherited thrombophilia, the treatment is the
same as for patients with no inherited disorders (see Chapter 528).
In neonates with purpura fulminans caused by homozygous protein
C or S deficiency or in patients with warfarin-­induced skin necrosis,
heparin-­induced thrombocytopenias and severe antithrombin deficiency often require factor replacement (protein C, S or antithrombin concentrates or plasma) in addition to unfractionated heparin or
low molecular weight heparin. In less severe antithrombin deficiency,
higher than usual doses of heparin may be needed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3040 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 528

Thrombotic Disorders in
Children
Leslie J. Raffini and Brian R. Branchford
Thromboembolic events (TEs) are seen in pediatric tertiary care centers and may result in significant acute and chronic morbidity. TEs in
children are rare. Diagnosis and treatment are often extrapolated from
adult data because of a current lack of high-­quality data in the pediatric
setting.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although the overall incidence of thrombosis in the general pediatric
population is quite low (0.07/100,000), the rate of venous thromboembolism (VTE) in hospitalized children is 60/10,000 admissions. Infants
<1 year old account for the largest proportion of pediatric VTEs, with
a second peak during adolescence.
Most children who develop a TE have multiple risk factors that may
be acquired, inherited, or anatomic (Table 528.1). The presence of a
central venous catheter (CVC) or peripherally inserted central venous
catheter (PICC) is the most important risk factor for VTE in pediatric
patients, associated with approximately 90% of neonatal VTE and 60%
of childhood VTE. PICC lines may be among the highest-­risk CVC
subtypes. CVCs are often necessary for the care of premature neonates
and children with acute and chronic diseases and are used for intravenous (IV) hyperalimentation, chemotherapy, dialysis, antibiotics, or
supportive therapy. CVCs may damage the endothelial lining and/or
cause blood flow disruption, increasing the risk of thrombosis. Many
other acquired risk factors are associated with thrombosis, including
trauma, surgery, infection, inflammation, chronic medical conditions,
and certain medications. Cancer, congenital heart disease, and prematurity are the most common medical conditions associated with TEs.
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS) is characterized by
recurrent fetal loss and/or thrombosis (Table 528.2). Antiphospholipid
antibodies are associated with venous and, less often, arterial thrombosis. The autoantibodies in APS include lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, and anti-­β2 glycoprotein I. If all three antibodies
are positive (triple positive), the risk of thrombosis is increased. The
mechanism by which these antibodies cause thrombosis is not well
understood. A diagnosis of APS requires the presence of both clinical and laboratory abnormalities (see “Laboratory Testing”). The laboratory abnormalities must be identified on two separate occasions,
at least 12 weeks apart. Because of the high risk of VTE recurrence,
patients with APS often require long-­term anticoagulation, at least
until the antibodies have resolved; the type of antibodies and the presence of arterial thrombosis may have important implications for the
type of anticoagulant therapy chosen. Up to 20% of healthy children
may have a transient lupus anticoagulant, often diagnosed because of a
prolonged partial thromboplastin time (PTT) on routine preoperative
testing. In this setting, transient antibodies may be associated with a
recent viral infection and are not a risk factor for thrombosis. APS is
also noted in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (see Chapter 199) and may also be associated with livedo reticularis, neuropsychiatric complications, thrombocytopenia, or anemia; these patients
are often persistently positive for the antiphospholipid antibody. Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome is a rare and potentially fatal
disorder characterized by rapid onset of multiorgan thrombosis and/
or thrombotic microangiopathies (Table 528.3).
Anatomic abnormalities that impede blood flow also predispose
patients to thrombosis at an earlier age. Atresia of the inferior vena
cava has been described in association with acute and chronic lower-­
extremity deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Compression of the left iliac

vein by the overlying right iliac artery (May-­Thurner syndrome)
should be considered in patients who present spontaneously with
left iliofemoral thrombosis, and thoracic outlet obstruction (Paget-­
Schroetter syndrome) frequently presents with effort-­related axillary-­
subclavian vein thrombosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Extremity Deep Vein Thrombosis

Children with acute DVT often present with extremity pain, swelling,
and discoloration (see Table 524.1). A history of a current or recent
CVC in that extremity should be very suggestive. Many times, symptoms of CVC-­associated thrombosis are more subtle and chronic,
including repeated CVC occlusion (potentially requiring clearance
with tissue plasminogen activator [tPA]) or sepsis, or prominent
venous collaterals on the chest, face, and neck.

Pulmonary Embolism

Signs and symptoms classically include shortness of breath, pleuritic
chest pain, cough, hemoptysis, fever, tachypnea, tachycardia, and/or, in
the case of massive pulmonary embolism (PE), hypotension and right-­
sided heart failure. Based on autopsy studies in pediatric centers, PE
is often undiagnosed because young children are unable to describe
their symptoms accurately, and their respiratory deterioration may be
masked by other conditions (see Chapter 458.1).

Cerebral Sinovenous Thrombosis

Signs and symptoms of cerebral sinovenous thrombosis (CSVT) may
be subtle and may develop over many hours or days (see Table 524.1).
Neonates with CSVT often present with seizures, whereas older children often complain of headache, vomiting, seizures, visual changes,
and/or focal neurologic signs. They may also have papilledema and
abducens palsy. Older patients may have a concurrent sinusitis or mastoiditis that has contributed to the thrombosis. Other risk factors may
include trauma, meningitis, or dehydration.

Renal Vein Thrombosis

Renal vein thrombosis (RVT) is the most common spontaneous VTE
in neonates (see Table 524.1). Affected infants may present with hematuria, an abdominal mass, and thrombocytopenia. Infants of diabetic
mothers are at increased risk for RVT, although the mechanism for the
increased risk is unknown. Approximately 25% of cases are bilateral.

Portal Vein Thrombosis

Portal vein thrombosis (PVT) often occurs during the neonatal period
and is often asymptomatic, only manifesting in those patients who
develop symptomatic portal hypertension (e.g., gastrointestinal [GI]
bleeding, splenomegaly) after the initial thrombotic event (see Table
524.1). The most common risk factor associated with PVT is an umbilical venous catheter, although sepsis, pancreatitis, cirrhosis, liver transplant, splenectomy, and sickle cell disease are also notable risk factors.
A known complication of PVT is cavernous transformation, which
confers a risk for variceal bleeding.

Peripheral Arterial Thrombosis

The majority of arterial TEs in children are associated with catheters,
often related to umbilical artery lines in neonates or cardiac catheterization via the femoral artery (see Table 524.1). Less common etiologies of arterial thrombosis include homocystinuria and APS. Patients
with an arterial thrombosis affecting blood flow to an extremity will
present with a cold, pale extremity with poor or absent pulses, which
can signify a limb-­threatening emergency.

Acute Ischemic Stroke

Acute ischemic stroke (AIS) typically presents with hemiparesis, slurred
speech, altered consciousness, or seizures. This condition may occur
secondary to pathology that affects the intracranial arteries (e.g., sickle
cell disease, vasculitis, vasculopathy, traumatic arterial dissection, or
paradoxical embolism across a patent foramen ovale) or may result
from venous thrombi that embolize to the arterial circulation (placental

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 528 u Thrombotic Disorders in Children
Table 528.1  Risk Factors for Thrombosis
GENERAL
Indwelling catheter, especially PICC lines
Infection
Trauma
Surgery
Cancer
Immobility
Cardiac disease/prosthetic valve
Systemic lupus
Rheumatoid arthritis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Celiac disease
Polycythemia/dehydration
Nephrotic syndrome
Diabetes
Pregnancy
Obesity
Prematurity
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (acquired)
COVID-­19
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
INHERITED THROMBOPHILIA
Factor V Leiden pathogenic variant
Prothrombin pathogenic variant
Antithrombin deficiency
Protein C deficiency
Protein S deficiency
Homocystinuria
Elevated factor VIII
Dysfibrinogenemia
GATA-­2 deficiency
Hereditary thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
ANATOMIC
Thoracic outlet obstruction (Paget-­Schroetter syndrome)
Iliac vein compression syndrome (May-­Thurner syndrome)
Absence of inferior vena cava
MEDICATIONS
Estrogen-­containing contraceptives
Asparaginase
Heparin (heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia)
Corticosteroids
Immune checkpoint inhibitors
Hemophilia bypassing agents
PICC, Peripherally inserted central venous catheter.

thrombi, children with congenital heart disease, or patent foramen
ovale allowing right-­to-­left shunting of an embolic venous thrombosis).

Rapidly Progressive Thrombosis (Thrombotic Storm)

Rapid progression or multifocal thrombosis is a rare complication of
APS (catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome), or heparin-­induced
thrombocytopenia with thrombosis (see Table 528.3). Multiorgan dysfunction develops in the presence of small vessel occlusion and elevated
D-­dimer levels, and this may progress to disseminated intravascular
coagulation. Treatment includes aggressive anticoagulation, often with
direct thrombin inhibitors or fondaparinux, followed by prolonged
warfarin therapy. In rare cases, plasmapheresis and/or immunosuppression and/or antiinflammatory therapy may be warranted.

DIAGNOSIS

Compression ultrasound with Doppler flow is the most common imaging study for the diagnosis of extremity DVT and chest CT is used most
frequently for the diagnosis of PE (Fig. 528.1). Echocardiogram is often
used to detect and follow right atrial clots, most often detected in patients
with central catheter tips in the right atrium. Other diagnostic imaging
options include CT and MR venography, which are noninvasive, although
the sensitivity and specificity of these studies is not known. These studies

3041

Table 528.2  Sydney Investigational Criteria for the Diagnosis
of the Antiphospholipid Syndrome
CLINICAL
• Vascular thrombosis (one or more episodes of arterial, venous,
or small-­vessel thrombosis). For histopathologic diagnosis, there
should be no evidence of inflammation in the vessel wall.
• Pregnancy morbidities attributable to placental insufficiency,
including: (a) three or more otherwise unexplained recurrent
spontaneous miscarriages before 10 weeks of gestation, (b) one
or more fetal losses after the 10th week of gestation, (c) stillbirth,
and (d) episode of preeclampsia, preterm labor, placental abruption, intrauterine growth restriction, or oligohydramnios that are
otherwise unexplained.
LABORATORY
• Medium-­ or high-­titer aCL or anti-­β2 GPI IgG and/or IgM antibody
present on two or more occasions, at least 12 weeks apart, measured by standard ELISA.
• Lupus anticoagulant in plasma, on two or more occasions, at least
12 weeks apart, detected according to the guidelines of the ISTH
SSC Subcommittee on Lupus Anticoagulants and Phospholipid-­
Dependent Antibodies.
“Definite APS” is considered present if at least one of the clinical
criteria and one of the laboratory criteria are met.
aCL, Anticardiolipin; aPL, antiphospholipid; β 2 GPI, β2 -­glycoprotein I; ELISA, enzyme-­
linked immunosorbent assay; Ig, immunoglobulin.
Modified from Miyakis S, Lockshin MD, Atsumi T, et al. International consensus statement on an update of the classification criteria for definite antiphospholipid syndrome
(APS). Thromb Haemost. 2006;4:295–306. Table 2.

Table 528.3  Proposed Criteria for the Classification of
Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome
1.	Evidence of involvement of three or more organs, systems and/or
tissues*
2.	Development of manifestations simultaneously or in less than a week
3.	Confirmation by histopathology of small vessel occlusion in at
least one organ or tissue†
4.	Laboratory confirmation of the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (lupus anticoagulant and/or anticardiolipin antibodies)‡
DEFINITE CATASTROPHIC APS
• All four criteria
PROBABLE CATASTROPHIC APS
• All four criteria, except for only involvement of two organs,
systems, and/or tissues
• All four criteria, except for the absence of laboratory confirmation
at least 6 weeks apart because of the early death of a patient
never previously tested for aPL before the catastrophic APS event
• Criteria 1, 2, and 4
• Criteria 1, 3, and 4 and the development of a third event in more
than a week but less than a month, despite anticoagulation
*Usually, clinical evidence of vessel occlusions, confirmed by imaging techniques when
appropriate. Renal involvement is defined by a 50% rise in serum creatinine, severe
systemic hypertension (≥180/100 mm Hg) and/or proteinuria (≥500 mg/24 h).
†For histopathologic confirmation, significant evidence of thrombosis must be present,
although, in contrast with Sydney criteria, vasculitis may coexist occasionally.
‡If the patient had not been previously diagnosed as having an APS, the laboratory confirmation requires that the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies must be detected on
two or more occasions at least 6 weeks apart (not necessarily at the time of the event),
according to the proposed preliminary criteria for the classification of definite APS.
aPL, Antiphospholipid; APS, antiphospholipid syndrome
Modified from Asherson RA, Cevera R, de Groot PG et al. Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome: international consensus statement on classification criteria and treatment
guidelines. Lupus 2003;12:530–534.

may be particularly helpful in evaluating proximal or abdominal thrombosis. For the diagnosis of CSVT and AIS, the most sensitive imaging
study is brain MRI with venography or diffusion-­weighted imaging.

LABORATORY TESTING

All children with a VTE should have a complete blood count and a baseline prothrombin time (PT) and PTT to assess their coagulation status in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3042 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
COMPLICATIONS

Complications of VTE include recurrent thrombosis (local or distant),
and development of post-­thrombotic syndrome (PTS). Over time, due
to venous hypertension or damaged endovascular valves, patients may
develop pain, swelling, edema, discoloration, and ulceration of the
affected limb. Several prospective studies in adults have shown PTS to
be present in 17–50% of patients with a history of thrombosis. The likelihood of developing PTS has been shown to increase with age, thrombus burden, and delay in anticoagulation therapy.

528.1 Anticoagulant and Thrombolytic
Therapy
Leslie J. Raffini and Brian R. Branchford

Fig. 528.1 Chest CT scan from a 15-­yr-­old male with a large pul-

monary embolism. Large filling defects are present in the right and left
main pulmonary arteries (arrows).

anticipation of anticoagulation treatment. In adults with suspected DVT, the
D-­dimer level has a high negative predictive value, but the predictive value
is not as well established for children. The D-­dimer is a fragment produced
when fibrin is degraded by plasmin and is a measure of both clot formation
and subsequent fibrinolysis. Based on the clinical scenario, other laboratory
studies, such as renal and hepatic function, may be indicated. Testing for
APS includes evaluation for the lupus anticoagulant as well as anticardiolipin
and anti–β2-­glycoprotein antibodies and should be considered in patients
with inflammatory disorders, recent trauma, surgery, or infection, and those
who present with thrombosis and no other obvious risk factors.
There is debate regarding which patients should have testing for
inherited risk factors. Thrombophilia testing rarely influences the acute
management of a child with a thrombotic event, and natural anticoagulants like protein C and S or antithrombin (AT) may appear to have
low levels due to consumption during the acute phase of thrombosis,
even if the patient does not have an existing deficiency of these proteins (see Chapter 527). Identification of an inherited thrombophilia
may influence the duration of treatment, particularly for those with a
strong thrombophilia, and may aid in counseling patients about their
risk of recurrence. Unprovoked (absence of risk factors) thrombosis
and a family history of thrombotic events may be a clue to an inherited
thrombophilia, although they may coincide with a known risk factor.
The evaluation and interpretation of coagulation studies in pediatric
patients may be complicated by the developing hemostatic system and the
differences in normal ranges between infants and adults (see Chapter 527).

TREATMENT

Therapeutic options for children with thrombosis may include observation, anticoagulation, thrombolysis, and surgery. In premature neonates
and critically ill children who are at high risk of bleeding, the potential
benefits must be weighed against the risks, and close observation with
repeat imaging may be an option. The majority of nonneonates with
symptomatic thrombosis are treated with anticoagulant therapy. The goal
of anticoagulation is to reduce the risk of embolism, halt clot extension,
and prevent recurrence (see Chapter 528.1). Systemic or endovascular
thrombolysis may be indicated for organ-­or limb-­threatening thrombosis. Surgery may be necessary for life-­or limb-­threatening thrombosis
when there is a contraindication to thrombolysis. The optimal treatment
for a child with AIS depends on the likely etiology and the size of the
infarct and may include either anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy
such as aspirin. Children with sickle cell disease who develop stroke are
treated acutely with erythrocytapheresis to rapidly lower the percentage
of hemoglobin S and may also receive ongoing chronic red blood cell
transfusions (or erythrocytapheresis) to reduce recurrence risk.
A summary of management recommendations for various types of
VTE can be found in (Tables 528.4 and 528.5)

Initial options for anticoagulation in children have generally included
unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low molecular weight heparin (LMWH),
followed by LMWH or warfarin for outpatient management (see Tables
528.4 and 528.5). Clinical trials of several direct oral anticoagulants
(DOACs) have demonstrated the safety and efficacy of these drugs to treat
VTE in children, and the landscape of treatment options for children with
thrombosis is changing rapidly as these drugs gain regulatory approval.
DOACs act by inhibiting factor Xa or thrombin (Table 528.6).
The optimal duration of anticoagulation for children with TEs is not
well established. American Society of Hematology (ASH) guidelines
recommend that pediatric patients with provoked DVT or PE receive
≤3 months of anticoagulation and those with unprovoked DVT or PE
receive 6-­12 months of therapy. Patients with strong inherited thrombophilia, recurrent thrombosis, and APS (or other nonmitigatable risk
factors) may require indefinite anticoagulation.

UNFRACTIONATED HEPARIN

Both UFH and LMWH act by catalyzing the action of AT. UFH consists of large molecular weight polysaccharide chains that interact with
AT, supporting the inhibition of factor Xa and thrombin, as well as
other serine proteases.

Heparin Dosing

A therapeutic heparin dose achieves a prolongation of the PTT of
1.5-­2.5 the upper limit of normal. A bolus dose of 75-­100 units/kg
results in a therapeutic PTT in the majority of children. This bolus
should be followed by a continuous infusion. Initial dosing is based
on age, with infants having the highest requirements. It is important
to continue to monitor the PTT closely. In some situations, such as
patients with a lupus anticoagulant, those with elevated factor VIII,
or neonates, the PTT may not accurately reflect the degree of anticoagulation, and heparin can be monitored using a heparin anti-­Xa
level of 0.35-­0.7 units/mL.

Heparin Complications

Maintaining the PTT in the therapeutic range can be difficult in young
children. The bioavailability of heparin is difficult to predict and may
be influenced by plasma proteins, including AT level. In many patients,
this results in multiple dose adjustments requiring close monitoring
with frequent venipuncture. UFH also requires continuous IV access,
which may be difficult to maintain in young children.
The most common adverse effect related to heparin therapy is
bleeding. There are case reports of life-­threatening bleeding in children treated with heparin. The true frequency of bleeding in pediatric
patients receiving heparin has not been well established and is reported
as 1–24%. If the anticoagulant effect of heparin must be reversed immediately, protamine sulfate may be administered to neutralize the heparin.
With an elimination half-­life of approximately 30 minutes, the anticoagulant effect of this drug typically wears off in approximately 2-­3 hours
after stopping the infusion. UFH is cleared by the liver and kidney.
Other adverse effects include osteoporosis (with long-­term use)
and heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia (HIT). Although rare in
pediatric populations, HIT is a prothrombotic, immune-­
mediated

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 528 u Thrombotic Disorders in Children

3043

Table 528.4  Management Considerations for Pediatric Thromboembolic Events
VTE
Symptomatic DVT

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATION

COMMENTS

Anticoagulation
Provoked—treat <3 months (or until provoking
factor is resolved)
Unprovoked—treat 6-­12 months, or longer
based on risk/benefit analysis

Observation may be necessary or reasonable for
premature neonates or critically ill children at
high risk of bleeding
Recommendations vary regarding utility of
radiographic follow-­up

Thrombolysis considered if life-­or limb-­threatening
VTE
IVC filter considered if absolute contraindication
to anticoagulation
Asymptomatic DVT

Anticoagulation or observation

Natural history is unclear, decision may vary
based on VTE-­and patient-­specific factors

Massive PE (hemodynamic compromise)

Thrombolysis followed by anticoagulation

Submassive PE (no hemodynamic
compromise)

Anticoagulation alone

CVC-­related

Anticoagulation
Removal of CVC if not functioning or no longer
needed

Renal vein thrombosis (RVT)

Unilateral: Anticoagulation alone
Bilateral: Consider thrombolysis for bilateral RVT
(life-­ or organ-­threatening)

Portal vein thrombosis (PVT)

Occlusive: Anticoagulation
Nonocclusive: Observation (close radiologic
follow-­up)

Observe for cavernous transformation.
Bleeding risk with anticoagulation increases in
the setting of portal hypertension (and associated
esophageal varices)

Cerebral Sinovenous Thrombosis (CSVT)

Anticoagulation (radiologic follow-­up
recommended)
Acetazolamide if concomitant increased
intracranial pressure

Decision in patients with intracranial hemorrhage
needs to be individualized, but some patients
may benefit from anticoagulation

Duration of anticoagulation needed before CVC
removal is still being investigated, and
recommendations vary

CVC, Central venous catheter; DVT, deep vein thrombosis; IVC, inferior vena cava; PE pulmonary embolism; VTE, venous thromboembolism

Table 528.5  Comparison of Antithrombotic Agents
rTPA

UNFRACTIONATED
HEPARIN

Indication

Recent onset of life-­or limb-­
threatening thrombus

Acute or chronic thrombus,
prophylaxis

Subacute or chronic thrombosis, thromboprophylaxis
for cardiac valves

Acute or chronic thrombus,
prophylaxis

Administration

IV continuous infusion

IV continuous infusion

PO once daily

SC injection twice daily

Monitoring

“Lytic state”: FDP or D-­dimer

PTT

INR

Anti–factor Xa activity

Other

Higher risk of bleeding

Difficult to titrate;
requires frequent dose
adjustments; higher dose
required in newborns

Heavily influenced by other
drugs and diet

More stable and easy to
titrate; concern of
osteopenia with long-­term
use

WARFARIN

LMW HEPARIN
(ENOXAPARIN)

FDP, Fibrin degradation products; INR, international normalized ratio; IV, intravenous; LMW, low-­molecular-­weight; PO, oral; PTT, partial thromboplastin time; rTPA, recombinant
tissue-­type plasminogen activator; SC, subcutaneous.

complication in which antibodies develop to a complex of heparin
and platelet factor-­4. These antibodies result in platelet activation,
stimulation of coagulation, thrombocytopenia, and in some cases, life-­
threatening thrombosis. If HIT is strongly suspected, heparin must be
discontinued immediately. An alternative parenteral anticoagulant,
including the direct thrombin inhibitors argatroban or bivalirudin,
may be used in this situation.

LOW MOLECULAR WEIGHT HEPARIN

In contrast to UFH, LMWH contains smaller molecular weight polysaccharide chains. The interaction of the smaller chains with AT
results primarily in the inhibition of factor Xa, with less of an effect
on thrombin. The several LMWHs available have variable inhibitory

effects on thrombin. For this reason, the PTT is not a reliable measure
of the anticoagulant effect of LMWH, and the anti–factor Xa activity
is used instead. Because of the ease of dosing and need for less monitoring, LMWH is the most frequently used anticoagulant in pediatric
patients. Although dalteparin was the first (and currently only) LMWH
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in children (older than 1 month of age), enoxaparin is the LMWH that has
been studied and used more often in pediatric patients.

Enoxaparin Dosing

The recommended standard starting dose of enoxaparin for infants
<2 months old is 1.5 mg/kg/dose subcutaneously every 12 hours and
for patients >2 months old, 1 mg/kg every 12 hours, although many

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3044 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 528.6  Pharmacologic Properties of Direct Oral Anticoagulants
DABIGATRAN

APIXABAN

BETRIXABAN

EDOXABAN

RIVAROXABAN

Target

Thrombin

Factor Xa

Factor Xa

Factor Xa

Factor Xa

Bioavailability, %

6–7%

50%

34%

62%

66%*

Protein binding, %

35%

87%

60%

40–59%

92–95%

Time to maximum
concentration, hr

2

1–3

3–4

1–2

2–4

Half-­life, hr

12–14

8–15

19–27

9–14

9–13

Renal elimination, %

>80%

25%

6–13%

50%

33%

Metabolism via
cytochrome P450
enzymes, %

<2%

<32%

<1%

<5%

57%

Drug interactions

Inhibitors and inducers of P-­gp

Dual inhibitors and
inducers of CYP3A4
and P-­gp

Inhibitors and inducers of P-­gp

Inhibitors and inducers of P-­gp

Dual inhibitors and
inducers of CYP3A4
and P-­gp

Specific reversal
agents

Idarucizumab

Andexanet alfa

Andexanet alfa†

Andexanet alfa†

Andexanet alfa

*Applies to the 15 mg and 20 mg doses given once a day without food; bioavailability is 80–100% when these doses are given with food.
†Expected to be effective on the basis of its mechanism of action, although not approved for these agents.
P-­gp, P-­glycoprotein.
From Chan N, Sobieraj-­Teague M, Eikelboom JW. Direct oral anticoagulants: evidence and unresolved issues. Lancet 2020;396:1767–1776. Table 1.

centers use slightly higher doses for children <2 years old. In general,
peak levels are achieved 3-­6 hours after injection. A therapeutic anti–
factor Xa level, drawn 4 hours after the second or third dose, should
be 0.5-­1.0 IU/mL; the dose can be titrated to achieve this range. The
elimination half-­life of enoxaparin is 4-­6 hours. Enoxaparin is cleared
by the kidney and should be used with caution in patients with renal
insufficiency. It should be avoided in patients with renal failure.
After an initial period of anticoagulation with heparin or LMWH,
patients may continue to receive LMWH as an outpatient for the duration of therapy or may be transitioned to an oral anticoagulant such as
warfarin.

Direct Thrombin Inhibitors

Argatroban and bivalirudin are IV direct thrombin inhibitors that are
used in the setting of HIT, complex heart disease/failure cases with
ventricular assist devices, or other relatively uncommon situations in
pediatrics. They have short half-­lives but cannot be fully reversed. Dosing has not been well established in children.

WARFARIN

Warfarin is an oral anticoagulant that competitively interferes with
vitamin K metabolism, exerting its action by decreasing concentrations of the vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and
X, as well as protein C and protein S. Therapy should be started while a
patient is anticoagulated with heparin or LMWH because of the risk of
warfarin-­induced skin necrosis. This transient hypercoagulable condition may occur when levels of protein C drop more rapidly than the
procoagulant factors.

Dosing

Warfarin therapy is often initiated with a weight-­based loading dose,
with subsequent dose adjustments made according to a nomogram.
When initiating warfarin therapy, UFH or LMWH should be continued until the international normalized ratio (INR) is therapeutic for
2 days. In most patients, this takes 5-­7 days. The PT is used to monitor the anticoagulant effect of warfarin. Because the thromboplastin
reagents used in PT assays have widely varying sensitivities, the PT
performed in one laboratory cannot be compared with that performed
in another laboratory. As a result, the INR was developed as a mechanism to standardize the variation in the thromboplastin reagent. The
target INR range depends on the clinical situation. In general, a range

of 2.0-­3.0 is the target for the treatment of VTE. High-­risk patients,
such as those with mechanical heart valves, APS, or recurrent thrombosis, may require a higher target range.
Polymorphisms in CYP2C9 and VKORC1 affect the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of warfarin. Pharmacogenetic testing can
identify wild-­type responders, as well as those who are more sensitive
(increased risk of bleeding). Genotyping in adults may help select warfarin dose, monitor for bleeding, or choose a DOAC instead of warfarin for patients highly sensitive and at risk for hemorrhage.

Complications

Bleeding is the most common adverse effect of warfarin. The risk of
serious bleeding in children receiving warfarin for the treatment of
VTE has been reported at 0.5% per year. Children who have supratherapeutic INR are at higher risk. There is considerable interpatient
variation in dose. Diet, medications, and illness may influence the
metabolism of warfarin, requiring frequent dose adjustments and laboratory studies. Numerous medications can affect the pharmacokinetics
of warfarin by altering its clearance or rate of absorption. These effects
can have a profound impact on the INR and must be considered when
monitoring a patient receiving warfarin.
The strategies used to reverse warfarin therapy depend on the clinical situation and whether there is bleeding. Vitamin K can be administered to reverse the effect of warfarin but takes some time to have
an effect. If the patient is having significant bleeding, a nonactivated
plasma-­derived 4-­factor prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) or
fresh-­frozen plasma (FFP, 15 mL/kg) should be given along with the
vitamin K. PCCs have not been well investigated in children.
Nonhemorrhagic complications are uncommon in children,
although hair loss has been reported. Warfarin is a teratogen, particularly in the first trimester. Warfarin embryopathy is characterized by
bone and cartilage abnormalities known as chondrodysplasia punctata.
Affected infants may have nasal hypoplasia and excessive calcifications
in the epiphyses and vertebrae.

DIRECT ORAL ANTICOAGULANTS

Oral direct thrombin inhibitors (dabigatran) or inhibitors of factor Xa
(apixaban, rivaroxaban, edoxaban) are approved for the prevention or
treatment of thrombosis in patients >18 years old (see Table 528.6), and
dabigatran is FDA-­approved for children older than 3 months of age.
Fixed dosing, oral administration, no dietary interference with vitamin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 528 u Thrombotic Disorders in Children

3045

Table 528.7  Guidelines for Therapeutic Anticoagulation Treatment Duration
INDICATION

RISK FACTOR

THERAPEUTIC ANTICOAGULATION TREATMENT DURATION

First VTE episode

Provoked, reversible
Provoked, chronic
Unprovoked

3 mo
3 mo, then continue anticoagulation with either therapeutic or
prophylaxis regimens until the risk factor is resolved
6–12 mo

Recurrent VTE

Reversible
Chronic
Unprovoked

3 mo
If recurrence occurs while the patient was on prophylaxis regimen,
after first VTE episode, restart therapeutic regimen until risk factor
is resolved
Restart therapeutic regimen for at least 3 mo and then switch to
lifelong VTE prophylaxis regimen

VTE, Venous thromboembolism.
From Shoag J, Davis JA, Corrales-­Medina FF. Venous thromboembolism in pediatrics. Pediatr Rev. 2021;42:78–87.

K, and no need to monitor laboratory tests, as well as initial results suggesting noninferiority to warfarin and fewer bleeding episodes, have
favored the use of DOACs. Clinical trials have demonstrated the safety
and efficacy of dabigatran and rivaroxaban in children. Drugs are available to reverse the effects of DOACs if indicated. DOACs should be
avoided in patients with APS in the presence of arterial thrombosis.

THROMBOLYTIC THERAPY

Although anticoagulation alone is often effective at managing thrombosis while awaiting natural fibrinolysis, more rapid clot resolution
may sometimes be necessary or desirable. In these situations, a thrombolytic agent that can activate the fibrinolytic system is of potential
benefit. The pharmacologic activity of thrombolytic agents depends on
the conversion of endogenous plasminogen to plasmin. Plasmin is then
able to degrade several plasma proteins, including fibrin and fibrinogen. Because of the high risk of bleeding, thrombolytic therapy is generally reserved for patients with life-­or limb-­threatening thrombosis.
tPA is available as a recombinant product and has become the primary agent used for thrombolysis in children, although proper dose
finding studies have not been performed. Depending on the situation,
tPA may be used systemically or locally with catheter-­directed thrombolysis, sometimes with the addition of mechanical clot lysis devices
operated by interventional radiologists.

Dosing

An extremely wide range of doses of tPA has been used for systemic
therapy, and no consensus exists as to the optimal dose. Systemic tPA
doses of 0.1-­0.6 mg/kg/hr were previously recommended, although
recent reports indicate successful therapy with fewer bleeding complications using prolonged infusions with very low doses—0.01-­0.06 mg/
kg/hr.

Monitoring

There is no specific laboratory test to document a “therapeutic range”
for thrombolytic therapy. It is important to maintain the fibrinogen
>100 mg/dL and the platelet count >75,000 × 109/L during treatment.
Supplementation of plasminogen using FFP is generally recommended
in neonates before initiating thrombolysis because of their low baseline
levels.
The clinical and radiologic response to thrombolysis should be
closely monitored. The duration of therapy depends on the clinical
response. Invasive procedures, including urinary catheterization, arterial puncture, and rectal temperatures, should be avoided.

The role of adjuvant UFH during thrombolytic therapy is controversial. Animal models have demonstrated that thrombolytic therapy can
induce a procoagulant state with activation of the coagulation system,
generation of thrombin, and extension or reocclusion of the thrombosis. In pediatric patients thought to be at low risk for bleeding, adjuvant
UFH should be considered using doses of 10-­20 units/kg/hr. The recommended duration of therapy is noted in Table 528.7.

Complications

The most serious complication from thrombolysis is bleeding, which
has been reported in 0–40% of patients. Absolute contraindications to
thrombolysis include major surgery within 7 days, history of significant bleeding (intracranial, pulmonary, or GI), peripartum asphyxia
with brain damage, uncontrolled hypertension, and severe thrombocytopenia. In the event of serious bleeding, thrombolysis should be
stopped, and cryoprecipitate should be given to replace fibrinogen.

THROMBOPROPHYLAXIS

There have been no formal trials of VTE prevention in children,
although many institutions are starting to develop and use risk-­guided
algorithms to identify children who may benefit from mechanical
(sequential compression devices) or pharmacologic (low-­dose anticoagulant) prevention strategies in the absence of concomitant bleeding
risk. Hospitalized adolescents with multiple risk factors for thrombosis
who are immobilized for a prolonged period are a group that expert
consensus would suggest may benefit from prophylactic treatment
with enoxaparin, 0.5 mg/kg every 12 hours (maximum 30 mg).

ANTIPLATELET THERAPY

Inhibition of platelet function using agents such as aspirin is more likely
to be protective against arterial TEs than VTEs. Aspirin, or acetylsalicylic acid (ASA), exerts its antiplatelet effect by irreversibly inhibiting
cyclooxygenase, preventing platelet thromboxane A2 production. Aspirin is used routinely in children with Kawasaki disease and may also
be useful in children with stroke, ventricular assist devices, and single-­
ventricle cardiac defects. The recommended dose of aspirin to achieve
an antiplatelet effect in children is 1-­5 mg/kg/day.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3046 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 529

Postneonatal Vitamin K
Deficiency
Brian R. Branchford, Benjamin J. Samelson-­
Jones, and Veronica H. Flood
Vitamin K deficiency occurring after the neonatal period is usually secondary to insufficient vitamin K intake, malabsorption, or alterations in
the intestinal flora as a consequence of antibiotics. The biologic activity of
the “vitamin K–dependent factors” (coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and
X, as well as the natural anticoagulants protein C and protein S) requires
vitamin K for their posttranslational carboxylation. In the absence of vitamin K, only nonfunctional forms of these proteins are synthesized, which
are ineffective for hemostasis. Severe vitamin K deficiency will result in a
prolonged prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT),
although early deficiency may only demonstrate a prolonged PT because of
the short half-­life of factor VII. Plasma levels of uncarboxylated factor II are
measured in the PIVKA-­II (proteins induced by vitamin K absence) test
and elevated levels are diagnostic of vitamin K deficiency, although clinical
history and basic coagulation labs are usually sufficient to make the diagnosis. It can often be clinically helpful to distinguish between deficiencies
of the vitamin K–dependent factors and deficiencies in the clotting factors
synthesized by hepatocytes due to liver disease (see Chapter 530), which
includes the vitamin K–dependent factors as well as factors V and XI.
Intestinal malabsorption of fats may accompany cystic fibrosis,
biliary atresia, or other liver diseases and results in a deficiency of fat-­
soluble dietary vitamins including vitamin K.
Prophylactic administration of water-­soluble vitamin K orally is indicated in these patients (2-­5 mg/24 hr for children and 5-­10 mg/24 hr for
adolescents and adults). Vitamin K may also be administered at 1-­2 mg
intravenously. Broad-­spectrum antibiotics can alter the intestinal flora,
reducing the vitamin K that is produced in the gastrointestinal tract.
Patients have only a few weeks of vitamin K stores. The anticoagulant properties of warfarin (Coumadin) depend on interference with vitamin K,
with a concomitant reduction of the vitamin K–dependent clotting factors.
Rat poison (superwarfarin) produces a similar deficiency that should be
considered in young children presenting with bleeding and bruising with a
history compatible with ingestion. There are also cases of illicit drugs being
adulterated with vitamin K antagonists. Vitamin K is a specific antidote for
these substances. Four factor prothrombin complex concentrates contain
all the vitamin K–­dependent clotting factors; they are available for warfarin reversal and have been used to rapidly replace vitamin K–dependent
clotting factors in urgent scenarios. Dosing is based on the international
normalized ratio (INR), and vitamin K should also be administered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 530

Coagulopathy in Liver
Disease

exclusively in hepatocytes, coagulation abnormalities are very common in patients with severe liver disease (Table 530.1). Only 15%
of such patients have significant clinical bleeding states, possibly
because of concomitant reduction in anticoagulation proteins (protein C and S). The severity of the coagulation abnormality appears
to be directly proportional to the extent of hepatocellular damage.
The most common mechanism causing the hemostasis defect is
decreased synthesis of coagulation factors. Patients with severe liver
disease characteristically have normal to increased (not reduced)
levels of factor VIII activity in plasma. In some instances, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC; see Chapter 510), hypofibrinogenemia, or hyperfibrinolysis may complicate liver disease,
making laboratory differentiation of severe liver disease from DIC-­
related clotting factor consumption difficult. These entities, as well
as vitamin K deficiency (see Chapter 529), may be distinguished by
comparing levels of a hepatically synthesized factor (such as factor
V), a hepatically synthesized vitamin K–dependent factor (such as
factor VII), and a nonhepatically synthesized factor that could be
subject to consumption (such as factor VIII).
Treatment of the coagulopathy of liver disease should be reserved
for patients with clinical bleeding rather than used to normalize the
lab values. Because a reduction in vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors is common in those with acute or chronic liver disease,
a trial of vitamin K supplementation can be given. Vitamin K can be
given orally, subcutaneously, or preferably intravenously (not intramuscularly) at a dose of 1 mg/24 hr for infants, 2-­5 mg/24 hr for
children, and 5-­10 mg/24 hr for adolescents and adults. Inability to
correct coagulopathy with vitamin K indicates that the coagulopathy may be caused by reduced levels of clotting factors that are not
vitamin K–dependent and/or by inadequate production of precursor vitamin K proteins. Treatment for bleeding consists of factor
replacement with fresh-­frozen plasma (FFP) or cryoprecipitate.
FFP (10-­15 mL/kg) contains all clotting factors, but replacement
of fibrinogen for severe hypofibrinogenemia may require cryoprecipitate at a dose of 1 unit per 5-­10 kg body weight, or a fibrinogen
concentrate if a patient is unable to tolerate excess fluid volume.
In severe liver disease, it is often difficult to attain correction of
abnormal clotting studies despite vigorous therapy with FFP and
cryoprecipitate, and such attempts are often complicated by volume
overload concerns. Some patients with bleeding as a result of liver
disease have responded to therapy with desmopressin (DDAVP),
whereas others have responded to treatment with recombinant factor VIIa, albeit at a dose lower than typically given for hemophilia.
Recombinant factor VIIa is contraindicated in DIC.
Desmopressin (0.3 μg/kg intravenously) is effective in shortening bleeding time, prompts endothelial cell release of von Willebrand factor and factor VIII, promotes platelet activation, and is
therefore used effectively to augment hemostasis before diagnostic
liver biopsy in the setting of hepatic insufficiency/failure. In clinical
trials of adults, recombinant factor VIIa has not been shown to be
effective for the treatment of bleeding caused by severe liver disease, possibly because of its short half-­life (3-­6 hours). Frequently,
severe liver disease is associated with moderate prolongation of
coagulation disorder screening tests (partial thromboplastin time
[PTT]; prothrombin time [PT]) that is not corrected by vitamin
K or plasma replacement. Another diagnostic clue may be a low
serum albumin level because this protein is also synthesized in the
liver.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Because all the clotting factors except factor VIII (which is synthesized in liver sinusoids and extrahepatic endothelium) are produced
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 532 u Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation

3047

Table 530.1  Coagulation Changes in Liver Disease
CHANGES IN PROCOAGULANT
PROTEINS

CHANGES IN ANTICOAGULANT
PROTEINS

CHANGES IN ANTIFIBRINOLYTIC
PROTEINS

Decreased fibrinogen and factors FII, FV, FVII,
FIX, FX, and FXI

Decreased protein C

Decreased α2-­antiplasmin and thrombin-­
activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor

Increased FVIII

Decreased protein S

FXIII decreased in some patients

Increased VWF, decreased ADAMTS-­13

Decreased antithrombin

Increased tissue plasminogen activator

ADAMTS-­13, A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13.
From Han H, Hensch L, Hui SKR, Teruya J. Evaluation and management of coagulopathies and thrombophilias in pediatric patients. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:83–100. Table 4.

Chapter 531

Acquired Inhibitors of
Coagulation
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Acquired circulating anticoagulants (inhibitors) are antibodies that
react, or cross-­react, with clotting factors or components used in coagulation screening tests (phospholipids), thereby prolonging screening
tests, such as prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time
(PTT), although not all of them result in a clinical bleeding state. Some
of these anticoagulants are autoantibodies that react with phospholipid
and thereby interfere with clotting in vitro but not in vivo. This group
comprises anticardiolipin and anti-­beta(2)-­glycoprotein-­Ib antibodies,
but the most common subtype of these antiphospholipid antibodies
has been referred to as the lupus anticoagulant (see Chapter 528.1).
This unfortunately named antibody is neither found exclusively in
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; see Chapter 199),
nor does its presence consistently signify the concomitant presence of
SLE in a patient. It can also be seen in those with other collagen vascular diseases and in association with HIV infection. In otherwise healthy
children, spontaneous lupus-­like inhibitors have developed transiently
after incidental viral infection and can be seen in up to 26% of screening tests in asymptomatic subjects. These transient inhibitors are usually not associated with either bleeding or thrombosis.
Although the classic lupus anticoagulant is more often associated
with a predisposition to thrombosis than with bleeding symptoms,
bleeding symptoms in a patient with the lupus anticoagulant may be
caused by thrombocytopenia, which may be a manifestation of the
antiphospholipid syndrome or of lupus itself (alone or occasionally in
context with Evans syndrome), or, rarely, by a coexistent specific autoantibody against prothrombin (factor II). The antiprothrombin antibody does not inactivate prothrombin but rather causes accelerated
clearance of the protein, resulting in low levels of prothrombin and
subsequent inadequate hemostasis.
Rarely, antibodies may arise spontaneously against a specific clotting factor, such as factor VIII or von Willebrand factor, leading to
acquired hemophilia A or von Willebrand disease (VWD), but this
is usually seen more frequently in adult patients. These patients are
prone to excessive hemorrhage and may require specific treatment. In
patients with a hereditary deficiency of a clotting factor (factor VIII or
factor IX), antibodies may develop after exposure to transfused factor
concentrates. These hemophilic inhibitory antibodies are discussed in
Chapter 525.1.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Inhibitors against specific coagulation factors usually affect factors VIII,
IX, and XI, or, rarely, prothrombin (factor II). Depending on the target
of the antibody and the target’s participation in the intrinsic, extrinsic,

or common coagulation cascade pathway, the PT and/or PTT may be
prolonged. The mechanism by which the inhibitory antibody functions
determines whether mixing patient plasma with normal plasma will
normalize (correct) the clotting time. Patient plasma that contains antibodies directed against the active site of a clotting factor (factor VIII or
factor IX) will not correct on 1:1 mixing with normal plasma, whereas
antibodies that lead to increased clearance of the factor (such as antiprothrombin antibodies) will correct on such mixing studies. Specific
factor assays are used to determine which factor is involved, and the
pattern of abnormalities in PT, PTT, and/or thrombin time (TT) is
used to guide initial investigation.

TREATMENT

Management of the bleeding patient with an acquired inhibitory
autoantibody against factor VIII or IX is the same as for the patient
with congenital hemophilia who has an alloantibody against factor
VIII or factor IX. Infusions of recombinant factor VIIa or activated
prothrombin complex concentrate may be needed to control significant bleeding. Occasionally, high-­dose coagulation factor VIII or IX
concentrates may be effective. Immunosuppressive agents have been
used “off label” to treat the inhibitor or reduce titers. Acute bleeding
caused by an antiprothrombin antibody can often be treated with a
plasma infusion and may resolve with a short course of corticosteroid
therapy.
Asymptomatic spontaneous inhibitors that arise after a viral infection tend to disappear within a few weeks to months. Inhibitors seen
with an underlying disease, such as those associated with SLE, often
resolve during the treatment of the underlying disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 532

Disseminated
Intravascular Coagulation
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones and
Leslie J. Raffini
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is an acquired clinicopathologic syndrome characterized by the widespread pathologic activation of the coagulation system, which results in both microvascular
thrombi and the consumption of clotting factors, anticoagulant proteins, and platelets. Microvasculature injury can contribute to organ
dysfunction, while hemorrhage can be life-­threatening in a minority
of cases. The diagnosis of DIC is based on the laboratory findings and
clinical manifestations within the appropriate clinical context. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3048 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
simultaneous occurrence of bleeding and clotting is clinically challenging, with management starting from appropriately recognizing this
syndrome.

ETIOLOGY

DIC is always a secondary complication of an underlying disorder (Table 532.1) and never an isolated diagnosis. The complex
pathogenesis involves the loss of localization and excessive activation of coagulation leading to unregulated thrombin generation
and microvascular fibrin deposition. Dysfunction of the vascular

Table 532.1  Causes of Disseminated Intravascular
Coagulation in Children
INFECTIONS
Meningococcemia (purpura fulminans)
Bacterial sepsis (staphylococcal, streptococcal, Escherichia coli,
Salmonella)
Rickettsia (Rocky Mountain spotted fever)
Viruses (cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, hemorrhagic fevers)
Malaria
Fungi
TISSUE INJURY
Central nervous system trauma (massive head injury)
Fat embolism
Crush injury
Profound shock or asphyxia
Hypothermia or hyperthermia (heat shock)
Massive burns
MALIGNANCY
Acute promyelocytic leukemia
Acute monoblastic leukemia
Disseminated solid tumors (rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma)
VENOM OR TOXINS
Toxic shock syndrome
Snakebites
Spider bites
MICROANGIOPATHIC DISORDERS
Severe thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura or hemolytic-­uremic
syndrome
Vascular malformations
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Fulminant hepatitis
Ischemic bowel
Pancreatitis
HEREDITARY THROMBOTIC DISORDERS
Homozygous/compound heterozygous protein C, protein S, or
antithrombin deficiency
PERINATAL
Maternal toxemia
Abruptio placentae
Severe respiratory distress syndrome
Meconium aspiration syndrome
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Erythroblastosis fetalis
Fetal demise of a twin
MISCELLANEOUS
Severe acute graft rejection
Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction
Severe collagen-­vascular disease
Kawasaki disease
Heparin-­induced thrombosis
Infusion of activated prothrombin complex concentrates
Hyperpyrexia/encephalopathy, hemorrhagic shock syndrome
Adapted from Montgomery RR, Scott IP. Hemostasis: diseases of the fluid phase. In
Nathan DG, Oski FA, eds. Hematology of Infancy and Childhood, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 1993.

endothelium can both precipitate and amplify this process. The
excessive activation consumes platelets, procoagulant clotting factors (factor V, factor VIII, prothrombin, and fibrinogen), and anticoagulant proteins (protein C, protein S, and antithrombin). The
fibrinolytic system can also become dysregulated with endothelial
injury and plasma protein consumption.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Although DIC is characterized by a number of abnormal laboratory findings, none are specific for the diagnosis. The consumption of coagulation factors and platelets often results in a prolonged
prothrombin time (PT), an increased partial thromboplastin time
(PTT), and low platelet counts. Low fibrinogen is seen in severe disease, but as an acute-­phase reactant, fibrinogen may be high or normal early in the disease process; declining fibrinogen levels, even
within the normal range, can suggest DIC. Fibrinogen degradation
products and D-­dimer levels are frequently highly elevated. Factors V and VIII are usually both reduced in DIC, whereas in acute
hepatic disease, factor VIII may be normal or elevated. Thrombi in
the microvasculature can lead to red blood cell fragmentation and
a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia with elevated lactate dehydrogenase and characteristic blood smear morphology, including
schistocytes, helmet cells, and microspherocytes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

DIC may be subclinical with only laboratory abnormalities, termed
nonovert DIC. Clinical manifestations include thrombotic and hemorrhagic complications, as well as organ dysfunction. Bleeding frequently first occurs from sites of venipuncture or surgical incision,
and the skin may show petechiae, purpura, and ecchymoses. Localized large-­vessel arterial or venous thromboembolic events can
occur. Tissue necrosis may involve many organs and can be most
spectacularly seen as infarction of large areas of skin and subcutaneous tissue. A compromised blood supply can lead to organ dysfunction including organ failure, especially to the lungs, kidneys,
liver, and brain.

MANAGEMENT

The primary treatment of DIC is resolving the underlying triggering
disease process. Blood components support is recommended for
active hemorrhage or in patients requiring invasive procedures;
this may consist of platelet infusions (for thrombocytopenia), cryoprecipitate (for hypofibrinogenemia), and fresh-­frozen plasma (for
replacement of other coagulation factors and anticoagulant proteins). Blood product support in the absence of bleeding should not
be based solely on laboratory abnormalities, but clinical practice
varies on the importance of minor bleeding symptoms. Hemostatic
products with activated clotting factors such as recombinant factor VIIa (FVIIa) and activated prothrombin complex concentrate
(aPCC) theoretically may worsen the widespread and unregulated
generation of thrombin. Likewise, systemic antifibrinolytics are
generally contraindicated except in clinical scenarios associated
with hyperfibrinolysis such as acute promyelocytic leukemia and
early trauma.
DIC patients with overt thromboembolic complications should
receive therapeutic anticoagulation, usually with unfractionated
heparin, as outlined in Chapter 528.1; stringent attention to replacement therapy is warranted to maintain an adequate platelet count to
limit bleeding. Prophylactic anticoagulation may be carefully used
in patients with DIC at high risk of thromboembolic events that
are not actively bleeding. Most patients should receive mechanical
thromboprophylaxis such as sequential compression devices.
The prognosis of patients with DIC is primarily dependent on the
outcome of the treatment of the primary disease and prevention of
end-­organ damage.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders

local vasoconstriction. In addition to acting in concert with the vessel
wall to form the platelet plug, the platelet provides the catalytic phospholipid surface on which coagulation factors assemble and eventually
generate thrombin through a sequential series of enzymatic cleavages.
Lastly, the platelet contractile proteins and cytoskeleton mediate clot
retraction.

Chapter 533

Platelet and Blood Vessel
Disorders

THROMBOCYTOPENIA

The normal platelet count is 150-­450 × 109/L. Thrombocytopenia refers
to a reduction in platelet count to <150 × 109/L, although clinically
significant bleeding is not seen until counts drop well below 50 × 109/L.
Causes of thrombocytopenia include decreased production on either
a congenital or an acquired basis, sequestration of the platelets within
an enlarged spleen or other organ, and increased destruction of normally synthesized platelets on either an immune or a nonimmune basis
(Tables 533.1-­533.3, Fig. 533.2, and Chapter 524).

Brian R. Branchford, Benjamin J. Samelson-­
Jones, and Veronica H. Flood
MEGAKARYOPOIESIS

Platelets are anuclear cellular fragments produced by megakaryocytes
(large polyploid cells) within the bone marrow, lung, and other tissues. When the megakaryocyte approaches maturity, budding of the
cytoplasm occurs, and large numbers of platelets are liberated. Platelets
circulate with a life span of 7-­10 days. Thrombopoietin (TPO) is the
primary growth factor that controls platelet production (Fig. 533.1).
Levels of TPO appear to correlate inversely with platelet number and
megakaryocyte mass, with highest expression in the thrombocytopenic
states associated with decreased marrow megakaryopoiesis, and may
be variable in states of increased platelet production.
The platelet plays multiple hemostatic roles. The platelet surface possesses a number of important receptors for adhesive proteins, including
von Willebrand factor (VWF) and fibrinogen, as well as receptors for
agonists that trigger platelet aggregation, such as thrombin, collagen,
and adenosine diphosphate (ADP). After injury to the blood vessel wall,
the extracellular matrix containing adhesive and procoagulant proteins
is exposed. Subendothelial collagen binds VWF, which then undergoes
a conformational change that induces binding of the platelet glycoprotein Ib (GPIb) complex, the VWF receptor. This process is called
platelet adhesion. Platelets then undergo activation. During the process
of activation, the platelets generate thromboxane A2 from arachidonic
acid via the enzyme cyclooxygenase. After activation, platelets release
agonists, such as ADP, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), calcium ions
(Ca2+), serotonin, and coagulation factors, into the surrounding milieu
from dense and alpha granules. Binding of VWF to the GPIb complex
triggers a complex signaling cascade that results in activation of the
fibrinogen receptor, the major platelet integrin glycoprotein αIIb-­β3
(GPIIb-­IIIa). Circulating fibrinogen binds to this receptor on activated
platelets, linking platelets in a process called aggregation. This series
of events forms a hemostatic plug at the site of vascular injury. The
serotonin and histamine that are liberated during activation increase

533.1 Immune Thrombocytopenia
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
The most common cause of acute onset of thrombocytopenia in an
otherwise-­well child is immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) (also called
immune or idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

In a small number of children, estimated at 1/20,000, 1-­4 weeks after
exposure to a common viral infection, an autoantibody directed against
the platelet surface develops with resultant sudden onset of thrombocytopenia. A recent history of viral illness is described in 50–65% of children with ITP. The peak age is 1-­4 years, although the age ranges from
early in infancy to elderly. In childhood, males and females are equally
affected. ITP seems to occur more often in late winter and spring after
the peak season of viral respiratory illness. Approximately 5–10% of
ITP may recur more than 3 months after initial disease resolution.

PATHOGENESIS

The exact antigenic target for most such antibodies in most cases of
childhood acute ITP remains undetermined, although in chronic ITP,
many patients demonstrate antibodies against αIIb-­β3 and GPIb. After
binding of the antibody to the platelet surface, circulating antibody-­
coated platelets are recognized by the Fc receptor on splenic macrophages, ingested, and destroyed. The most common identifiable viruses
that have been described in association with ITP include Epstein-­Barr

Upgrade of megakaryocytopoiesis and platelet production in ITP

Proliferation

Endoreplication

Maturation

Proplatelet formation
TPO Stromal cells

TPO SCF, IL-3, IL-6, IL-11
HSC

c-MPL

MEP

MK
2-4N

MKP

SDF-1

TPO
IL-11
MK
8-64N

Mature
MK

c-MPL
Enhanced
JAK2/Stat5
signalling

Romiplostim
Eltrombopag
Bone marrow

3049

c-MPL
Endothelial cell
barrier
Vascular sinus

Fig. 533.1 Scheme of megakaryocytopoiesis
and platelet production in immune thrombocytopenia (ITP). Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) are
mobilized, and megakaryocyte (MK) and erythroid
progenitors (MEP) accumulate with MK-­committed
progenitors (MKP), giving rise to mature MKs under control of thrombopoietin (TPO) working with
chemokines, cytokines, and growth factors, including stem cell factor (SCF) and interleukin (IL)-­3, IL-­6,
and IL-­11. Endoreplication results in ploidy changes
in MKs and increased chromosome number (up to
64N). Mature MKs migrate to the endothelial cell
barrier delimiting the vascular sinus and, under the
influence of stromal-­derived factor-­1 (SDF-­1), give
rise to proplatelets that protrude into the circulation and produce large numbers of platelets under
hemodynamic determinants. Therapeutically given
romiplostim and eltrombopag enter the marrow and
join with TPO to stimulate megakaryocytopoiesis
and platelet production. (From Nurden AT, Viallard
JF, Nurden P. New-­generation drugs that stimulate
platelet production in chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura. Lancet 2009;373:1563–1569.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3050 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 533.1  Differential Diagnosis of Thrombocytopenia in
Children and Adolescents
DESTRUCTIVE THROMBOCYTOPENIAS
Primary Platelet Consumption Syndromes
Immune thrombocytopenias
Acute and chronic ITP
Autoimmune diseases with chronic ITP as a manifestation
•
•
•
•
•
•

Cyclic thrombocytopenia
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome and its variants
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Evans syndrome
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Neoplasia-­associated immune thrombocytopenia

Thrombocytopenia associated with HIV
Neonatal immune thrombocytopenia
• Alloimmune
• Autoimmune (e.g., maternal ITP)

Drug-­induced immune thrombocytopenia (including heparin-­
induced thrombocytopenia)
Posttransfusion purpura
Allergy and anaphylaxis
Posttransplant thrombocytopenia
Nonimmune thrombocytopenias
Thrombocytopenia of infection
• Bacteremia or fungemia
• Viral infection
• Protozoan

Thrombotic microangiopathic disorders
•
•
•
•
•

Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
Eclampsia, HELLP syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Bone marrow transplantation–associated microangiopathy
Drug induced (quinine, etc.)

Platelets in contact with foreign material
Congenital heart disease
Drug-­induced via direct platelet effects (ristocetin, protamine)
Type 2B VWD or platelet-­type VWD
Combined Platelet and Fibrinogen Consumption Syndromes
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (inherited or acquired)
IMPAIRED PLATELET PRODUCTION
Hereditary disorders (see Table 533.2)
Acquired disorders
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Aplastic anemia
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Marrow infiltrative process—neoplasia
Osteopetrosis
Nutritional deficiency states (iron, folate, vitamin B12, anorexia nervosa)
Drug-­ or radiation-­induced thrombocytopenia
Neonatal hypoxia or placental insufficiency

SEQUESTRATION
Hypersplenism
Hypothermia
Burns
ASSOCIATION WITH OTHER DISEASES
Fanconi anemia
Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
TAFRO syndrome

HELLP, Hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; ITP, immune thrombocytopenic purpura; TAFRO, thrombocytopenia,
ascites, myelofibrosis renal dysfunction, organomegaly (a variant of multicentric
Castleman disease); VWD, von Willebrand disease.
From Wilson DB. Acquired platelet defects. In: Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al.,
eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015: Box 34.1, p. 1077.

virus (EBV; see Chapter 301) and HIV (see Chapter 322), and ITP is also
noted as a rare occurrence after measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR)
vaccination. EBV-­related ITP is usually of short duration and follows
the course of infectious mononucleosis. HIV-­associated ITP is usually chronic. In some patients, ITP appears to arise in children infected
with Helicobacter pylori or rarely after vaccines. The SARS-­CoV-­2

virus responsible for the COVID-­19 infection has been associated with
development of ITP, as have some of the vaccines for this virus.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The classic presentation of ITP is a previously healthy 1–4-­year-­old
child who has sudden onset of generalized petechiae and purpura. The
parents often state that the child was fine the previous day but is now
covered with bruises and purple dots. There may be bleeding from the
gums and mucous membranes, particularly with profound thrombocytopenia (platelet count <10 × 109/L). There is a history of a preceding viral infection 1-­4 weeks before the onset of thrombocytopenia.
Findings on physical examination are typically normal, other than
petechiae and purpura. Splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, bone pain,
and pallor are rare. A simple classification system to characterize the
severity of bleeding in ITP on the basis of symptoms and signs rather
than platelet count includes:
1.	No symptoms
2.	Mild symptoms: Bruising and petechiae, occasional minor epistaxis,
very little interference with daily living
3.	Moderate symptoms: More severe skin and mucosal lesions, more
troublesome epistaxis, and menorrhagia
4.	Severe symptoms: Bleeding episodes—menorrhagia, epistaxis, melena—requiring transfusion or hospitalization, symptoms interfering seriously with the quality of life
The presence of abnormal findings such as hepatosplenomegaly,
bone or joint pain, remarkable lymphadenopathy, other cytopenias, or
congenital anomalies suggests other diagnoses (e.g., leukemia, genetic
syndromes). When the onset is insidious, especially in an adolescent,
chronic ITP or the possibility of a systemic illness, such as systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE), is more likely. In addition, presentation
at an atypical age (neonates, adolescents) should suggest an underlying
disease.

OUTCOME

Severe bleeding is rare (<3% of cases in one large international study).
In 70–80% of children who present with acute ITP, spontaneous resolution occurs within 6 months. Therapy does not appear to affect the
natural history of the illness. Fewer than 1% of patients develop an
intracranial hemorrhage (ICH). Proponents of interventional therapy
argue that the objective of early therapy is to raise the platelet count
to >20 × 109/L and prevent the rare development of ICH. There is no
evidence that therapy prevents serious bleeding. Approximately 20%
of children who present with acute ITP go on to have chronic ITP. The
outcome/prognosis may be related more to age; ITP in younger children is more likely to resolve, whereas development of chronic ITP in
adolescents approaches 50%.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count <20 × 109/L) is common, and
platelet size is normal or increased, reflective of increased platelet turnover (Fig. 533.3). In acute ITP, the hemoglobin value, white blood cell
(WBC) count, and differential count are usually normal. Hemoglobin
may be decreased in the context of profuse nosebleeds (epistaxis) or
menorrhagia. Bone marrow examination, which is not routinely indicated in this disease, shows normal granulocytic and erythrocytic
series, with characteristically normal or increased numbers of megakaryocytes. Some of the megakaryocytes may appear to be immature
and reflect increased platelet turnover. Indications for bone marrow
aspiration/biopsy include an abnormal WBC count or differential or
unexplained anemia, as well as history and physical examination findings suggestive of a bone marrow failure syndrome or malignancy.
Other laboratory tests should be performed as indicated by the history
and examination. HIV studies should be done in at-­risk populations,
especially sexually active teens. Platelet antibody testing is seldom useful in acute ITP. A direct antiglobulin test (Coombs) should be done if
there is unexplained anemia to rule out Evans syndrome (autoimmune
hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia; see Chapter 506). Evans
syndrome may be idiopathic or an early sign of SLE, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, or common variable immunodeficiency

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders

3051

Table 533.2  Inherited Platelet Disorders
PLATELET DEFECT

GENE DEFECT (CHROMOSOMAL
LOCATION)

DEFECTS IN PLATELET ADHESION
Bernard-­Soulier syndrome
Autosomal recessive:
(BSS)
GP1BA (17p13)
GP1BB (22q11)
GP9 (3q21)
Autosomal dominant:
Ala156Val, GP1BA -­Bolzano
variant

CLINICAL AND LABORATORY
CHARACTERISTICS

BLEEDING TREATMENT

• Often severe bleeding phenotype
• Thrombocytopenia
• Large platelets
• Platelet aggregation: absent
ristocetin-induced response
• Flow cytometry: reduced or
absent CD42a (GPIX)/CD42b
(GP1bα)
• GP1BA & GP1BB gene
sequencing

• Supportive care
• Platelet transfusion (risk of
alloantibodies)
• Antifibrinolytics
• rFVIIa

Velocardiofacial/DiGeorge
syndrome
(VCFS)

22q11.2 deletion including GP1BB

• Thrombocytopenia
• Large platelets and α-­granules
• Cardiac, thymus, parathyroid,
facial, and cognitive abnormalities

• Supportive care

Platelet-­type von Willebrand
disease
(PT-­VWD)

Autosomal dominant:
gain of function variants in GP1BA

• Thrombocytopenia
• Large platelets
• Platelet clumping
• Decreased VWF:Ag, VWF
multimers
• Platelet aggregation: low dose
ristocetin-­induced platelet
agglutination
• GP1BA gene sequencing

• Supportive care
• Platelet transfusion
• Antifibrinolytics
• rFVIIa

• Often severe bleeding phenotype
• Normal platelet count and
morphology
• Platelet aggregation: absent
response to all agonists except
ristocetin
• Flow cytometry: absent or
reduced CD41 and CD61

• Supportive care
• rFVIIa (considered the first line)
• Platelet transfusion (risk of HPA
alloantibodies)
• Antifibrinolytics

• Mild bleeding phenotype
• Platelet aggregation: abnormal
response to arachidonic acid and
U46619
• TBXA2R gene sequencing

• Supportive care

DEFECTS OF PLATELET AGGREGATION
Glanzmann thrombasthenia
Autosomal recessive:
(GT)
ITGA2B (17Q21.32)
ITGB3 (17q21.32)

DEFECTS IN AGONISTS RECEPTORS
Thromboxane-­prostanoid (TP) Autosomal recessive
receptor defects
TBXA2R (19p13.3)

ADP receptor defects P2Y12

Autosomal recessive
P2RY12 (3q23–25)

• Mild bleeding phenotype
• Platelet aggregation: abnormal
response to ADP
• P2RY12 gene sequencing

• Supportive care

Collagen receptor defects
GPVI

Autosomal recessive
GP6 (19q13.4)

• Mild bleeding phenotype
• Platelet aggregation: abnormal
response to collagen
• GP6 gene sequencing

• Supportive care

• Progressive myelofibrosis
• Thrombocytopenia
• Large pale platelets on blood
smears
• Absent α-­granules on TEM
• NBEAL2 gene sequencing

• Supportive care
• Antifibrinolytics
• DDVAP
• Platelet transfusion
• Splenectomy

• Thrombocytopenia
• Large pale platelets on blood
smears
• Absent α-­granules on TEM
• Lethal early in life
• VPS33B & VIPAS39 sequencing

• Supportive care
• Platelet transfusion
• Antifibrinolytics

PLATELET GRANULES DEFECTS (Α-­GRANULES)
Gray platelet syndrome (GPS) Autosomal recessive
NBEAL2 (3p21)

Arthrogryposis, renal dysfunction, and cholestasis
syndrome
(ARC syndrome)

Autosomal dominant
VPS33B (15q26)
VIPAS39 (14q24)

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3052 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 533.2  Inherited Platelet Disorders—cont’d
GENE DEFECT (CHROMOSOMAL
LOCATION)

PLATELET DEFECT

CLINICAL AND LABORATORY
CHARACTERISTICS

BLEEDING TREATMENT

Quebec platelet disorder
(QPD)

Autosomal recessive
Tandem duplication of PLAU
(10q22.2)

• Delayed-­onset bleeding not
responding to platelet transfusion
• Variable thrombocytopenia
• Abnormal urokinase in platelets
detected with immunoblot or
ELISA
• PLAU duplication testing

• Supportive care
• Antifibrinolytics

Paris-­Trousseau/Jacobsen
syndrome (PTS)

Autosomal dominant
Deletion of chromosome 11q23–24
Hemizygous deletion of FLI1
(11q24.1 – q24.3)

• Thrombocytopenia
• Large platelets
• Giant α-­granules on TEM
• Immature megakaryocytes in the
bone marrow
• Cognitive, cardiac, and facial
abnormalities

• Supportive care
• Antifibrinolytics
• Platelet transfusion

• Decreased to absent δ-­granules
• Lumiaggregometry: decreased/
absent ATP release
• Whole-­mount EM
• Gene sequencing of 10 candidate
genes
• Oculocutaneous albinism

• Supportive care
• Antifibrinolytics
• Platelet transfusion
• DDAVP

• Giant eosinophilic inclusions in
neutrophils
• Decreased to absent δ-­granules
• Lumiaggregometry: decreased/
absent ATP release
• Hypopigmentation and immunodeficiency

• Supportive care

• Thrombocytopenia
• Small platelets
• Recurrent infections and eczema
• Decreased/absent intracellular
• WASp per immunoblot/ELISA
• WAS gene sequencing

• Supportive care
• Platelet transfusion
• Antifibrinolytics
• Splenectomy (not
recommended)

PLATELET GRANULES DEFECTS (δ-­GRANULES)
Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome Autosomal recessive
(HPS)
HPS1–10 (HPS1, AP3B1, HPS3,
HPS4, HPS5, HPS6, DTNBP1,
BLOC1S3, BLOC1S6, and AP3D1)

Chediak-­Higashi syndrome
(CHS)

Autosomal recessive
LYST (1q42 – 1q42.2)

PLATELET CYTOSKELETAL DEFECTS
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
X-­linked
(WAS) / X-­linked
WAS (Xp11.23 – p11.22) encoding
thrombocytopenia
WAS protein

ARPC1B deficiency

Autosomal recessive
ARPC1B (7q22.1)

• Small platelets
• Inflammatory disease, recurrent
infections, small vessel vasculitis,
abnormal platelet function
• Decreased/absent intracellular
• ARPC1B per immunoblot
• ARPC1B gene sequencing

• Supportive care
• Antifibrinolytics
• Platelet transfusion

MYH9-­related disease
(MYH9-­RD)

Autosomal dominant
MYH9 (22q12–13) encoding
nonmuscle myosin heavy chain IIA

• Thrombocytopenia
• Large platelets
• Döhle-­like inclusions in
neutrophils
• Myosin IIA aggregates in
neutrophils -­immunofluorescence
microscopy
• Variable degree of renal disease,
sensorineural hearing loss,
presenile cataract

• Supportive care
• Platelet transfusion
• Antifibrinolytics
• THPO receptor agonists

VWF, Von Willebrand factor; HPA, human platelet antigen; ADP, adenosine diphosphate; TEM, transmission electron microscopy; EM, electron microscopy; ELISA, enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay; DDAVP, desmopressin; THPO, thrombopoietin.
Modified from Al-­Huniti A, Kahr WHA. Inherited platelet disorders: diagnosis and management. Transfu Med Rev 2020;34:277–285. Table 1.

syndrome. An antinuclear antibody should be considered in adolescents, especially with other features of SLE (see Chapter 199).

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The well-­appearing child with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia, an
otherwise normal complete blood cell count (CBC), and normal exam
findings has a limited differential diagnosis that includes exposure to
medication inducing drug-­dependent antibodies, splenic sequestration
because of previously unappreciated portal hypertension, and, rarely, early

aplastic processes, such as Fanconi anemia (see Chapter 517). Other than
congenital thrombocytopenia syndromes (see Chapter 533.8), such as
thrombocytopenia–absent radius (TAR) syndrome and MYH9-­related
thrombocytopenia, most marrow processes that interfere with platelet
production eventually cause abnormal synthesis of red blood cells (RBCs)
and WBCs and therefore manifest diverse abnormalities on the CBC. Disorders that cause increased platelet destruction on a nonimmune basis
are usually serious systemic illnesses with obvious clinical findings such
as hemolytic-­uremic syndrome (HUS) and disseminated intravascular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders
Table 533.3  Classification of Fetal and Neonatal
Thrombocytopenias*
Fetal

Alloimmune thrombocytopenia
Congenital infection (CMV,
toxoplasma, rubella, HIV,
syphilis)
Aneuploidy (trisomy 18, 13, or
21, triploidy, Turner syndrome)
Autoimmune condition
(maternal ITP, SLE)
Severe Rh hemolytic disease
Congenital/inherited
(Wiskott-­Aldrich, Noonan,
Cornelia deLange, Jacobsen
syndromes)

Early-­onset neonatal (<72 hr)

Placental insufficiency (PET,
IUGR, diabetes)
Perinatal asphyxia
Perinatal infection (Escherichia
coli, GBS, herpes simplex)
DIC
Alloimmune thrombocytopenia
Autoimmune condition
(maternal ITP, SLE)
Congenital infection (CMV,
toxoplasma, rubella, HIV)
Thrombosis (aortic, renal vein)
Bone marrow disease (congenital
leukemia, HLH)
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
Metabolic disease (propionic and
methylmalonic acidemia)
Congenital/inherited (TAR,
CAMT)

Late-­onset neonatal (>72 hr)

Late-­onset sepsis
NEC
Congenital infection (CMV,
toxoplasma, rubella, HIV)
Autoimmune
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
Metabolic disease (propionic and
methylmalonic acidemia)
Congenital/inherited (TAR, CAMT)

*The most common conditions are shown in bold.
CAMT, Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia; CMV, cytomegalovirus; DIC,
disseminated intravascular coagulation; GBS, group B streptococcus; HIV, human
immunodeficiency virus; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; ITP, immune
thrombocytopenic purpura; IUGR, intrauterine growth restriction; NEC, necrotizing
enterocolitis; PET, preeclampsia; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TAR,
thrombocytopenia with absent radii.
From Roberts I, Murray NA. Neonatal thrombocytopenia: causes and management.
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2003;88:F359–F364.

coagulation (DIC) (see Fig. 533.2, and Table 532.1 in Chapter 532).
Patients receiving heparin may develop heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia. Isolated enlargement of the spleen suggests the potential for hypersplenism caused by liver disease or portal vein thrombosis. Autoimmune
thrombocytopenia may be an initial manifestation of SLE, HIV infection,

3053

WELL
Large platelets
Normal hemoglobin
and WBC

Small platelets
Congenital anomalies
n Mean corpuscular volume

Consumption

p Synthesis

Immune

Congenital

ITP
2° to SLE, HIV
Drug-induced

TAR
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
X-linked
Amegakaryocytic
Fanconi anemia

Maternal ITP
NATP
Non-immune
2B or platelet-type VWD
Hereditary macrothrombocytopenia

Acquired
Medications
Toxins
Radiation

ILL
p Fibrinogen
n Fibrin degradation
products
Large platelets
Consumption
Microangiopathy
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
TTP
Disseminated intravascular
coagulation
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Respiratory distress
Thrombosis
UAC
Sepsis
Viral infection

Small platelets
HSM
Mass
pSynthesis
Malignancy
Storage disease

Sequestration
Hemangioma
Hypersplenism

Fig. 533.2 Differential diagnostic algorithm of childhood thrombo-

cytopenic syndromes. The syndromes initially are separated by their
clinical appearance. Clues leading to the diagnosis are shown in italics.
The mechanisms and common disorders leading to these findings are
shown in the lower part of the figure. Disorders that commonly affect
neonates are listed in the shaded boxes. HSM, Hepatosplenomegaly;
ITP, immune thrombocytopenia; NATP, neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenic purpura; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TAR, thrombocytopenia–absent radius; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura;
UAC, umbilical artery catheter; VWD, von Willebrand disease; WBC,
white blood cell. (From Scott JP. Bleeding and thrombosis. In Kliegman RM, ed. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 1996. p. 849; and Kliegman RM, Marcdante KJ,
Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 2006. p. 716.)

common variable immunodeficiency, and, rarely, lymphoma or autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome (WAS)
must be considered in young males found to have thrombocytopenia with
small platelets, particularly if there is a history of eczema and recurrent
infection (see Chapter 165.2). Bernard-­Soulier syndrome, on the other
hand, involves a macrothrombocytopenia. Gray platelet syndrome is usually associated with splenomegaly and pale-­colored platelets on peripheral
smear.

TREATMENT

A number of treatment options exist (Table 533.4), but there are no
current high-­quality data showing that treatment affects either short-­
or long-­term clinical outcome of ITP in children. Many patients with
new-­onset ITP have mild symptoms, with findings limited to petechiae
and purpura on the skin, despite severe thrombocytopenia. Compared
with untreated controls, treatment appears to be capable of inducing
a more rapid rise in platelet count to the presumed safe level of >20
× 109/L, although no data indicate that early therapy prevents ICH.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3054 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Antiplatelet antibodies bind to transfused platelets as well as they do
to autologous platelets. Thus platelet transfusion in ITP is usually contraindicated unless life-­threatening bleeding is present. Management
guidelines for ITP in children and adults reinforce existing emphasis on
prioritizing watchful waiting for spontaneous resolution or outpatient
therapy in the uncommon cases for which treatment is needed. Initial
approaches to the management of pediatric ITP include the following:
1.	No therapy other than education and counseling of the family and
patient for patients with minimal, mild, and moderate symptoms, as
defined earlier. This approach emphasizes the usually benign nature
of ITP and avoids the therapeutic roller coaster that ensues once interventional therapy is begun. This approach is much less costly, and
side effects are minimal. Observation is recommended for children
with no bleeding or only mild bleeding symptoms such as bruising
or petechiae.
2.	Treatment with either intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or corticosteroids, particularly for children who present with mucocutaneous bleeding. IVIG at a dose of 0.8-­1.0 g/kg/day for 1-­2 days induces
a rapid rise in platelet count (usually >20 × 109/L) in 95% of patients within 48 hours. IVIG appears to induce a response by downregulating Fc-­mediated phagocytosis of antibody-­coated platelets.
IVIG therapy is both expensive and time-­consuming and typically
requires inpatient admission. Additionally, after infusion, there is a
risk of headaches and vomiting, suggestive of IVIG-­induced aseptic
meningitis.
3.	Corticosteroid therapy has been used for many years to treat acute
and chronic ITP in adults and children. Doses of prednisone at 1-­4
mg/kg/day appear to induce a more rapid rise in platelet count than

in untreated patients with ITP. Corticosteroid therapy is usually
continued for a short course (approximately 5 days) until a rise in
platelet count to >20 × 109/L has been achieved to avoid the long-­
term side effects of corticosteroid therapy, especially growth failure,
diabetes mellitus, and osteoporosis.
Each of these medications may also be used to treat subsequent ITP
exacerbations/recurrences, which usually occur several weeks after an
initial course of therapy in 5–10% of patients. In the special case of
ICH, multiple modalities should be used, including platelet transfusion
(although not recommended in other bleeding manifestations), IVIG,
high-­dose corticosteroids, and prompt consultation by neurosurgery
and general surgery (splenectomy).
Patients who are bleeding significantly (<5% of children with ITP)
should be treated. ICH remains rare, and there are no data showing
that treatment actually reduces its incidence. Mucosal bleeding in particular is the most significant in terms of predicting severe bleeding,
but specific predictive indices, such as positive or negative predictive
values, are not currently well established.
The role of splenectomy in ITP should be reserved for one of two
circumstances: (1) the older child (≥4 years) with severe ITP that
has lasted >1 year (chronic ITP) and whose symptoms are not easily controlled with therapy and/or (2) when life-­threatening hemorrhage (e.g., ICH) complicates acute ITP if the platelet count cannot be
corrected rapidly with transfusion of platelets and administration of
IVIG and corticosteroids. Splenectomy is associated with a lifelong risk
of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection caused by encapsulated
organisms, increased risk of thrombosis, and the potential development of pulmonary hypertension in adulthood. As an alternative to
splenectomy, rituximab has been used in children to treat chronic ITP.
In 30–40% of children, rituximab has induced a partial or complete
remission. TPO receptor agonists have also been used to increase platelet count and are approved for pediatric use.

CHRONIC AUTOIMMUNE THROMBOCYTOPENIC
PURPURA

A

B

Fig. 533.3 Blood and marrow aspirate from child with immune throm-

bocytopenia. A, Blood smear shows large platelets. B, Bone marrow
aspirate shows increased numbers of megakaryocytes, many of which
appear immature. (From Blanchette V, Bolton-­Maggs P: Childhood immune thrombocytopenic purpura: diagnosis and management. Pediatr
Clin North Am 2008;55:393–420. Fig 4.)

Approximately 20% of patients who present with acute ITP have persistent thrombocytopenia for >12 months and are said to have chronic
ITP. At that time, a careful reevaluation for associated disorders should
be performed, especially for autoimmune disease (e.g., SLE), chronic
infectious disorders (e.g., HIV), and nonimmune causes of chronic
thrombocytopenia, such as type 2B and platelet-­type von Willebrand
disease (VWD), X-­linked thrombocytopenia, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, common variable immunodeficiency syndrome,
autosomal macrothrombocytopenia, and WAS. The presence of coexisting H. pylori and hepatitis C infection should be considered and, if
found, treated. Therapy should be aimed at controlling symptoms and

Table 533.4  Treatment Options for Immune Thrombocytopenia (ITP)
PROS

CONS

COST

Observation

Does not expose patient to
unnecessary medications

May increase parent and physician
anxiety

Relatively inexpensive

IVIG

Rapid response in most cases

IV administration, side effects

Expensive

Corticosteroids

Oral, effective in 70–80% of
patients, minimal side effects
with short courses

Side effects, may not affect long
term outcome

Inexpensive

Rituximab

Long-­term remission in 40–60% of
patients

IV administration, immune suppression, potential for reactivation of hepatitis

Very expensive

Splenectomy

Curative in 80% of patients

Requires surgery and anesthesia,
lifelong risk of infection

Expensive

Thrombopoietin receptor agonists

Potential for oral administration,
40–60% of patients respond

Not curative, usually required long
term, can cause elevated liver
enzymes

Very expensive

IV, Intravenous; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin.
Adapted from Flood VH, Scott JP. Bleeding and thrombosis. In: Kliegman R, Lye P, Bordini B, et al. eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders
preventing serious bleeding. In ITP, the spleen is the primary site of
both antiplatelet antibody synthesis and platelet destruction. Splenectomy is successful in inducing complete remission in 64–88% of children with chronic ITP. This effect must be balanced against the lifelong
risk of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection and/or thrombosis.
This decision is often affected by quality-­of-­life issues, as well as the
ease with which the child can be managed using medical therapy, such
as IVIG, corticosteroids, IV anti-­D, or rituximab. Two effective agents
that act to stimulate thrombopoiesis, romiplostim and eltrombopag
(see Fig. 533.1), are approved to treat adults and children with chronic
ITP. Although these do not address the mechanism of action of ITP,
the increase in platelet count may be enough to compensate for the
increased destruction and allow the patient to have resolution of bleeding and maintain a platelet count >50 × 109/L.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

533.2 Drug-­Induced Thrombocytopenia
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
A number of drugs are associated with immune thrombocytopenia
as the result of either an immune process or megakaryocyte injury.
Some common drugs used in pediatrics that cause thrombocytopenia
include valproic acid, phenytoin, carbamazepine, sulfonamides, vancomycin, and trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole. Most of these drugs
may affect platelet function as well as the count itself. Heparin-­induced
thrombocytopenia (and rarely an associated thrombosis) is seldom
seen in pediatrics, but it occurs when, after exposure to heparin, the
patient has an antibody directed against the heparin–platelet factor 4
complex. Recommended treatment for heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia includes direct thrombin inhibitors such as argatroban or bivalirudin and removal of all sources of heparin, including central venous
catheter line flushes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3055

form is more common and usually presents in adults and occasionally
in adolescents. Microvascular thrombi within the CNS cause subtle,
shifting neurologic signs that vary from changes in affect and orientation to aphasia, blindness, and seizures. Initial manifestations are
often nonspecific (weakness, pain, emesis), and prompt recognition of
this disorder is critical. Laboratory findings provide important clues to
the diagnosis and show microangiopathic hemolytic anemia characterized by morphologically abnormal RBCs, with schistocytes, spherocytes, helmet cells, and an elevated reticulocyte count in association
with thrombocytopenia. Coagulation studies are usually nondiagnostic.
Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine are sometimes elevated. The treatment of acquired TTP is plasmapheresis (plasma exchange), which is
effective in 80–95% of patients. Treatment with plasmapheresis should
be instituted on the basis of thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia even if other symptoms are not yet present because
of the high mortality (80–90%) in patients without timely intervention.
Rituximab, corticosteroids, and splenectomy are reserved for refractory
cases. Caplacizumab, an anti-­VWF humanized immunoglobulin, blocks
the interaction of ultralarge (i.e., most likely to bind platelets) VWF multimers with platelets, and many result in rapid resolution of acute TTP.
The majority of cases of TTP are acquired, caused by an autoantibody-­
mediated deficiency of ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif member 13) that is responsible
for cleaving the high-­molecular-­weight multimers of VWF and appears
to play a pivotal role in the evolution of the thrombotic microangiopathy (Fig. 533.4) that results in a preponderance of ultralarge multimers that more adeptly bind platelets, triggering the microangiopathy. In
contrast, levels of ADAMTS13 in HUS are usually normal.
Congenital ADAMTS13 deficiency causes rare familial cases of
TTP/HUS, usually manifested as recurrent episodes of thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, jaundice, and renal involvement, with or without neurologic changes, that often present in infancy in the context of
an intercurrent illness. Treatment of hereditary TTP with recombinant
ADAMTS13 has been successful when patients are refractory to fresh
frozen plasma therapy. Abnormalities of the complement system have
now also been implicated in rare cases of familial TTP. ADAMTS13
deficiency can be treated by repeated infusions of fresh-­frozen plasma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

533.3 Nonimmune Platelet Destruction
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
The syndromes of DIC (see Chapter 532), HUS (see Chapter 560.5),
and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (see Chapter 533.5) share
the hematologic picture of a thrombotic microangiopathy in which
there exists RBC destruction and consumptive thrombocytopenia
caused by platelet and fibrin deposition in the microvasculature. The
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia is characterized by the presence of
RBC fragments, including helmet cells, schistocytes, spherocytes, and
burr cells.

533.4 Hemolytic-­Uremic Syndrome
See Chapter 560.5.

533.5 Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic
Purpura
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is a rare thrombotic
microangiopathy characterized by the pentad of fever, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, abnormal renal function,
and central nervous system (CNS) changes; TTP is clinically similar
to HUS (Table 533.5). Although TTP can be congenital, the acquired

533.6 Kasabach-­Merritt Syndrome
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
See also Chapter 691.
The association of a giant hemangioma with localized intravascular coagulation causing consumptive thrombocytopenia and hypofibrinogenemia is called Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome. In most patients,
the site of the hemangioma is obvious, but retroperitoneal and intra-­
abdominal hemangiomas may require body imaging for detection.
Platelet trapping and activation of coagulation occurs inside the hemangioma, with fibrinogen consumption and generation of fibrin(ogen)
degradation products. Arteriovenous malformation within the lesions
can cause heart failure. Pathologically, Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
appears to develop more often as a result of a kaposiform hemangioendothelioma or tufted hemangioma rather than a simple hemangioma.
The peripheral blood smear shows microangiopathic changes.
Multiple modalities have been used to treat Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome, including propranolol, surgical excision (if possible), laser
photocoagulation, high-­dose corticosteroids, local radiation therapy,
antiangiogenic agents such as interferon-­α2, and vincristine. Over
time, most patients who present in infancy have regression of the hemangioma. Treatment of the associated coagulopathy may benefit from a
trial of antifibrinolytic therapy with ε-­aminocaproic acid (Amicar) or
anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3056 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 533.5  ADAMTS13 Deficiency and Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura
DISEASE

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP)

Acquired: Ab to ADAMTS13
Congenital: Inadequate
ADAMTS13 production

LAB FINDINGS
Ab to ADAMTS13
ADAMTS13 <10%

MANAGEMENT
Acquired: Plasmapheresis with
plasma
Congenital: Scheduled plasma
infusions

Autoimmune TTP may be transient, recurrent, drug (ticlopidine, clopidogrel) associated, or seen in some pregnancy-­associated cases of TTP.
ADAMTS13 pathogenic variants are often familial and chronic-­relapsing RRP.

Blood Flow
Platelet GPIb
ADAMTS13

VWF
Subendothelium

Fig. 533.4 Pathogenesis of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura

(TTP). The von Willebrand factor (VWF) multimers facilitate platelet adhesion to the subendothelium by binding to exposed connective tissue
and then to platelet glycoprotein Ib (GPIb). In flowing blood shear stress
unfolds ultralarge VWF multimers in the platelet-­rich thrombus and enables ADAMTS13 to cleave a specific Tyr-­Met bond in the second of
the three A domains in VWF subunits. Cleavage reduces VWF multimer
size and limits thrombus growth. In the absence of ADAMTS13, VWF-­
dependent platelet accumulation continues and eventually results in
microvascular thrombosis and TTP. (Courtesy Dr. J. Evan Sadler, Washington University.)

533.7 Sequestration
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Thrombocytopenia develops in individuals with massive splenomegaly, such as those with portal vein thrombosis or liver disease, because
the spleen acts as a reservoir for platelets and may sequester a large
number of them. Most such patients also have mild leukopenia and
anemia on CBC. Individuals who have thrombocytopenia caused by
splenic sequestration should undergo a workup to diagnose the etiology of splenomegaly, including infectious, inflammatory, infiltrative,
neoplastic, obstructive, and hemolytic causes.

533.8 Congenital Thrombocytopenic
Syndromes
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
See Table 533.2.
Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT) usually
manifests within the first few days to week of life, when the child presents with petechiae and purpura caused by profound thrombocytopenia. CAMT is caused by a rare defect in hematopoiesis as a result of
pathogenic variants in the MPL gene that encodes the stem cell TPO
receptor. Other than skin and mucous membrane abnormalities, findings on physical examination are normal. Examination of the bone
marrow shows an absence of megakaryocytes. These patients often
progress to marrow failure (aplasia). Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is curative.

Thrombocytopenia–absent radius (TAR) syndrome consists of
thrombocytopenia (absence or hypoplasia of megakaryocytes) that
presents in early infancy with bilateral radial anomalies of variable
severity, ranging from mild changes to marked limb shortening (Fig.
533.5). Many such individuals also have other skeletal abnormalities
of the ulna, radius, and lower extremities. Present thumbs help to differentiate this disorder from Fanconi anemia. Intolerance to cow’s milk
formula (present in 50%) may complicate management by triggering
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, increased thrombocytopenia, eosinophilia, and a leukemoid reaction. The thrombocytopenia of TAR syndrome frequently remits over the first few years of life. The molecular
basis of TAR syndrome is linked to RBM8A. A few patients have been
reported to have a syndrome of amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia with radioulnar synostosis caused by a pathogenic variant in the
HOXA11 gene. In contrast to TAR syndrome, this clinical disorder
presents with marrow aplasia.
WAS is characterized by microthrombocytopenia, with tiny platelets, eczema, and recurrent infection as a consequence of immune deficiency (see Chapter 165.2). WAS is inherited as an X-­linked disorder,
and the gene implicated in WAS has been identified. The WAS protein
appears to play an integral role in regulating the cytoskeletal architecture of both platelets and T lymphocytes in response to receptor-­
mediated cell signaling. The WAS protein is common to all cells of
hematopoietic lineage. Molecular analysis of families with X-­linked
thrombocytopenia has shown that many affected members have a single nucleotide pathogenic variant within the WAS gene, whereas individuals with the full manifestation of WAS have large gene deletions.
Examination of the bone marrow in WAS shows the normal number of
megakaryocytes, although they may have bizarre morphologic features.
Transfused platelets have a normal life span in these patients. Splenectomy often corrects the thrombocytopenia, suggesting that the platelets formed in WAS have accelerated destruction. After splenectomy,
these patients are at increased risk for overwhelming infection and
require lifelong antibiotic prophylaxis against encapsulated organisms.
Approximately 5–15% of patients with WAS develop lymphoreticular
malignancies (involving mostly leukemias and lymphomas). Successful
HSCT from an unaffected donor cures WAS. X-­linked macrothrombocytopenia and dyserythropoiesis have been linked to pathogenic
variants in GATA1, which encodes an erythroid and megakaryocytic
transcription factor.
MYH9-­related thrombocytopenias include a number of diverse
hereditary thrombocytopenia syndromes (e.g., Sebastian, Epstein,
May-­Hegglin, Fechtner) characterized by autosomal dominant macrothrombocytopenia, neutrophil inclusion bodies, and a variety of
physical anomalies, including sensorineural deafness, renal disease,
and eye disease. These have all been shown to be caused by different
pathogenic variants in the MYH9 gene (nonmuscle myosin-­IIa heavy
chain 9). The thrombocytopenia is usually mild and not progressive.
Some other individuals with recessively inherited macrothrombocytopenia have abnormalities in chromosome 22q11. Pathogenic variants
in the gene for glycoprotein Ibβ, an essential component of the platelet
VWF receptor, can result in Bernard-­Soulier syndrome (see Chapter
533.13), a macrothrombocytopenic disease. A diagnostic approach to
genetic platelet disorders is noted in Figure 533.6.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders

Fig. 533.5 A newborn, the first child of young, healthy parents, with

fully expressed thrombocytopenia–absent radius (TAR) syndrome, including hypereosinophilia and anemia. Hypoplasia of the distal humeri
and the shoulder girdles, bilateral hip dysplasia, mild talipes calcaneus,
and clinodactyly of both little fingers are seen. This patient had a pronounced allergy to cow’s milk, with exposure followed by diarrhea,
vomiting, and decreased weight and platelet count, making a cow’s
milk–free diet mandatory. A persistent depressed nasal bridge and development of pronounced bowed legs are seen. (From Wiedemann H-­
R, Kunze J, Grosse F-­R, eds. Clinical Syndromes, 3rd ed. [English translation]. London: Mosby-­Wolfe, 1997. p. 430.)

533.9 Neonatal Thrombocytopenia
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Thrombocytopenia in the newborn rarely is indicative of a primary
disorder of megakaryopoiesis. It is usually the result of systemic illness
or transfer of maternal antibodies directed against fetal platelets (see
Table 533.3). Neonatal thrombocytopenia often occurs in association
with congenital viral infections, especially rubella, cytomegalovirus,
protozoal infection (e.g., toxoplasmosis), and syphilis, and perinatal
bacterial infections, especially those caused by gram-­negative bacilli.

3057

Thrombocytopenia associated with DIC may be responsible for severe
spontaneous bleeding. The constellation of marked thrombocytopenia
and abnormal abdominal findings is common in necrotizing enterocolitis and other causes of necrotic bowel. Thrombocytopenia in an ill
child requires a prompt search for viral and bacterial pathogens.
Antibody-­
mediated thrombocytopenia in the newborn occurs
because of transplacental transfer of maternal antibodies directed
against fetal platelets. Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
(NAIT) is caused by the development of maternal antibodies against
paternally inherited antigens present on fetal platelets that are recognized as foreign by the maternal immune system. The incidence of
NATP is 1/4,000-­5,000 live births. The clinical manifestations of NAIT
are those of an apparently well child who, within the first few days after
delivery, has generalized petechiae and purpura. Laboratory studies
show a normal maternal platelet count but moderate to severe thrombocytopenia in the newborn. Detailed review of the history should
show no evidence of maternal thrombocytopenia. Up to 30% of infants
with severe NAIT may have ICH, either prenatally or in the perinatal
period. Unlike Rh disease, first pregnancies may be severely affected.
Subsequent pregnancies are often more severely affected than the first.
The diagnosis of NAIT is made by checking for the presence of
maternal alloantibodies directed against the father’s platelets. Specific
studies can be done to identify the target alloantigen. The most common cause is incompatibility for the platelet alloantigen HPA-­1a. Specific DNA sequence polymorphisms have been identified that permit
informative prenatal testing to identify at-­risk pregnancies. The differential diagnosis of NAIT includes transplacental transfer of maternal
IgG antiplatelet autoantibodies (maternal ITP), and, more commonly,
viral or bacterial infection.
Treatment of NAIT requires the administration of IVIG prenatally to the mother if the status is known before birth. Therapy usually begins in the second trimester and is continued throughout the
pregnancy. Fetal platelet count can be monitored by percutaneous
umbilical blood sampling. Delivery should be performed by cesarean
section to reduce risk for ICH from vaginal delivery. After delivery,
if severe thrombocytopenia persists, transfusion of platelets that share
the maternal alloantigens (e.g., washed maternal platelets) will cause a
rise in platelet counts to provide effective hemostasis. However, a random donor platelet transfusion is more likely to be readily available.
Some centers have units available that may lack the antigens most often
involved. After there has been one affected child, genetic counseling is
critical to inform the parents of the high risk of thrombocytopenia in
subsequent pregnancies.
Children born to mothers with immune thrombocytopenic purpura
(maternal ITP) appear to have a lower risk of serious hemorrhage
than infants born with NAIT, although severe thrombocytopenia may
occur. The mother’s preexisting platelet count may have some predictive value in that severe maternal thrombocytopenia before delivery
appears to predict a higher risk of fetal thrombocytopenia. In mothers
who have had splenectomy for ITP, the maternal platelet count may be
normal and is not predictive of fetal thrombocytopenia.
Treatment includes prenatal administration of corticosteroids to the
mother and IVIG and sometimes corticosteroids to the infant after
delivery. Thrombocytopenia in an infant, whether a result of NAIT or
maternal ITP, usually resolves within 2-­4 months after delivery. The
period of highest risk is the immediate perinatal period.
Two syndromes of congenital failure of platelet production often
present in the newborn period. In CAMT the newborn manifests
petechiae and purpura shortly after birth. Findings on physical examination are otherwise normal. Megakaryocytes are absent from the
bone marrow. This syndrome is caused by a pathogenic variant in the
megakaryocyte TPO receptor that is essential for development of all
hematopoietic cell lines. Pancytopenia eventually develops, and HSCT
is curative. TAR syndrome consists of thrombocytopenia that presents in early infancy, with bilateral radial anomalies of variable severity,
ranging from mild changes to marked limb shortening. It frequently
remits over the first few years of life (see Chapter 533.8 and Fig. 533.5).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3058 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
When IPD is suspected

Decreased platelet count

Small
platelet
size

WAS
XLT

Normal platelet count

Large
platelet
size

Normal
platelet
size

BM
failure

Bony
defect

Storage pool
deficiency
(a-granule)

Erythroid
dysplasia

Nephritis
SNHL

Platelet
adhesion
defect

Storage pool
deficiency
(a-granule)

Platelet
aggregation
defect

Storage pool
deficiency
(dense-granule)

CAMT

RUSAT
TAR

QPD

XLTDA

MYH9

BSS
Pseudo-vWD
22q11 del

GPS
JS/PTS

GT

HPS
CHS

Fig. 533.6 Diagnostic algorithm for sequence and flow in inherited platelet disorders (IPDs). BM, bone marrow; WAS, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome; XLT, X-­linked thrombocytopenia; CAMT, congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia; RUSAT, radioulnar synostosis with amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia; TAR, thrombocytopenia-­absent radius; QPD, Quebec platelet disorder; XLTDA, X-­linked thrombocytopenia with or without dyserythropoietic anemia; MYH9, MYH9-­related disorders; BSS, Bernard-­Soulier syndrome; vWD, von Willebrand disease; 22q11 del, 22q11
deletion syndrome; GPS, gray platelet syndrome; JS, Jacobsen syndrome; PTS, Paris-­Trousseau syndrome; GT, Glanzmann thrombasthenia; HPS,
Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome; CHS, Chediak-­Higashi syndrome. (From Shim YJ. Genetic classification and confirmation of inherited platelet disorders: current status in Korea. CEP 2020;63:79–87. Fig. 2.)

533.10 Thrombocytopenia From Acquired
Disorders Causing Decreased
Production
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Disorders of the bone marrow that inhibit megakaryopoiesis usually
affect RBC and WBC production. Infiltrative disorders, including malignancies, such as acute lymphocytic leukemia, histiocytosis, lymphomas,
and storage disease, usually cause either abnormalities on physical examination (lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, or masses), abnormalities of the WBC count, or anemia. Aplastic processes may present as
isolated thrombocytopenia, although there are usually clues on the CBC
(leukopenia, neutropenia, anemia, or macrocytosis). Children with constitutional aplastic anemia (Fanconi anemia) often (but not always) have
abnormalities on examination, including radial and/or thumb anomalies, other skeletal anomalies, short stature, microcephaly, and hyperpigmentation. Bone marrow examination should be performed when
thrombocytopenia is associated with abnormalities found on physical
examination or on examination of the other blood cell lines.

533.11 Platelet Function Disorders

either collagen-­epinephrine or collagen-­ADP. Results are reported as
the closure time in seconds. The use of the PFA-­100 as a screening test
remains controversial. For patients with a positive history of bleeding
suggestive of VWD or platelet dysfunction, specific VWF testing and
platelet function studies should be done, irrespective of the results of
the bleeding time or PFA-­100.
Platelet function in the clinical laboratory is measured using platelet
aggregometry. In the aggregometer, agonists, such as collagen, ADP, ristocetin, epinephrine, arachidonic acid, and thrombin (or the thrombin
receptor peptide), are added to platelet-­rich plasma, and the clumping
of platelets over time is measured by an automated machine through
either light transmission or electric impedance. At the same time, other
instruments measure the release of granular contents, such as ATP,
from the platelets after activation. The ability of platelets to aggregate
and their metabolic activity can thus be assessed simultaneously. When
a patient is being evaluated for possible platelet dysfunction, it is critically important to exclude the presence of other exogenous agents and
to study the patient, if possible, off all medications for 2 weeks, especially those with any potential antiplatelet effects. Further evaluation
using flow cytometric analysis of surface receptors or molecular and/or
genetic testing is often necessary to make a more definitive diagnosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
There is no simple and reliable test to screen for abnormal platelet
function. Bleeding time and the platelet function analyzer (PFA-­100)
have been used, but neither has sufficient sensitivity or specificity to
rule in or rule out a platelet defect, especially one with mild-­moderate
phenotypic expression. Bleeding time measures the interaction of
platelets with the blood vessel wall and thus is affected by both platelet count and platelet function. The predictive value of bleeding time
is problematic because bleeding time is dependent on other factors,
including the technician’s skill and the patient’s cooperation, often a
challenge in the infant or young child; it is not recommended in high
resource settings. The PFA-­100 measures platelet adhesion and aggregation in whole blood at high shear when the blood is exposed to

533.12 Acquired Disorders of Platelet
Function
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
A number of systemic illnesses are associated with platelet dysfunction, most frequently liver disease, kidney disease (uremia), and disorders that trigger increased amounts of fibrin degradation products.
These disorders frequently cause prolonged bleeding time and are often
associated with other abnormalities of the coagulation mechanism.
The most important element of management is to treat the primary illness. If treatment of the primary process is not feasible, infusions of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders
desmopressin have been helpful in augmenting hemostasis and correcting bleeding time. In some patients, transfusions of platelets and
cryoprecipitate have also been helpful in improving hemostasis.
Many medications alter platelet function. The most common drug in
adults that alters platelet function is acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin). Aspirin irreversibly acetylates the enzyme cyclooxygenase, which is critical
in the formation of thromboxane A2. Aspirin usually causes moderate
platelet dysfunction that becomes more prominent if there is another
abnormality of the hemostatic mechanism. In children, common drugs
that reversibly inhibit platelet function include other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), valproic acid, and high-­dose penicillin.
Specific agents to inhibit platelet function therapeutically include those
that block the platelet ADP receptor (clopidogrel) and αIIb-­β3 receptor
antagonists, as well as aspirin.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

533.13 Congenital Abnormalities of Platelet
Function
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Severe platelet function defects usually present with petechiae and
purpura shortly after birth, especially after vaginal delivery (see Table
533.2). Defects in the platelet GPIb complex (the VWF receptor) or
the αIIb-­β3 complex (the fibrinogen receptor) cause severe congenital
platelet dysfunction. Although laboratory tests of platelet function are
available, molecular characterization by genetic testing is rapidly progressing for platelet disorders.
Bernard-­S oulier syndrome, a severe congenital platelet function disorder, is caused by absence or severe deficiency of the
GPIb complex (VWF receptor) on the platelet membrane. This
syndrome is characterized by a macrothrombocytopenia, with
giant platelets and greatly prolonged bleeding time (>20 min) or
PFA-­1 00 closure time. Patients may have significant mucocutaneous and GI bleeding. Platelet aggregation tests classically demonstrate absent ristocetin-­induced platelet aggregation but normal
aggregation to all other agonists. Ristocetin induces the binding

3059

of VWF to platelets and agglutinates platelets. Results of studies of VWF antigen and activity are normal. The GPIb complex
interacts with the platelet cytoskeleton; a defect in this interaction
is believed to be the cause of the large platelet size. This receptor deficiency can also be detected by flow cytometry. Bernard-­
Soulier syndrome is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder.
Causative pathogenic variants are usually identified in the genes
encoding the GPIb complex of glycoproteins Ibα, Ibβ, V, and IX.
Glanzmann thrombasthenia is a congenital disorder associated with
severe platelet dysfunction that yields prolonged bleeding time and a
normal platelet count. Platelets have normal size and morphologic features on the peripheral blood smear, and closure times for PFA-­100 or
bleeding time are extremely abnormal. Aggregation studies classically
demonstrate abnormal or absent aggregation with all agonists used
except ristocetin because ristocetin agglutinates platelets and does not
require a metabolically active platelet. This disorder is caused by deficiency of the platelet fibrinogen receptor αIIb-­β3, the major integrin
complex on the platelet surface that undergoes conformational changes
by inside-­out signaling when platelets are activated. This receptor deficiency can also be detected by flow cytometry. Fibrinogen binds to this
complex when the platelet is activated and causes platelets to aggregate.
Glanzmann thrombasthenia is caused by pathogenic variants in the
genes for αIIb or β3 and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
For both Bernard-­Soulier syndrome and Glanzmann thrombasthenia,
the diagnosis is confirmed by flow cytometry of the patient’s platelet glycoproteins. Bleeding in Glanzmann thrombasthenia may be quite severe
and is typically mucocutaneous, including epistaxis, gingival, and GI
bleeding. There are reports of curative therapy using stem cell transplant.
Hereditary deficiency of platelet storage granules occurs in two
well-­characterized but rare syndromes that involve deficiency of
intracytoplasmic granules. Dense granule deficiency is characterized by absence of the granules that contain ADP, ATP, Ca2+, and
serotonin. This disorder is diagnosed by the finding that ATP is not
released on platelet aggregation studies and ideally is characterized
by transmission electron microscopic studies. Hermansky-­Pudlak
syndrome (with nine subtypes) is a dense granule deficiency caused
by defects in lysosomal storage. Affected patients present with
oculocutaneous albinism and hemorrhage caused by the platelet
defect; some patients also develop granulomatous colitis resembling

Table 533.6  Comparison of Nine Types of Hermansky-­Pudlak Syndrome
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Oculocutaneous
albinism

Variable,
mild-­
moderate:
brown to
white hair

Severe: lack of
hair and iris
pigment

Mild-­
moderate:
light skin
pigment

Severe:
blonde
hair, gray
iris

Variable:
light-­
brown hair,
brown iris

Variable: iris
heterochromia

Variable

Variable:
tan skin,
silver hair,
brown iris

Pale skin,
silver-­
blonde
hair, pale-­
blue iris

Platelet
defect/
bruising

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Granulomatous colitis

+

−

−

+

−

+

+

−

−

Pulmonary
fibrosis/
ILD

+

+

−

+

−

−

−

−

−

Depression

High
cholesterol

Other
symptoms

Neutropenia
Failure to
thrive
Hypothyroidism
CAH

+, Present; −, absent; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; ILD, interstitial lung disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Cutaneous
infections

3060 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Crohn disease or pulmonary fibrosis/interstitial lung disease (Table
533.6). Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome also presents with a dense
granule defect, immune dysfunction, and albinism. Gray platelet
syndrome is caused by the absence of platelet α granules, resulting in large platelets that are large and appear gray on Wright stain
of peripheral blood. In this rare syndrome, aggregation and release
are absent with most agonists other than thrombin and ristocetin.
Transmission electron microscopic studies are diagnostic. Autosomal recessive gray platelet syndrome is caused by defects in the
NBEAL2 gene, while autosomal dominant disease is associated with
a pathogenic variant in GFI1B. This disorder may also be associated with familial leukemia. Quebec platelet syndrome is caused
by degradation of platelet α granules caused by defects in PLAU,
which encodes a urokinase-­type plasminogen activator. Treatment
usually involves antifibrinolytic therapy.

OTHER HEREDITARY DISORDERS OF PLATELET
FUNCTION

Abnormalities in the pathways of platelet signaling/activation and
release of granular contents cause a heterogeneous group of platelet
function defects that are usually manifested as increased bruising,
epistaxis, and menorrhagia. Symptoms may be subtle and are often
made more obvious by high-­risk surgery, such as tonsillectomy or
adenoidectomy, or by administration of NSAIDs. In the laboratory,
bleeding time is variable, and closure time as measured by the PFA-­
100 is frequently, but not always, prolonged. Platelet aggregation
studies show deficient aggregation with one or two agonists and/or
abnormal release of granular contents.
The formation of thromboxane from arachidonic acid (AA) after
the activation of phospholipase is critical to normal platelet function.
Deficiency or dysfunction of enzymes, such as cyclooxygenase and
thromboxane synthase, which metabolize AA, causes abnormal platelet function. In the aggregometer, platelets from such patients do not
aggregate in response to AA.
The most common platelet function defects are those characterized by variable bleeding time/PFA closure times and abnormal
aggregation with one or two agonists, usually ADP and/or collagen. Some of these individuals have only decreased release of ATP
from intracytoplasmic granules; the significance of this finding is
debated.

TREATMENT OF PATIENTS WITH PLATELET
DYSFUNCTION

Successful treatment depends on the severity of both the diagnosis and the hemorrhagic event. In all but severe platelet function
defects, desmopressin, 0.3 μg/kg intravenously, may be used for
mild to moderate bleeding episodes. In addition to its effect on
stimulating levels of VWF and factor VIII, desmopressin corrects
bleeding time and augments hemostasis in many individuals with
mild to moderate platelet function defects. Antifibrinolytic therapy
may be useful for mucosal bleeds. For individuals with Bernard-­
Soulier syndrome or Glanzmann thrombasthenia, platelet transfusions of 0.5-­1 unit single donor platelets correct the defect in
hemostasis and may be lifesaving. Rarely, alloantibodies develop to
the deficient platelet protein, rendering the patient refractory to the
transfused platelets. In such patients, the use of recombinant factor
VIIa has been effective, and this treatment was recently approved
for platelet-­refractory Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia. In both conditions, HSCT has been curative.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

533.14 Disorders of the Blood Vessels
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Disorders of the vessel walls or supporting structures mimic the findings of a bleeding disorder, although coagulation studies are usually

normal. The findings of petechiae and purpuric lesions in such patients
are often attributable to an underlying vasculitis or vasculopathy. Skin
biopsy can be particularly helpful in elucidating the type of vascular
pathology.

IgA VASCULITIS (HENOCH-­SCHÖNLEIN PURPURA)
See Chapter 210.1.

EHLERS-­DANLOS SYNDROME
See Chapter 744.

OTHER ACQUIRED DISORDERS

Scurvy, chronic corticosteroid therapy, and severe malnutrition are
associated with “weakening” of the collagen matrix that supports the
blood vessels. Therefore these factors are associated with easy bruising,
and, particularly in the case of scurvy, bleeding gums and loosening of
the teeth. Lesions of the skin that initially appear to be petechiae and
purpura may be seen in vasculitic syndromes, such as SLE. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis may present with nonthrombocytopenic purpura (see
Chapter 210). A unique variant of leukocytoclastic vasculitis is associated with exercise.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 8

The Spleen
Chapter 534

Anatomy and Function of
the Spleen
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
ANATOMY

The splenic precursor is recognizable by 5 weeks of gestation. At
birth, the spleen weighs approximately 11 g. Thereafter, it enlarges
until puberty, reaching an average weight of 150 g, and then diminishes in size during adulthood. Approximately 15% of patients will
have an accessory spleen. The major splenic components are a lymphoid compartment (white pulp) and a filtering system (red pulp).
The white pulp consists of periarterial lymphatic sheaths (PALS;
T-­zone) of T lymphocytes with embedded germinal centers containing B lymphocytes. The red pulp has a skeleton of fixed reticular
cells, mobile macrophages, partially collapsed endothelial passages
(cords of Billroth), and splenic sinuses. A perifollicular zone (PFZ)
(known as the marginal zone in murine models) is rich in dendritic
(antigen-­presenting) cells and natural killer cells and separates the
red pulp from the white pulp. The splenic capsule contains smooth
muscle and contracts in response to epinephrine. Approximately
10% of the blood delivered to the spleen flows rapidly through a
closed vascular network. The other 90% flows more slowly through
an open system (the splenic cords), where it is filtered through 1-­5
μm slits before entering the splenic sinuses.

FUNCTION

The unique anatomy and blood flow of the spleen enable it to perform reservoir, filtering, and immunologic functions. The spleen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3060 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Crohn disease or pulmonary fibrosis/interstitial lung disease (Table
533.6). Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome also presents with a dense
granule defect, immune dysfunction, and albinism. Gray platelet
syndrome is caused by the absence of platelet α granules, resulting in large platelets that are large and appear gray on Wright stain
of peripheral blood. In this rare syndrome, aggregation and release
are absent with most agonists other than thrombin and ristocetin.
Transmission electron microscopic studies are diagnostic. Autosomal recessive gray platelet syndrome is caused by defects in the
NBEAL2 gene, while autosomal dominant disease is associated with
a pathogenic variant in GFI1B. This disorder may also be associated with familial leukemia. Quebec platelet syndrome is caused
by degradation of platelet α granules caused by defects in PLAU,
which encodes a urokinase-­type plasminogen activator. Treatment
usually involves antifibrinolytic therapy.

OTHER HEREDITARY DISORDERS OF PLATELET
FUNCTION

Abnormalities in the pathways of platelet signaling/activation and
release of granular contents cause a heterogeneous group of platelet
function defects that are usually manifested as increased bruising,
epistaxis, and menorrhagia. Symptoms may be subtle and are often
made more obvious by high-­risk surgery, such as tonsillectomy or
adenoidectomy, or by administration of NSAIDs. In the laboratory,
bleeding time is variable, and closure time as measured by the PFA-­
100 is frequently, but not always, prolonged. Platelet aggregation
studies show deficient aggregation with one or two agonists and/or
abnormal release of granular contents.
The formation of thromboxane from arachidonic acid (AA) after
the activation of phospholipase is critical to normal platelet function.
Deficiency or dysfunction of enzymes, such as cyclooxygenase and
thromboxane synthase, which metabolize AA, causes abnormal platelet function. In the aggregometer, platelets from such patients do not
aggregate in response to AA.
The most common platelet function defects are those characterized by variable bleeding time/PFA closure times and abnormal
aggregation with one or two agonists, usually ADP and/or collagen. Some of these individuals have only decreased release of ATP
from intracytoplasmic granules; the significance of this finding is
debated.

TREATMENT OF PATIENTS WITH PLATELET
DYSFUNCTION

Successful treatment depends on the severity of both the diagnosis and the hemorrhagic event. In all but severe platelet function
defects, desmopressin, 0.3 μg/kg intravenously, may be used for
mild to moderate bleeding episodes. In addition to its effect on
stimulating levels of VWF and factor VIII, desmopressin corrects
bleeding time and augments hemostasis in many individuals with
mild to moderate platelet function defects. Antifibrinolytic therapy
may be useful for mucosal bleeds. For individuals with Bernard-­
Soulier syndrome or Glanzmann thrombasthenia, platelet transfusions of 0.5-­1 unit single donor platelets correct the defect in
hemostasis and may be lifesaving. Rarely, alloantibodies develop to
the deficient platelet protein, rendering the patient refractory to the
transfused platelets. In such patients, the use of recombinant factor
VIIa has been effective, and this treatment was recently approved
for platelet-­refractory Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia. In both conditions, HSCT has been curative.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

533.14 Disorders of the Blood Vessels
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Disorders of the vessel walls or supporting structures mimic the findings of a bleeding disorder, although coagulation studies are usually

normal. The findings of petechiae and purpuric lesions in such patients
are often attributable to an underlying vasculitis or vasculopathy. Skin
biopsy can be particularly helpful in elucidating the type of vascular
pathology.

IgA VASCULITIS (HENOCH-­SCHÖNLEIN PURPURA)
See Chapter 210.1.

EHLERS-­DANLOS SYNDROME
See Chapter 744.

OTHER ACQUIRED DISORDERS

Scurvy, chronic corticosteroid therapy, and severe malnutrition are
associated with “weakening” of the collagen matrix that supports the
blood vessels. Therefore these factors are associated with easy bruising,
and, particularly in the case of scurvy, bleeding gums and loosening of
the teeth. Lesions of the skin that initially appear to be petechiae and
purpura may be seen in vasculitic syndromes, such as SLE. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis may present with nonthrombocytopenic purpura (see
Chapter 210). A unique variant of leukocytoclastic vasculitis is associated with exercise.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 8

The Spleen
Chapter 534

Anatomy and Function of
the Spleen
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
ANATOMY

The splenic precursor is recognizable by 5 weeks of gestation. At
birth, the spleen weighs approximately 11 g. Thereafter, it enlarges
until puberty, reaching an average weight of 150 g, and then diminishes in size during adulthood. Approximately 15% of patients will
have an accessory spleen. The major splenic components are a lymphoid compartment (white pulp) and a filtering system (red pulp).
The white pulp consists of periarterial lymphatic sheaths (PALS;
T-­zone) of T lymphocytes with embedded germinal centers containing B lymphocytes. The red pulp has a skeleton of fixed reticular
cells, mobile macrophages, partially collapsed endothelial passages
(cords of Billroth), and splenic sinuses. A perifollicular zone (PFZ)
(known as the marginal zone in murine models) is rich in dendritic
(antigen-­presenting) cells and natural killer cells and separates the
red pulp from the white pulp. The splenic capsule contains smooth
muscle and contracts in response to epinephrine. Approximately
10% of the blood delivered to the spleen flows rapidly through a
closed vascular network. The other 90% flows more slowly through
an open system (the splenic cords), where it is filtered through 1-­5
μm slits before entering the splenic sinuses.

FUNCTION

The unique anatomy and blood flow of the spleen enable it to perform reservoir, filtering, and immunologic functions. The spleen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 535 u Splenomegaly

3061

receives 5–6% of the cardiac output but normally contains only 25
mL of blood. It can retain much more when it enlarges, leading to
cytopenias. Hematopoiesis in the red pulp is a major splenic function at 3-­6 months of fetal life but subsequently disappears. Splenic
hematopoiesis can be resumed in patients with myelofibrosis or
severe hemolytic anemia. Factor VIII, iron, plasmablasts, plasma
cells, and one third of the circulating platelet mass are sequestered
in the spleen and can be released by stress or epinephrine stimulation. Thrombocytosis and leukocytosis occur with loss of the
splenic reservoir function. A high platelet count after the loss of
splenic function or splenectomy is not associated with an increased
risk of thrombosis in children.
Slow blood flow past macrophages and through small openings
in the sinus walls facilitates the filtering functions of the spleen
removing any particles >1 micron in size from the circulation.
Excess membrane is removed from young red blood cells (RBCs)
and loss of this function is characterized by target cells, poikilocytosis, and decreased osmotic fragility. The spleen is the primary
site for destruction of old RBCs, and this function is assumed by
other reticuloendothelial cells after splenectomy. The spleen also
removes damaged/abnormal RBCs (e.g., spherocytes, antibody-­
coated RBCs) and damaged/senescent platelets. Intracytoplasmic
inclusions may be removed from RBCs without cell lysis. Functional or anatomic hyposplenia is characterized by continued circulation of cells containing nuclear remnants (Howell-­Jolly bodies),
denatured hemoglobin (Heinz bodies), and other debris in RBCs.
This debris may appear as “pits” on indirect microscopy.
The spleen plays a large role in host defense against infection.
Mechanical filtration occurs removing parasitized erythrocytes, as
well as unopsonized bacteria. The spleen is the largest lymphoid organ
in the body and contains almost half the body’s total immunoglobulin-­
producing B lymphocytes. The spleen processes foreign material to
stimulate production of opsonizing antibody. Upon antigenic challenge, B and T cells are developed in the spleen, with subsequent
release of immunoglobulins. Production of immune-­mediating proteins important in bacterial clearance occurs in the spleen including
complement, opsonins, properdin, and tuftsin. Thus young (nonimmune) or hyposplenic individuals are at increased risk for sepsis
caused by pneumococci and other encapsulated bacteria. The spleen
can also use phagocytosis to trap and destroy intracellular parasites.
The spleen has a minor role in antibody response to intramuscularly
or subcutaneously injected antigens but is required for early antibody
production after exposure to intravenous antigens. Additionally, the
spleen is important in the pathogenesis of immune-­mediated cytopenias (IMCs). Antibody-­coated platelets or erythrocytes are phagocytosed via mechanisms associated with splenic macrophages. The
spleen also serves as a reservoir for antibody producing plasma cells
involved in IMCs.

by palpating across the abdomen as the patient inspires deeply or
with the patient in the right lateral decubitus position. A splenic
edge felt more than 2 cm below the left costal margin is abnormal.
An enlarged spleen might descend into the pelvis; when splenomegaly is suspected, the abdominal examination should begin at a
lower starting point. Superficial abdominal venous distention may
be present when splenomegaly is a result of portal hypertension.
Patients may also complain of left upper quadrant pain as the spleen
enlarges. Radiologic detection or confirmation of splenic enlargement is done with ultrasonography, CT, MRI, positron emission
tomography, or technetium-­99m sulfur colloid scan. The latter also
assesses splenic function.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Splenomegaly may result from obstruction in the hepatic, portal, or
splenic veins leading to hypersplenism. Wilson disease (see Chapter
405.2), galactosemia (see Chapter 107.2), biliary atresia (see Chapter 404.1), and α1-­antitrypsin deficiency (see Chapter 405) may
result in hepatic inflammation, fibrosis, and vascular obstruction.
Congenital abnormalities (absence or hypoplasia) of the portal or
splenic veins may cause vascular obstruction. Septic omphalitis or
thrombophlebitis (spontaneous or as a result of umbilical venous
catheterization in neonates) may result in secondary obliteration
of these vessels. Splenic venous flow may be obstructed by masses
of sickled erythrocytes leading to infarction. When the spleen is
the site of vascular obstruction, splenectomy cures hypersplenism. However, because obstruction usually is in the hepatic or portal systems, portacaval shunting may be more helpful since both
portal hypertension and thrombocytopenia contribute to variceal
bleeding.

Chapter 535

Splenomegaly
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A soft, thin spleen is palpable in 15% of neonates, 10% of normal
children, and 5% of adolescents. In most individuals, the spleen
must be 2-­3 times its normal size before it is palpable. The spleen is
best examined when standing on the right side of a supine patient

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Table 535.1 lists specific causes of splenomegaly. A thorough history
with a focus on systemic complaints (e.g., fever, night sweats, malaise, weight loss) and a complete physical examination (with special
attention to lymphadenopathy, jaundice, hepatomegaly, rashes, joint
swelling, petechiae, ecchymoses), in combination with a complete
blood count and careful review of the peripheral smear, can help guide
diagnosis.

Pseudosplenomegaly

Abnormally long mesenteric connections may produce a wandering or ptotic spleen. An enlarged left lobe of the liver, a left upper
quadrant mass, or a splenic hematoma may be mistaken for splenomegaly. Splenic cysts may contribute to splenomegaly or mimic
it; these may be congenital (epidermoid) or acquired (pseudocyst)
after trauma or infarction. Cysts are usually asymptomatic and are
found on radiologic evaluation. Splenosis after splenic rupture or
an accessory spleen (present in 15% of normal individuals) may
also mimic splenomegaly; most are not palpable. The syndrome of
congenital polysplenism includes cardiac defects, left-­sided organ
anomalies, bilobed lungs, biliary atresia, and pseudosplenomegaly
(see Chapter 480.11).

Hypersplenism

Increased splenic function (sequestration or destruction of circulating cells) can result in peripheral blood cytopenias (thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, anemia), increased bone marrow activity, and
splenomegaly. It is usually secondary to another disease and may
be cured by treatment of the underlying condition or, if absolutely
necessary, may be moderated by splenectomy. Table 535.1 lists the
most common diseases associated with massive splenomegaly.

Congestive Splenomegaly

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3062 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 535.1  Differential Diagnosis of Splenomegaly by Pathophysiology
ANATOMIC LESIONS
Cysts, pseudocysts
Hamartomas
Polysplenia syndrome
Hemangiomas and lymphangiomas
Hematoma or rupture (traumatic)
Peliosis
HYPERPLASIA CAUSED BY HEMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Acute and Chronic Hemolysis*
Hemoglobinopathies (sickle cell disease in infancy with or without
sequestration crisis and sickle variants, thalassemia major, unstable
hemoglobins)‡
Erythrocyte membrane disorders (hereditary spherocytosis,
elliptocytosis, pyropoikilocytosis)
Erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies (severe G6PD deficiency, pyruvate
kinase deficiency)
Immune hemolysis (autoimmune and isoimmune hemolysis)
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Chronic Iron Deficiency
Extramedullary Hematopoiesis
Myeloproliferative diseases: CML, juvenile CML, myelofibrosis with
myeloid metaplasia, polycythemia vera
Osteopetrosis
Patients receiving granulocyte and granulocyte-­macrophage
colony-­stimulating factors
INFECTIONS†
Bacterial
Acute sepsis: Salmonella typhi, Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae type b, Staphylococcus aureus
Chronic infections: infective endocarditis, chronic meningococcemia,
brucellosis, tularemia, cat-­scratch disease
Local infections: splenic abscess (S. aureus, streptococci, less often
Salmonella spp., polymicrobial infection), pyogenic liver abscess
(anaerobic bacteria, gram-­negative enteric bacteria), cholangitis
Viral*
Acute viral infections
Congenital CMV, herpes simplex, rubella
Hepatitis A, B, and C; CMV
EBV
Viral hemophagocytic syndromes: CMV, EBV, HHV-­6
HIV‡
Spirochetal
Syphilis, especially congenital syphilis
Leptospirosis
Rickettsial
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Q fever
Typhus

Fungal/Mycobacterial
Miliary tuberculosis
Disseminated histoplasmosis
South American blastomycosis
Systemic candidiasis (in immunosuppressed patients)
Parasitic
Malaria‡
Toxoplasmosis, especially congenital
Toxocara canis, Toxocara cati (visceral larva migrans)
Leishmaniasis (kala-­azar)‡
Schistosomiasis (hepatic-­portal involvement)
Trypanosomiasis
Fascioliasis
Babesiosis
IMMUNOLOGIC AND INFLAMMATORY PROCESSES*
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Mixed connective tissue disease
Systemic vasculitis
Serum sickness
Drug hypersensitivity, especially to phenytoin
Graft-­versus-­host disease
Sjögren syndrome
Cryoglobulinemia
Amyloidosis
Sarcoidosis
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome‡
Castleman disease‡
Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease
Large granular lymphocytosis and neutropenia
Histiocytosis syndromes‡
Macrophage activation syndrome
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (genetic, acquired)‡
MALIGNANCIES
Primary: leukemia (acute, chronic)‡, lymphoma‡, angiosarcoma,
mastocytosis
Metastatic
STORAGE DISEASES
Lipidosis (Gaucher disease‡, Niemann-­Pick disease, infantile GM1
gangliosidosis)
Mucopolysaccharidoses (Hurler, Hunter-­type)
Mucolipidosis (I-­cell disease, sialidosis, multiple sulfatase deficiency,
fucosidosis)
Defects in carbohydrate metabolism: galactosemia, fructose
intolerance, glycogen storage disease IV
Sea-­blue histiocyte syndrome
Tangier disease
Wolman disease
Hyperchylomicronemia type I, IV
CONGESTIVE DISEASE*
Heart failure
Intrahepatic cirrhosis or fibrosis
Extrahepatic portal (thrombosis), splenic, and hepatic vein obstruction
(thrombosis, Budd-­Chiari syndrome)

*Common.
†Chronic or recurrent infection suggests underlying immunodeficiency.
‡Associated with hypersplenomegaly.
CML, Chronic myelogenous leukemia; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; HHV-­6, human herpesvirus 6; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 536 u Hyposplenism, Splenic Trauma, and Splenectomy

Chapter 536

Hyposplenism, Splenic
Trauma, and Splenectomy
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
HYPOSPLENISM

Congenital absence (asplenia) or underdevelopment (hyposplenia)
of the spleen is associated with complex cyanotic heart defects, dextrocardia, bilateral trilobed lungs, and heterotopic abdominal organs
(Ivemark syndrome; see Chapter 480.11). Patients with isolated congenital asplenia have pathogenic variants in RPSA in ∼40% of cases.
Right atrial isomerism (Ivemark syndrome), a form of heterotaxy, may
have asplenia associated with pathogenic variants of GDF1. Splenic
function is usually normal in children with congenital polysplenia.
Functional hyposplenism may occur in normal neonates, especially
premature infants. Children with sickle cell hemoglobinopathies (see
Chapter 511.1) may have splenic hypofunction as early as 6 months
of age. In this setting, the spleen eventually autoinfarcts and becomes
fibrotic and permanently nonfunctional. Functional hyposplenism
may also occur in malaria (see Chapter 334), after irradiation to the
left upper quadrant, and when the reticuloendothelial function of the
spleen is overwhelmed (as in severe hemolytic anemia or metabolic
storage disease). Thrombosis of the splenic/celiac arteries or splenic
vein is associated with functional hyposplenism. Splenic hypofunction
has been reported occasionally in patients with autoimmune diseases
(i.e., juvenile idiopathic arthritis, lupus, sarcoidosis), nephritis, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, chronic hepatitis, Pearson syndrome, Fanconi anemia, those with use of high-­dose corticosteroids,
and graft-­versus-­host disease (Table 536.1).
Splenic hypofunction is characterized by red blood cell (RBC)
inclusions in peripheral blood smears (Howell-­Jolly or Heinz bodies),
“pits” on interference microscopy, and poor uptake of technetium or
other spleen scans (Table 536.2 and Fig. 536.1). Reduced immunoglobulin M memory B cells may also be detected and is a risk factor
for overwhelming sepsis. Patients with functional hyposplenism or
asplenia are at increased risk for sepsis from encapsulated bacteria
and benefit from antibiotic prophylaxis and urgent evaluation when
febrile.

SPLENIC TRAUMA

Injury to the spleen may occur with abdominal trauma. Small splenic
capsular tears may cause abdominal or referred left shoulder pain as a
result of diaphragmatic irritation by blood. Larger tears result in more
severe blood loss, with similar pain and signs of hypovolemic shock.
Previously enlarged spleens (as in patients with infectious mononucleosis) are more likely to rupture with minor trauma. Patients with splenomegaly should avoid contact sports and other activities that increase
the risk of splenic trauma. CT scan with intravenous contrast is the
best imaging modality to assess splenic trauma in a hemodynamically
stable patient. In emergent situations extended focused assessment
with sonography in trauma (E-­FAST) should be considered as an initial evaluation, although the sensitivity and specificity in children is
variable.
Treatment of a small capsular injury should include careful observation with attention to changes in vital signs or abdominal findings,
serial hemoglobin determinations, and the availability of prompt surgical intervention if a patient's condition deteriorates (see Chapter 80).
RBC transfusion requirements should be minimal (<25 mL/kg/48 hr).
These patients are usually hospitalized for 10-­14 days and have their
activities restricted for months. Laparotomy, with or without splenectomy, is indicated for more marked abdominal bleeding, in patients
who have clinical instability or deterioration, or when other organ

3063

Table 536.1  Diseases Associated with Hyposplenism or
Splenic Atrophy
CONGENITAL FORMS
Normal and premature neonates
Isolated congenital hypoplasia
Ivemark syndrome
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal
dystrophy (APECED) syndrome
Hypoparathyroidism syndrome
Stormorken syndrome
Heterotaxia syndromes

AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Glomerulonephritis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Goodpasture syndrome
Sjögren syndrome
Polyarteritis nodosa
Thyroiditis
Sarcoidosis

GASTROINTESTINAL
DISORDERS
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Whipple disease
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Intestinal lymphangiectasia
Idiopathic chronic ulcerative
enteritis

INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Pneumococcal meningitis
HIV/AIDS
Malaria

HEPATIC DISORDERS
Active chronic hepatitis
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Hepatic cirrhosis and portal
hypertension
Alcoholism and alcoholic
hepatopathy
HEMATOLOGIC AND
ONCOLOGIC DISORDERS
Sickle cell disease (all genotypes)
Bone marrow transplantation
Chronic graft-­versus-­host disease
Acute leukemia
Chronic myeloproliferative
disorders
Fanconi syndrome
Splenic tumors
Mastocytosis

IATROGENIC FORMS
Exposure to methyldopa
High-­dose steroids
Total parenteral nutrition
Splenic irradiation
ALTERATION IN SPLENIC
CIRCULATION
Thrombosis of splenic artery
Thrombosis of splenic vein
Thrombosis of celiac artery
MISCELLANEOUS
Amyloidosis

From Di Sabatino A, Carsetti R, Corazza GR. Post-­splenectomy and hyposplenic states.
Lancet 2011;378:86–97.

damage is suspected. Partial splenectomy and splenic repair should
be substituted for total splenectomy when feasible to maintain some
splenic immune function. Nonoperative management is typically
possible in >90% of patients. Delayed splenic rupture is quite rare in
children.

SPLENECTOMY

Splenectomy should be limited to specific indications where medical
therapy is (or has been) ineffective. These include traumatic splenic
rupture, anatomic defects, splenic malignancy (i.e., splenic marginal
zone lymphoma [SMZL]), severe transfusion-­dependent hemolytic
anemia, refractory and severe immune-­mediated cytopenias, metabolic storage diseases, and secondary hypersplenism. There are certain
conditions where splenectomy should be avoided because of increased
risk of complications and/or better alternative treatments. These
include autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), hereditary stomatocytosis (HSt), hereditary xerocytosis (HX), cold agglutinin
disease (CAD), paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (PCH), Gaucher disease, and thrombocytopenia in hepatic cirrhosis. The major long-­term
risk of splenectomy is sudden, overwhelming postsplenectomy infections
(sepsis or meningitis). This risk is especially high in children <5 years
old at surgery. The risk of sepsis is less when splenectomy is performed
for trauma, RBC membrane defects, and immune thrombocytopenia
(2–4%) than when there is sickle cell anemia, thalassemia, or a preexisting immune deficiency (Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, Hodgkin disease)
or reticuloendothelial blockade (storage disease, severe hemolytic anemia) (8–30%). The overall risk is 2-­5 per 1,000 asplenic patient-­years,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3064 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 536.2

Diagnostic Techniques for and Features of Spleen Dysfunction
DESCRIPTION

COMMENTS

Immunoglobulin M memory B cells

Cells dependent on spleen for survival.
Produced in marginal zone.

Special tests required.

Technetium-­99m–labeled sulfur
colloidal scintiscan

Quantitation of splenic uptake of colloidal
sulfur particles enables a fairly accurate
static assessment of spleen function.

Hypertrophy of the left hepatic lobe might be a limiting
factor (this technique does not clearly show whether the
mass originated in the liver or the spleen in the presence of an overlapping hypertrophic left hepatic lobe).

Technetium-­99m–labeled or rubidium­81–labeled heat-­damaged
autologous erythrocyte clearance

Measurement of clearance time allows a
dynamic evaluation of spleen function.

Preexisting erythrocyte defects, difficult erythrocyte incorporation of the radioisotope, and false-­positive or false-­
negative results in relation to excessive or insufficient heat
damage make the test not suitable for clinical practice.

Detection of Howell-­Jolly bodies by
staining

Erythrocytes with nuclear remnants
Flow cytometry

No need for special equipment; inaccurate in the quantitation of splenic hypofunction.

Detection of pitted erythrocytes by
phase-­interference microscopy

Erythrocytes with membrane indentations
(4% upper limit of the normal range)

Need for phase-­interference microscopy; counts enable a
wide range of measurements and correlate with radioisotopic methods.

From Di Sabatino A, Carsetti R, Corazza GR. Post-­splenectomy and hyposplenic states. Lancet 2011;378:86–97. Table 1.

Fig. 536.1 Characteristic pitted erythrocytes in hyposplenism. A pit-

ted erythrocyte is recognizable on phase-­interference microscopy by
the characteristic “pit” on the cell membrane (arrows). (From Di Sabatino A, Carsetti R, Corazza GR. Post-­splenectomy and hyposplenic
states. Lancet. 2011;378:86–97. Fig 2.)

with a lifelong risk of overwhelming postsplenectomy infections of
5%; more than half occur within 2 years after splenectomy, although
the risk remains lifelong. The use of laparoscopic splenectomy has
decreased surgical morbidity and hospitalization time.
Encapsulated bacteria, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae (>60% of
cases), Haemophilus influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis, account for
>80% of cases of postsplenectomy sepsis. Because the spleen is responsible for filtering the blood and for early antibody responses, sepsis
(with or without meningitis) can progress rapidly, leading to death
within 12-­24 hours of onset. Febrile splenectomized patients should be
evaluated and treated promptly with antibiotics to cover the organisms
previously mentioned. This treatment should be initiated at home if
access to definitive medical care will be delayed. Common empiric antibiotics include amoxicillin-­clavulanate or cefdinir. A broad-­spectrum
cephalosporin (cefotaxime or ceftriaxone) is recommended until specific antibiotic susceptibility and presence, or absence of meningitis
is known. Vancomycin (to cover penicillin-­resistant pneumococci)
should be initiated, depending on the illness severity and susceptibilities of pneumococci at the institution. Splenectomized patients are also
at increased risk for contracting protozoal infections, such as malaria
and babesiosis. Serious infections may occur after an animal bite or lick
(particularly dogs) and is caused by Capnocytophaga canimorsus or C.
cynodegmi. Prophylactic antibiotics should be given after a bite potentially to prevent sepsis caused by these organisms (see Chapter 765).
Preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative management may
decrease the risk of postsplenectomy infection. It is important to be

certain of the need for splenectomy and, if possible, to postpone the
operation until the patient is ≥5 years of age. Pneumococcal, meningococcal, and H. influenzae conjugate vaccines given at least 14 days before
splenectomy may reduce postsplenectomy sepsis. The 7-­valent (PCV7) was
replaced by the 13-­valent pneumococcal polysaccharide-­protein conjugate vaccine (PCV13). Thus, depending on what primary pneumococcal
vaccine was given, a single dose of PCV13 may be recommended. In
addition, the 23-­valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (Pneumovax) should be given at age ≥2 years and a second dose 5 years later.
Yearly influenza vaccine should also be given because influenza infection
is a risk factor for secondary pneumococcal infections. Prophylaxis with
oral penicillin VK (125 mg twice daily for children <5 years old; 250 mg
twice daily for children ≥5 years) should be given until at least 5 years of
age and for at least 2 years after splenectomy. Although the greatest risk
is in the immediate postoperative period, reports of deaths occurring
years after splenectomy suggest that the risk (and the need for prophylaxis) may be lifelong. Lifelong prophylaxis should be strongly considered in patients who have had an invasive pneumococcal infection or
who have an underlying immune deficiency. In children with sickle cell
disease, penicillin prophylaxis should be started as soon as the diagnosis
is made. Prophylaxis may be continued into adulthood for higher-­risk
patients, including those with a history of pneumococcal sepsis, but
effectiveness in this older group has not been well documented.
In patients with traumatic injury, splenic repair or partial splenectomy should be considered in an attempt to preserve splenic function.
Partial splenectomy or partial splenic embolization may be sufficient to
ameliorate some forms of hemolytic anemia. Up to 50% of children
whose spleen is removed because of trauma have spontaneous splenosis; surgical splenosis (distributing small pieces of spleen throughout
the abdomen) may decrease the risk of sepsis in patients whose splenectomy is necessitated by trauma. However, in both these settings, the
splenic tissue that regrows frequently has poor function.
In addition to postsplenectomy sepsis, splenectomized patients may
be at risk for thromboembolic complications, including arterial and
venous thrombosis and pulmonary hypertension. These findings have
been reported regardless of the underlying reason for splenectomy and
the postsplenectomy platelet count. Proposed mechanisms include loss
of filtering function of the spleen, allowing abnormal RBCs to remain in
the circulation and activate the coagulation cascade. Portal vein thrombosis has been reported as a complication of laparoscopic splenectomy.
The etiology of pulmonary hypertension is not well understood. It has
been described in chronic hemolytic conditions including thalassemia,
sickle cell disease, and hereditary spherocytosis, indicating there may
be a relation to ongoing chronic hemolysis postsplenectomy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 538 u Abnormalities of Lymphatic Vessels

Section 9

The Lymphatic System
Chapter 537

Anatomy and Function of
the Lymphatic System
Michael E. Kelly and Richard L. Tower
The lymphatic system participates in many biologic processes,
including fluid homeostasis, absorption of dietary fat, and initiation of specific immune responses. Besides these well-­known,
classical functions, several novel and unexpected physiologic and
pathophysiologic functions of the lymphatics have been recently
discovered, including blood pressure regulation, reverse cholesterol
transport, association with metabolic diseases and obesity, and an
important role in the preparation for neonatal respiration. This
system includes circulating lymphocytes, lymphatic vessels, lymph
nodes, spleen, tonsils, adenoids, Peyer patches, and thymus. Lymph
is an ultrafiltrate of blood and is collected by lymphatic capillaries
that are present in all organs where blood flows except the bone
marrow and retina. Lymphatic capillaries form progressively larger
vessels that drain regions of the body. The lymphatic vessels carry
lymph to the lymph nodes, where it is filtered through sinuses,
particulate matter and infectious organisms are phagocytosed, and
antigens are presented to surrounding lymphocytes. These actions
stimulate antibody production, T-­
cell responses, and cytokine
secretion (see Chapter 165). Lymph is ultimately returned to the
intravascular circulation.
The composition of lymph can vary with the site of lymph drainage. It is usually clear, but lymph drained from the intestinal tract
may be milky (chylous) because of the presence of fats. The protein
content is intermediate between an exudate and a transudate. The
protein level may be increased with inflammation and in lymph
drained from the liver or intestines. Lymph also contains variable
numbers of lymphocytes and antigen-­presenting cells.
Embryonic lymphatic development is a stepwise process that
starts in the embryonic veins, where lymphatic endothelial cell
(LEC) progenitors are initially specified. The differentiation and
maturation of these progenitors continues as they bud from the
veins to produce scattered primitive lymph sacs, from which most
of the lymphatic vasculature is derived. PROX1 gene expression is
important to LEC specification, and studies have shown the critical importance of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), Wnt, Notch,
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling pathways
in lymphatic system development.
Little is known about the establishment of organ-­specific lymphatics at later stages. Studies using lineage-­tracing technology
suggest a venous and nonvenous origin of LECs giving rise to
organ-­specific lymphatics in the mesentery, skin, and heart. Lymphatic vessels also run parallel to the dural sinuses in the central
nervous system. The embryonic origin of the meningeal lymphatics
has not been determined.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3065

Chapter 538

Abnormalities of
Lymphatic Vessels
Michael E. Kelly and Richard L. Tower
LYMPHATIC MALFORMATIONS

Developmental lymphatic anomalies including lymphatic malformations (LMs) and complex lymphatic anomalies (CLAs) manifest as
localized or multifocal lesions of the lymphatic vasculature, respectively (see International Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies
[ISSVA] classification; www.issva.org).
Cystic LMs are the most common congenital lymphatic anomalies.
They occur as solitary lesions of variable size that are classified as macrocystic, microcystic, or mixed cystic LM. LMs commonly infiltrate
soft tissues and can be found anywhere on the body, although they
occur more frequently on the head, neck, and axilla.
CLAs are multifocal lymphatic vascular lesions involving both soft
tissue and bone and often result in disruption of central collecting lymphatic channels. They include generalized lymphatic anomaly (GLA),
Gorham-­Stout disease (GSD) (Fig. 538.1), kaposiform lymphangiomatosis (KLA), and central conducting lymphatic anomalies
(CCLA) (Fig. 538.2). CLAs are rare diseases with overlapping and
variable clinical features. Common features include bone involvement,
lymphatic leakage into the thoracic (chylous effusion) and abdominal (chylous ascites) cavities and mesenteric involvement leading to
protein losing enteropathy. In addition to common features, GSD is
uniquely associated with progressive cortical bone loss (see Fig. 538.1).
KLA can be distinguished by the presence of spindle cells on histology,
an aggressive clinical course, and evidence of consumptive coagulopathy and hemorrhage. CCLA, or channel type anomaly is characterized
by dilation, malformation, and dysfunction of the major abdominal or
thoracic lymphatic vessels.
LMs can also occur as combined malformations with other blood
vessel types like capillaries (capillary-­
lymphatic malformation) or
veins (lymphatic-­venous malformation). LMs are commonly associated with PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum (PROS) disorders,
which include Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome (KTS), CLOVES (congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal
nevi, and scoliosis/skeletal/spinal anomalies) and Proteus syndrome
(Fig. 538.3).

Genetics

Somatic, activating variants in the PIK3CA gene that encodes the p110α
catalytic subunit of PI3K are present at variable frequencies in most (80%)
isolated LMs and LMs associated with PROS. These activating PIK3CA
variants are identical to those found in venous malformations and in many
human cancers. The genetics of CLAs are far more diverse. Activating
PIK3CA gene variants have been identified in several patients diagnosed
with GLA. In addition, pathologic genetic variants in genes involved in
the RAS-­MAPK signaling pathway have been implicated in other CLAs.
Activating NRAS gene variants are associated with KLA while two patients
with GSD were found to have activating gene variants in KRAS. Somatic,
pathologic genetic variants in both the ARAF and CBL genes have been
found in patients diagnosed with CCLA as have inactivating germline
pathogenic variants in EPHB4. The role of RAS/MAPK pathway activation
in CLAs is further reinforced by the observation that patients with known
RASopathies, including Noonan and Noonan-­like syndrome, can present
with central conducting lymphatic anomalies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3066 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

A

C

B

Fig. 538.1 Gorham–Stout disease. A, CT sagittal reformat. Multiple erosive changes in the occiput, clivus, and the cervical spine. (B) Sagittal T2-­
weighted fat-­saturated (FS) MRI sequence. High signal is seen in the clivus and C 1–5 vertebral and the surrounding soft tissue. C, Postgadolinium T1
FS MRI. Enhancement is seen in the areas of osseous and soft tissue abnormalities. (From Trenor III CC, Chaudry G. Complex lymphatic anomalies.
Sem Pediatr Surg 2014;23:186–190. Fig. 3.)

Most patients with CLAs have extensive and invasive disease,
necessitating systemic therapeutic approaches. The mTOR inhibitor
sirolimus has had excellent effects in patients with vascular anomalies, including those patients with CLAs. A majority of CLA patients
showed improvements in functional impairment and quality of life
measures, whereas fewer showed evidence of decreased disease burden by imaging. Combining sirolimus with bisphosphonates may
be even more effective in CLA patients with significant bone disease. Alpelisib, a PIK3CA inhibitor, has been used with success in
patients with PROS and in a growing number of GLA patients with
a known PIK3CA pathologic variant. Small numbers of patients
with KLA who were known to have pathogenic variants in either
NRAS or CBL experienced clinical improvement with trametinib,
a MEK inhibitor. Trametinib also induced remodeling of the central lymphatics and induced symptom resolution in a patient with
CCLA who had an ARAF pathogenic variant, as well a patient with
Noonan syndrome and a SOS1 pathogenic variant with severe lymphatic abnormalities.

LYMPHEDEMA

Fig. 538.2 Intranodal lymphangiogram in 15-­year-­old male with central conducting lymphatic anomaly and recurrent pericardial effusions.
Stagnant flow is seen in the patulous superior portion of the thoracic
duct. Direct puncture of the terminal portion demonstrates marked dilation with no spontaneous emptying.

Treatment

A decision to treat an LM depends on the anatomic location,
involvement of local structures, and symptoms. Referral to a specialized vascular anomalies clinic with the expertise to guide
appropriate imaging and treatment decisions is recommended. For
localized macrocystic LMs, interventional radiology (IR) administration of sclerosing agents (OK432, ethanol, bleomycin) is most
effective. For lesions involving skin and mucosa, laser treatments
may be used.

Lymphedema is a localized swelling caused by impaired lymphatic
flow and can be primary (congenital) or acquired. Primary lymphedemas are grouped as LMs because they result from dysgenesis
of lymphatic networks during early development. Primary lymphedema may be found in Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome,
autosomal dominantly inherited Milroy disease, and other chromosomal abnormalities. Pathologic variants in multiple genes,
including the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor–3 gene
(VEGFR3), GJC2, PTPN14, and GATA2, are associated with primary
lymphedema (www.issva.org) (Table 538.1). Autosomal recessive,
dominant or de novo pathogenic variants of VEGFR3 produce Milroy disease. Pathologic variants in other genes are associated with
specific syndromes: CCBE1 (Hennekam), FOXC2 (lymphedema
distichiasis), SOX18 (hypotrichosis-­telangiectasia-­lymphedema),
KMT2D/MLL2, and KDM6A (Kabuki). Unilateral or bilateral lower
extremity lymphedema in an adolescent may be Meige disease.
Acquired obstruction of the lymphatics is much more common than
primary disorders and result from tumor, postirradiation fibrosis, and
postinflammatory scarring. Filariasis is an important cause of lymphedema in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. One third of the 120 million
infected persons (primarily older adolescents and adults) have lymphedema or a hydrocele. Injury to the major lymphatic vessels can cause

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 538 u Abnormalities of Lymphatic Vessels

3067

A

B

C

D

Fig. 538.3 Photographs and MRIs of participants with isolated LM, CLOVES, KTS, and FAVA. A, An 8-­month-­old male with isolated LM. Note
swelling in deltoid region without cutaneous vascular signs. Coronal and sagittal fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI demonstrates macrocystic LM
(a multilocular cystic mass) involving the anterolateral aspects of the right shoulder without muscular infiltration (arrows); humeral head star. B, A
19-­month-­old female with CLOVES syndrome. Note asymmetric distribution of truncal lipomatous masses and bilateral lower extremity involvement. Coronal fat-­saturated T1-­weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates moderate heterogeneous enhancement of the bilateral
truncal masses (arrows). Axial T1-­weighted MRI without contrast depicts truncal lipomatous overgrowth (arrows); segment VI of the liver (asterisk).

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3068 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Fig. 538.3, cont’d C, A 3-­yr-­old male (KT4) with KTS. Note capillary-­lymphatic malformation and overgrowth involving right lower extremity.

Coronal and axial fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI shows the persistent marginal vein system (bent arrows) and marked enlargement of the subcutaneous tissues because of a combination of lymphatic fluid and fat (straight arrow). There are also intramuscular venous malformations. D, A 9-­yr-­old
male (F8) with FAVA of the left gastrocnemius muscle; note absence of overgrowth and cutaneous vascular anomalies. Sagittal fat-­saturated T1-­
weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates the longitudinal distribution of the diffuse, fibro-­adipose vascular anomaly (arrows). Axial
fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI with (upper) and without (lower) contrast. Note right head of the gastrocnemius muscle is diffusely replaced by a
contrast enhancing heterogeneous soft tissue lesion (arrows). CLOVES, congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevis,
spinal/skeletal anomalies/scoliosis; FAVA, fibro-adipose vascular anomaly; KTS, Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome; LM, lymphatic malformations. (From
Luks VL, Kamitaki N, Vivero MP, et al. Lymphatic and other vascular malformative/overgrowth disorders are caused by somatic mutations in PIK3CA.
J Pediatr. 2015;166:1048–1054.)

Table 538.1

Chromosomal, Gene, and Syndromes Associated with Lymphedema
KNOWN GENES, CHROMOSOMAL LOCI,
INHERITANCE PATTERN

SYNDROMES
Primary lymphedema

Milroy disease
Meige disease

VEGFR3 AR, AD
Familial lymphedema
No known gene

Chromosomal aneuploidy

Turner syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
Trisomy 21
Trisomy 13
Trisomy 18

45,X
47,XXY
47,XX+21; 47,XY+21
47,XX+13; 47,XY+13
47,XX+18; 47,XY+18

Other genetic and
syndromic disorders

Emberger syndrome (primary lymphedema with myelodysplasia)
Lymphedema-­distichiasis syndrome
Hennekam lymphangiectasia-­lymphedema syndrome 1 (HKLLS1)
Hennekam lymphangiectasia-­lymphedema syndrome 2 (HKLLS2)
Hypotrichosis-­lymphedema-­telangiectasia ± renal defect
syndrome (HLTRS)
Microcephaly with or without chorioretinopathy, lymphedema, or
mental retardation (MCLMR)
Microcephaly and chorioretinopathy, 1 (MCCRP1)
Noonan syndrome
Cholestasis-­lymphedema syndrome (Aagenaes syndrome)
Ectodermal dysplasia, hypo/anhidrotic, lymphedema and
immunodeficiency; immunodeficiency 33

GATA2 (3q21.3), AD
FOXC2 (16q24.1), AD
CCBE1 (18q21.32), AR
FAT4 (4q28.1), AR
SOX18 (20q13.33), AR/AD
KIF11 (10q23.33), AD
TUBGCP6 (22q13.33), AR
PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, RIT1, KRAS, AD
LSC1, AR
IKBKG, (Xq28), XLR

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; XLR, X-­linked recessive.
Modified from Unolt M, Barry J, Digilio MC, et al. Primary lymphedema and other lymphatic anomalies are associated with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Eur J Med Genetics.
2018;61:411–415. Table 1.

collection of lymph fluid in the abdomen (chylous ascites) or chest
(chylothorax).
Untreated lymphedema can be disabling and is associated with
immune dysfunction, inflammation, fibrosis, adipose tissue overgrowth, and lymphangiosarcoma. Treatment modalities attempt
to reduce localized swelling through massage, exercise, and compression. Lymphatic reconstructive procedures, including lymphovenous bypass and lymphatico-­
lymphatic anastomosis are
increasingly used to achieve lymphatic decongestion, especially in
the early stages of disease.

LYMPHANGIOLEIOMYOMATOSIS

Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is characterized by proliferation of lymphatic endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells in the
lungs, leading to airway and lymphatic obstruction, cyst formation,
pneumothorax, and respiratory failure. It may initially be mistaken

for asthma. LAM occurs in young females and is associated with
pathogenic variants in the tuberous sclerosis tumor-­
suppressor
gene TSC2 in one third of cases. Sirolimus stabilizes lung function,
reduces symptoms, and improves life quality. Lung transplantation
may be required.

LYMPHANGITIS

Lymphangitis is an inflammation of the lymphatics that drain an
area of infection. Tender, erythematous streaks extend proximally
from the infected area. Regional nodes may also be tender. Group
A streptococci and Staphylococcus aureus are the most common
pathogens, and therapy should include antibiotics that treat these
organisms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 538 u Abnormalities of Lymphatic Vessels
Bibliography
Adams DM, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Sirolimus in the Treatment of Complicated
Vascular Anomalies. Pediatrics. 2016;137:e20153257.
Chang DW, Dayan J, Greene AK, et al. Surgical treatment of lymphedema: a systematic review and meta-­analysis of controlled trials. Results of a consensus conference. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2021;1(4):975–993. 147.
Dentici ML, Di Pede A, Lepri FR, et al. Kabuki syndrome: clinical and molecular
diagnosis in the first year of life. Arch Dis Child. 2015;100:158–164.
Frosk P, Chodirker B, Simard L, et al. A novel CCBE1 pathogenic variant leading to a
mild form of hennekam syndrome: case report and review of the literature. BMC
Med Genet. 2015;16:28.
Iacobas I, et al. Multidisciplinary guidelines for initial evaluation of complicated
lymphatic anomalies—expert opinion consensus. Pediatric Blood & Cancer.
2020;67:e28036.

3068.e1

Kuentz P, et al. Molecular diagnosis of PIK3CA-­
related overgrowth spectrum
(PROS) in 162 patients and recommendations for genetic testing. Genet Med.
2017;19:989–997.
Li D, et al. ARAF recurrent pathogenic variant causes central conducting lymphatic
anomaly treatable with a MEK inhibitor. Nature Medicine. 2019;25:1116–1122.
Mäkinen T, Boon LM, Vikkula M, Alitalo K. Lymphatic Malformations: Genetics,
Mechanisms and Therapeutic Strategies. Circ Res. 2021;129(1):136–154.
Ricci KW, et al. Efficacy of systemic sirolimus in the treatment of generalized lymphatic anomaly and Gorham–Stout disease. Pediatric Blood & Cancer. 2019;66:e27614.
Rodriguez-­Laguna L, et al. Somatic activating pathogenic variants in PIK3CA cause
generalized lymphatic anomaly. J Exper Med. 2018;216:407–418.
Trenor II CC, Chaudry G. Complex lymphatic anomalies. Semin Pediatr Surg.
2014;23:186–190.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 538 u Abnormalities of Lymphatic Vessels

Section 9

The Lymphatic System
Chapter 537

Anatomy and Function of
the Lymphatic System
Michael E. Kelly and Richard L. Tower
The lymphatic system participates in many biologic processes,
including fluid homeostasis, absorption of dietary fat, and initiation of specific immune responses. Besides these well-­known,
classical functions, several novel and unexpected physiologic and
pathophysiologic functions of the lymphatics have been recently
discovered, including blood pressure regulation, reverse cholesterol
transport, association with metabolic diseases and obesity, and an
important role in the preparation for neonatal respiration. This
system includes circulating lymphocytes, lymphatic vessels, lymph
nodes, spleen, tonsils, adenoids, Peyer patches, and thymus. Lymph
is an ultrafiltrate of blood and is collected by lymphatic capillaries
that are present in all organs where blood flows except the bone
marrow and retina. Lymphatic capillaries form progressively larger
vessels that drain regions of the body. The lymphatic vessels carry
lymph to the lymph nodes, where it is filtered through sinuses,
particulate matter and infectious organisms are phagocytosed, and
antigens are presented to surrounding lymphocytes. These actions
stimulate antibody production, T-­
cell responses, and cytokine
secretion (see Chapter 165). Lymph is ultimately returned to the
intravascular circulation.
The composition of lymph can vary with the site of lymph drainage. It is usually clear, but lymph drained from the intestinal tract
may be milky (chylous) because of the presence of fats. The protein
content is intermediate between an exudate and a transudate. The
protein level may be increased with inflammation and in lymph
drained from the liver or intestines. Lymph also contains variable
numbers of lymphocytes and antigen-­presenting cells.
Embryonic lymphatic development is a stepwise process that
starts in the embryonic veins, where lymphatic endothelial cell
(LEC) progenitors are initially specified. The differentiation and
maturation of these progenitors continues as they bud from the
veins to produce scattered primitive lymph sacs, from which most
of the lymphatic vasculature is derived. PROX1 gene expression is
important to LEC specification, and studies have shown the critical importance of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), Wnt, Notch,
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling pathways
in lymphatic system development.
Little is known about the establishment of organ-­specific lymphatics at later stages. Studies using lineage-­tracing technology
suggest a venous and nonvenous origin of LECs giving rise to
organ-­specific lymphatics in the mesentery, skin, and heart. Lymphatic vessels also run parallel to the dural sinuses in the central
nervous system. The embryonic origin of the meningeal lymphatics
has not been determined.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3065

Chapter 538

Abnormalities of
Lymphatic Vessels
Michael E. Kelly and Richard L. Tower
LYMPHATIC MALFORMATIONS

Developmental lymphatic anomalies including lymphatic malformations (LMs) and complex lymphatic anomalies (CLAs) manifest as
localized or multifocal lesions of the lymphatic vasculature, respectively (see International Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies
[ISSVA] classification; www.issva.org).
Cystic LMs are the most common congenital lymphatic anomalies.
They occur as solitary lesions of variable size that are classified as macrocystic, microcystic, or mixed cystic LM. LMs commonly infiltrate
soft tissues and can be found anywhere on the body, although they
occur more frequently on the head, neck, and axilla.
CLAs are multifocal lymphatic vascular lesions involving both soft
tissue and bone and often result in disruption of central collecting lymphatic channels. They include generalized lymphatic anomaly (GLA),
Gorham-­Stout disease (GSD) (Fig. 538.1), kaposiform lymphangiomatosis (KLA), and central conducting lymphatic anomalies
(CCLA) (Fig. 538.2). CLAs are rare diseases with overlapping and
variable clinical features. Common features include bone involvement,
lymphatic leakage into the thoracic (chylous effusion) and abdominal (chylous ascites) cavities and mesenteric involvement leading to
protein losing enteropathy. In addition to common features, GSD is
uniquely associated with progressive cortical bone loss (see Fig. 538.1).
KLA can be distinguished by the presence of spindle cells on histology,
an aggressive clinical course, and evidence of consumptive coagulopathy and hemorrhage. CCLA, or channel type anomaly is characterized
by dilation, malformation, and dysfunction of the major abdominal or
thoracic lymphatic vessels.
LMs can also occur as combined malformations with other blood
vessel types like capillaries (capillary-­
lymphatic malformation) or
veins (lymphatic-­venous malformation). LMs are commonly associated with PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum (PROS) disorders,
which include Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome (KTS), CLOVES (congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal
nevi, and scoliosis/skeletal/spinal anomalies) and Proteus syndrome
(Fig. 538.3).

Genetics

Somatic, activating variants in the PIK3CA gene that encodes the p110α
catalytic subunit of PI3K are present at variable frequencies in most (80%)
isolated LMs and LMs associated with PROS. These activating PIK3CA
variants are identical to those found in venous malformations and in many
human cancers. The genetics of CLAs are far more diverse. Activating
PIK3CA gene variants have been identified in several patients diagnosed
with GLA. In addition, pathologic genetic variants in genes involved in
the RAS-­MAPK signaling pathway have been implicated in other CLAs.
Activating NRAS gene variants are associated with KLA while two patients
with GSD were found to have activating gene variants in KRAS. Somatic,
pathologic genetic variants in both the ARAF and CBL genes have been
found in patients diagnosed with CCLA as have inactivating germline
pathogenic variants in EPHB4. The role of RAS/MAPK pathway activation
in CLAs is further reinforced by the observation that patients with known
RASopathies, including Noonan and Noonan-­like syndrome, can present
with central conducting lymphatic anomalies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3066 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

A

C

B

Fig. 538.1 Gorham–Stout disease. A, CT sagittal reformat. Multiple erosive changes in the occiput, clivus, and the cervical spine. (B) Sagittal T2-­
weighted fat-­saturated (FS) MRI sequence. High signal is seen in the clivus and C 1–5 vertebral and the surrounding soft tissue. C, Postgadolinium T1
FS MRI. Enhancement is seen in the areas of osseous and soft tissue abnormalities. (From Trenor III CC, Chaudry G. Complex lymphatic anomalies.
Sem Pediatr Surg 2014;23:186–190. Fig. 3.)

Most patients with CLAs have extensive and invasive disease,
necessitating systemic therapeutic approaches. The mTOR inhibitor
sirolimus has had excellent effects in patients with vascular anomalies, including those patients with CLAs. A majority of CLA patients
showed improvements in functional impairment and quality of life
measures, whereas fewer showed evidence of decreased disease burden by imaging. Combining sirolimus with bisphosphonates may
be even more effective in CLA patients with significant bone disease. Alpelisib, a PIK3CA inhibitor, has been used with success in
patients with PROS and in a growing number of GLA patients with
a known PIK3CA pathologic variant. Small numbers of patients
with KLA who were known to have pathogenic variants in either
NRAS or CBL experienced clinical improvement with trametinib,
a MEK inhibitor. Trametinib also induced remodeling of the central lymphatics and induced symptom resolution in a patient with
CCLA who had an ARAF pathogenic variant, as well a patient with
Noonan syndrome and a SOS1 pathogenic variant with severe lymphatic abnormalities.

LYMPHEDEMA

Fig. 538.2 Intranodal lymphangiogram in 15-­year-­old male with central conducting lymphatic anomaly and recurrent pericardial effusions.
Stagnant flow is seen in the patulous superior portion of the thoracic
duct. Direct puncture of the terminal portion demonstrates marked dilation with no spontaneous emptying.

Treatment

A decision to treat an LM depends on the anatomic location,
involvement of local structures, and symptoms. Referral to a specialized vascular anomalies clinic with the expertise to guide
appropriate imaging and treatment decisions is recommended. For
localized macrocystic LMs, interventional radiology (IR) administration of sclerosing agents (OK432, ethanol, bleomycin) is most
effective. For lesions involving skin and mucosa, laser treatments
may be used.

Lymphedema is a localized swelling caused by impaired lymphatic
flow and can be primary (congenital) or acquired. Primary lymphedemas are grouped as LMs because they result from dysgenesis
of lymphatic networks during early development. Primary lymphedema may be found in Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome,
autosomal dominantly inherited Milroy disease, and other chromosomal abnormalities. Pathologic variants in multiple genes,
including the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor–3 gene
(VEGFR3), GJC2, PTPN14, and GATA2, are associated with primary
lymphedema (www.issva.org) (Table 538.1). Autosomal recessive,
dominant or de novo pathogenic variants of VEGFR3 produce Milroy disease. Pathologic variants in other genes are associated with
specific syndromes: CCBE1 (Hennekam), FOXC2 (lymphedema
distichiasis), SOX18 (hypotrichosis-­telangiectasia-­lymphedema),
KMT2D/MLL2, and KDM6A (Kabuki). Unilateral or bilateral lower
extremity lymphedema in an adolescent may be Meige disease.
Acquired obstruction of the lymphatics is much more common than
primary disorders and result from tumor, postirradiation fibrosis, and
postinflammatory scarring. Filariasis is an important cause of lymphedema in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. One third of the 120 million
infected persons (primarily older adolescents and adults) have lymphedema or a hydrocele. Injury to the major lymphatic vessels can cause

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 538 u Abnormalities of Lymphatic Vessels

3067

A

B

C

D

Fig. 538.3 Photographs and MRIs of participants with isolated LM, CLOVES, KTS, and FAVA. A, An 8-­month-­old male with isolated LM. Note
swelling in deltoid region without cutaneous vascular signs. Coronal and sagittal fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI demonstrates macrocystic LM
(a multilocular cystic mass) involving the anterolateral aspects of the right shoulder without muscular infiltration (arrows); humeral head star. B, A
19-­month-­old female with CLOVES syndrome. Note asymmetric distribution of truncal lipomatous masses and bilateral lower extremity involvement. Coronal fat-­saturated T1-­weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates moderate heterogeneous enhancement of the bilateral
truncal masses (arrows). Axial T1-­weighted MRI without contrast depicts truncal lipomatous overgrowth (arrows); segment VI of the liver (asterisk).

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3068 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Fig. 538.3, cont’d C, A 3-­yr-­old male (KT4) with KTS. Note capillary-­lymphatic malformation and overgrowth involving right lower extremity.

Coronal and axial fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI shows the persistent marginal vein system (bent arrows) and marked enlargement of the subcutaneous tissues because of a combination of lymphatic fluid and fat (straight arrow). There are also intramuscular venous malformations. D, A 9-­yr-­old
male (F8) with FAVA of the left gastrocnemius muscle; note absence of overgrowth and cutaneous vascular anomalies. Sagittal fat-­saturated T1-­
weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates the longitudinal distribution of the diffuse, fibro-­adipose vascular anomaly (arrows). Axial
fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI with (upper) and without (lower) contrast. Note right head of the gastrocnemius muscle is diffusely replaced by a
contrast enhancing heterogeneous soft tissue lesion (arrows). CLOVES, congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevis,
spinal/skeletal anomalies/scoliosis; FAVA, fibro-adipose vascular anomaly; KTS, Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome; LM, lymphatic malformations. (From
Luks VL, Kamitaki N, Vivero MP, et al. Lymphatic and other vascular malformative/overgrowth disorders are caused by somatic mutations in PIK3CA.
J Pediatr. 2015;166:1048–1054.)

Table 538.1

Chromosomal, Gene, and Syndromes Associated with Lymphedema
KNOWN GENES, CHROMOSOMAL LOCI,
INHERITANCE PATTERN

SYNDROMES
Primary lymphedema

Milroy disease
Meige disease

VEGFR3 AR, AD
Familial lymphedema
No known gene

Chromosomal aneuploidy

Turner syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
Trisomy 21
Trisomy 13
Trisomy 18

45,X
47,XXY
47,XX+21; 47,XY+21
47,XX+13; 47,XY+13
47,XX+18; 47,XY+18

Other genetic and
syndromic disorders

Emberger syndrome (primary lymphedema with myelodysplasia)
Lymphedema-­distichiasis syndrome
Hennekam lymphangiectasia-­lymphedema syndrome 1 (HKLLS1)
Hennekam lymphangiectasia-­lymphedema syndrome 2 (HKLLS2)
Hypotrichosis-­lymphedema-­telangiectasia ± renal defect
syndrome (HLTRS)
Microcephaly with or without chorioretinopathy, lymphedema, or
mental retardation (MCLMR)
Microcephaly and chorioretinopathy, 1 (MCCRP1)
Noonan syndrome
Cholestasis-­lymphedema syndrome (Aagenaes syndrome)
Ectodermal dysplasia, hypo/anhidrotic, lymphedema and
immunodeficiency; immunodeficiency 33

GATA2 (3q21.3), AD
FOXC2 (16q24.1), AD
CCBE1 (18q21.32), AR
FAT4 (4q28.1), AR
SOX18 (20q13.33), AR/AD
KIF11 (10q23.33), AD
TUBGCP6 (22q13.33), AR
PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, RIT1, KRAS, AD
LSC1, AR
IKBKG, (Xq28), XLR

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; XLR, X-­linked recessive.
Modified from Unolt M, Barry J, Digilio MC, et al. Primary lymphedema and other lymphatic anomalies are associated with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Eur J Med Genetics.
2018;61:411–415. Table 1.

collection of lymph fluid in the abdomen (chylous ascites) or chest
(chylothorax).
Untreated lymphedema can be disabling and is associated with
immune dysfunction, inflammation, fibrosis, adipose tissue overgrowth, and lymphangiosarcoma. Treatment modalities attempt
to reduce localized swelling through massage, exercise, and compression. Lymphatic reconstructive procedures, including lymphovenous bypass and lymphatico-­
lymphatic anastomosis are
increasingly used to achieve lymphatic decongestion, especially in
the early stages of disease.

LYMPHANGIOLEIOMYOMATOSIS

Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is characterized by proliferation of lymphatic endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells in the
lungs, leading to airway and lymphatic obstruction, cyst formation,
pneumothorax, and respiratory failure. It may initially be mistaken

for asthma. LAM occurs in young females and is associated with
pathogenic variants in the tuberous sclerosis tumor-­
suppressor
gene TSC2 in one third of cases. Sirolimus stabilizes lung function,
reduces symptoms, and improves life quality. Lung transplantation
may be required.

LYMPHANGITIS

Lymphangitis is an inflammation of the lymphatics that drain an
area of infection. Tender, erythematous streaks extend proximally
from the infected area. Regional nodes may also be tender. Group
A streptococci and Staphylococcus aureus are the most common
pathogens, and therapy should include antibiotics that treat these
organisms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 539 u Lymphadenopathy 3069

Chapter 539

Table 539.1  Differential Diagnosis of Generalized
Lymphadenopathy

Lymphadenopathy

NEONATE

Zachary T. Graff and Richard L. Tower
Palpable lymph nodes are common in pediatrics and often pose a diagnostic challenge. Lymph node enlargement can be caused by proliferation of normal lymphoid elements or by infiltration with malignant or
other phagocytic cells. In most patients, a careful history and a complete physical examination suggest the proper diagnosis.

DIAGNOSIS
What Is the Site of the Mass?

The differential diagnosis of a mass varies greatly based on anatomic
location. Although pathologic masses can occur in any site, masses
occurring in the supraclavicular and lower half of the neck are more
likely to reflect pathologic lymphadenopathy than in other sites of the
body.

Is the Mass a Lymph Node?

Nonlymphoid masses (cervical rib, thyroglossal cyst, branchial cleft
cyst or infected sinus, cystic hygroma, goiter, thyroiditis, sternomastoid
muscle tumor of infancy, neurofibroma) occur frequently in the neck
and less often in other areas.

Is the Node Enlarged?

Lymph nodes are not usually palpable in the newborn. With antigenic
exposure, lymphoid tissue increases in volume. They are not considered enlarged until their diameter exceeds 1 cm for cervical and
axillary nodes, 1.5 cm for inguinal nodes, and epitrochlear >0.5 cm.
Other lymph nodes usually are not palpable or visualized with plain
radiographs.

What are the Characteristics of the Node?

Acutely infected nodes are usually tender. There may also be erythema
and warmth of the overlying skin. Fluctuance suggests abscess formation. Tuberculous nodes may be matted. With chronic infection, many
of these signs are not present. A firm, fixed, nonmobile (to adjacent or
underlying tissues), nontender node should always raise the question
of malignancy, regardless of the presence or absence of systemic symptoms or other abnormal physical findings. Tumors or tumor-­involved
nodes are often present for >2 weeks and may be associated with local
extension (voice change, dysphagia, otalgia) or systemic signs (fever,
weight loss, night sweats).

Is the Lymphadenopathy Localized or Generalized?

Generalized adenopathy (enlargement of >2 noncontiguous node
regions) is caused by systemic disease (Table 539.1) and is often accompanied by abnormal physical findings in other systems. In contrast,
regional adenopathy is most frequently the result of infection in the
involved node and/or its drainage area (Table 539.2). When caused by
infectious agents other than bacteria, adenopathy may be characterized by atypical anatomic areas, a prolonged course, a draining sinus,
lack of prior pyogenic infection, and unusual clues in the history (cat
scratches, tuberculosis exposure, venereal disease). The histopathologic pattern may also help with a differential diagnosis (Table 539.3).

TREATMENT

Evaluation and treatment of lymphadenopathy is guided by the probable etiologic factor, as determined from the history and physical
examination. Many patients with cervical adenopathy have a history
compatible with viral infection and are observed without intervention. If bacterial infection is suspected, antibiotic treatment covering
at least streptococci and staphylococci is indicated. Those who do not

CHILD

COMMON CAUSES
CMV
Nonspecific viral
HIV
infections
Syphilis
EBV
Toxoplasmosis
CMV
HIV
Toxoplasmosis
Measles
RARE CAUSES
Chagas disease
(congenital)
Congenital
leukemia
Congenital
tuberculosis
Reticuloendotheliosis
Metabolic storage
disease
Histiocytic
disorders
Listeria sepsis

Serum sickness
SLE, JIA
Leukemia/lymphoma
Tuberculosis (miliary)
Sarcoidosis
DRESS
Fungal infections
Plague
Leptospirosis
Brucellosis
Langerhans cell
histiocytosis
Macrophage activation
syndrome
Hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis
Castleman disease (very
rare in this age group)
Chronic granulomatous
disease
Sinus histiocytosis
(Rosai-­Dorfman
disease)
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto
disease
Autoimmune
lymphoproliferative
disease (ALP)
Rickettsial infection

ADOLESCENT
Viral infections
EBV
CMV
HIV
Measles
Toxoplasmosis
Syphilis

Serum sickness
SLE, JIA
Leukemia/
lymphoma
Tuberculosis
Sarcoidosis
DRESS
Fungal infections
Plague
Leptospirosis
Brucellosis
Drug reaction
(immune)
Castleman disease
Rickettsial infection

CMV, Cytomegalovirus; DRESS, drug reaction, eosinophilia, systemic symptoms; EBV,
Epstein-­Barr virus; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (as Still disease); SLE, systemic
lupus erythematosus.
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis: Common Diseases and Their Mimics, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023:
Table 48.3, p. 891.

respond to oral antibiotics, as demonstrated by persistent swelling and
fever, require intravenous (IV) antistaphylococcal antibiotics. If there
is no response in 1-­2 days, or if there are signs of airway obstruction
or significant toxicity, ultrasound, CT, or MRI of the neck with contrast should be obtained. If pus is present, it may be aspirated, or if it
is extensive, it may require incision and drainage. Gram stain and culture of the pus should be obtained. The sizes of involved nodes should
be documented before treatment. Failure to decrease in size within 14
days also suggests the need for further evaluation. This evaluation may
include a complete blood cell count (CBC) with differential; Epstein-­
Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, Toxoplasma, and Bartonella henselae
titers; anti–streptolysin O or anti-­DNase B serologic tests; tuberculin
skin test or gamma interferon assay; and chest radiograph to evaluate for mediastinal adenopathy. If these are not diagnostic, consultation with an infectious diseases or oncology specialist may be helpful.
Biopsy should be considered if there is persistent or unexplained fever,
weight loss, night sweats, supraclavicular location, mediastinal mass,
hard nodes, or fixation of the nodes to surrounding tissues. Biopsy may
also be indicated if there is an increase in size over baseline in 2 weeks,
no decrease in size in 4-­6 weeks, no regression to “normal” in 8-­12
weeks, or if new signs and symptoms develop.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3070 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 539.2  Sites of Regional Lymphadenopathy and
Associated Diseases
CERVICAL
Oropharyngeal infection (viral, group A streptococcal, staphylococcal,
or fusobacterial)
Scalp infection (tinea)
Mycobacterial lymphadenitis (tuberculous and nontuberculous
mycobacteria)
Viral infection (EBV, CMV, HHV-­6, measles)
Cat-­scratch disease
Kawasaki disease
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) associated
with COVID-­19
Thyroid disease
Kimura disease
Rosai-­Dorfman (sinus histiocytosis)
Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, cervical adenopathy
(PFAPA) syndrome
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease
Unicentric Castleman disease
ANTERIOR AURICULAR
Conjunctivitis or other eye infections
Oculoglandular tularemia, cat-­scratch disease, EBV, adenovirus
POSTERIOR AURICULAR
Otitis media
Viral infection (especially rubella, parvovirus)
SUPRACLAVICULAR
Malignancy or infection in the mediastinum (right)
Metastatic malignancy from abdomen (left)
Lymphoma
Tuberculosis
EPITROCHLEAR
Hand infection, arm infection*
Lymphoma†
Sarcoidosis
Syphilis
EBV
HIV
INGUINAL
Urinary tract infection
Sexually transmitted infection (especially syphilis or lymphogranuloma
venereum)
Lower extremity suppurative infection
Plague
HILAR (NOT PALPABLE, FOUND ON CHEST RADIOGRAPH OR
CT) (SEE TABLE 539.1)
Tuberculosis†
Histoplasmosis†
Blastomycosis†
Coccidioidomycosis†
Leukemia/lymphoma†
Hodgkin disease†
Metastatic malignancy*
Sarcoidosis†
Castleman disease
AXILLARY
Cat-­scratch disease
Arm infection
Malignancy of chest wall
Leukemia/lymphoma
Brucellosis
*Unilateral.
†Bilateral.
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HHV-­6, human herpesvirus 6.
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis: Common Diseases and Their Mimics, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023:
Table 48.2, p. 890.

Differentiating benign disorders from a malignancy may initially be
difficult. Hard, nontender, nonerythematous nodes involving multiple
regions (including mediastinum and abdomen), hepatic or splenic
enlargement, fever, night sweats, and weight loss suggest malignancy
or a granulomatous process. Persistence of symptoms and lymphadenopathy >2 weeks and certain locations (supraclavicular, mediastinal,
abdominal) also suggest malignancy. Cytopenias and elevated blood
lactate dehydrogenase are associated with malignancy and certain
infectious and inflammatory disorders. Ultrasound is useful in distinguishing malignancy from reactive nodes. CT with contrast is helpful
in identifying other affected nodes and organs. Although fine needle
aspiration (FNA) is sometimes used as an initial approach to diagnosis,
excisional biopsies are often needed and are the preferred diagnostic
approach to fully appreciate the lymph node architecture and genomic
profiling when malignant conditions are being considered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

539.1 Kikuchi-­Fujimoto Disease (Histiocytic
Necrotizing Lymphadenitis)
Zachary T. Graff and Richard L. Tower
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease is a rare, usually self-­limiting disease that is
seen in all ethnic groups; children and adults may be affected. Familial
cases have been reported. The etiology is unknown, although infectious
and autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
have been associated. The differential diagnosis includes infectious
lymphadenitis, lymphoma, tuberculosis, and SLE.
Presentation is varied but most often presents as firm, painful unilateral posterior cervical adenopathy evolving over several weeks. Fever
is frequently reported. Labs are often normal; however, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), elevated CRP, atypical lymphocytosis,
and leukopenia can be seen. Nodes range in size from 0.5-­6.0 cm, are
painful or tender in only 50% of cases, may be multiple, and must be
differentiated from lymphoma. Node involvement may occasionally be
bilateral or rarely present in axillary, supraclavicular, or intraabdominal
lymph nodes. Ultrasound usually shows multiple conglomerated, unilateral cervical lymphadenopathy with perinodal fat swelling and even
size distribution. Aseptic meningitis is an uncommon associated feature.
The diagnosis is made by lymph node biopsy. Histologic features include
paracortical lymph node expansion with patchy, well-­circumscribed areas
of necrosis showing karyorrhexis, an absence of neutrophils and eosinophils, a CD68+/MPO+ histiocytic infiltrate, and CD123+/TCL1+ plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease usually resolves within
6 months, although relapses have occurred up to 16 years later. Treatment
is typically symptomatic including rest and analgesics. Therapy with systemic steroids is reserved for patients with severe symptoms. Recurrences
occur in ∼5-20% depending on site (higher recurrences with bone, CNS,
or skin involvement). Patients should be followed for the possible development of systemic lupus erythematosus. Rarely, the disease has been fatal.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

539.2 Sinus Histiocytosis with Massive
Lymphadenopathy (Rosai-­Dorfman
Disease)
Zachary T. Graff and Richard L. Tower
The uncommon, benign, and usually self-­limited Rosai-­Dorfman disease (RDD) is a non-­Langerhans cell histiocytosis that has a worldwide
distribution but is more common in individuals of African descent. The
etiology is unknown, but immune dysfunction is suspected. Lesional
histiocytes are S100+, CD68+, and CD1a−. It is not a single entity, but a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 539 u Lymphadenopathy 3071
Table 539.3

Differential Diagnosis for the Histologic Patterns Seen in Pediatric Lymphadenopathies

HISTOLOGIC PATTERN

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

KEY FEATURES

Isolated follicular hyperplasia

Nonspecific reactive pattern
Viral infections
HIV lymphadenitis
Measles
Follicular lymphoma
Primary immunodeficiencies

Multinucleated Warthin-­Finkeldey cells seen in both HIV and
measles
Expansile irregular follicles in acute HIV
Normal polarization of germinal center cells and
phenotyping helpful to rule out follicular lymphoma

Follicular hyperplasia with
PTGC

Nonspecific reactive pattern
Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
lymphoma

Cytologically atypical cells seen in nodular lymphocyte
predominant Hodgkin lymphoma are absent in PTGC

Paracortical hyperplasia

EBV infectious mononucleosis
HSV1/2
CMV
Varicella
Measles
Classic Hodgkin lymphoma
Drug-­induced lymphadenopathy
Primary immunodeficiencies
Non-­Hodgkin B-­cell and T-­cell lymphoma

Polymorphic with numerous immunoblasts
RS-­like cells express CD20, unlike RS cells of classic Hodgkin
lymphoma
Warthin-­Finkeldey cells may be seen in measles and HSV
lymphadenitis
Well-­delineated necrosis in HSV
Intranuclear inclusions may be seen in CMV, HSV, and
varicella
Associated monocytoid B-­cell hyperplasia seen in CMV
lymphadenitis

Suppurative

Bacterial lymphadenitis, Staphylococcus,
Streptococcus, Haemophilus, Yersinia,
Francisella tularensis, Brucella
HSV lymphadenitis
Kawasaki

Poorly formed granulomas also may be seen in
bacterial infections
Necrotic foci beneath the capsule seen in Kawasaki

Necrotizing granulomas

Mycobacteria, tuberculous, and nontuberculous
Fungal infections
CSD
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto lymphadenitis/SLE

Acellular (caseating) necrosis with numerous giant cells
seen in mycobacterial and fungal infections
CSD palisading histiocytes with neutrophilic
microabscesses
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto lymphadenitis/SLE necrosis with nuclear
debris and absence of neutrophils; C-­shaped histiocytes;
clusters of immunoblasts and plasmacytoid dendritic cells

Nonnecrotizing granulomas

Sarcoidosis; infections; nonspecific

Histiocytoses

HLH, Rosai-­Dorfman disease

Miscellaneous

Toxoplasmosis
• Triad: follicular hyperplasia, monocytoid B-­cell hyperplasia, epithelioid histiocytes extend into lymphoid
­follicles
• Kimura
• Follicular hyperplasia and interfollicular eosinophils

CMV, cytomegalovirus; CSD, cat-scratch disease; EBV, Epstein Barr virus; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; HSV, herpes simplex virus; PTGC, progressive transformation of
germinal centers; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
From Faraz M, Rosando FGN. Reactive lymphadenopathies. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:433–451. Table 1.

pattern, and can be associated with neoplasia or autoimmune disease.
It can be sporadic or associated with inherited conditions. Some patients
have somatic pathogenic variants in NRAS, KRAS, and MAP2K1. Familial
RDD has been noted in patients with pathogenic variants in SLC29A3.
RDD may coexist with SLE, JIA, and autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
Patients can be classified as classical (nodal) RDD or extranodal RDD.
Classical RDD patients present with massive bilateral, painless, mobile
cervical adenopathy with or without fever, night sweats, and weight
loss. Other lymph node involvement can include mediastinal, axillary,
and inguinal, although retroperitoneal involvement is rare. Extranodal
RDD occurs in 43% of cases. Soft tissue involvement has been reported
in many organ systems. The most common sites are the skin, followed
by the nasal cavity and sinuses, palate, orbit, bone, and central nervous
system. Lab abnormalities can include normocytic anemia, leukocytosis (typically neutrophilia), elevated ESR, and polyclonal elevation of
immunoglobulin G (hypergammaglobulinemia). Initial imaging studies are determined by symptoms and sites of suspected disease.
A biopsy that demonstrates histiocytes with hypochromatic nuclei
with pale cytoplasm containing engulfed erythrocytes, plasma cells, and
lymphocytes (emperipolesis), and immunoreactivity to S100 protein, in
conjunction with expected clinical features, is diagnostic. IgG4-­positive

cells are often abundant. Occasionally, autoantibodies to erythrocytes or
synovium may be present. The differential diagnosis includes Langerhans cell histiocytosis, myeloproliferative disorders, lymphoma, and
hyper-­IgG4 syndrome. After diagnosis, whole-­body imaging with MRI
or PET scan is recommended to evaluate for extranodal RDD.
Observation alone is a reasonable treatment choice for patients with
uncomplicated nodal/cutaneous disease, as spontaneous remissions are
seen in 20–50% of these patients. Symptomatic patients may benefit from
surgical resection or debulking with the presence of single-­site disease.
Systemic therapy is typically reserved for severe, refractory, multifocal,
or unresectable disease. Steroids are helpful in reducing nodal size; however, durable responses are often not seen with steroids alone. Various
immunomodulatory (sirolimus) and chemotherapy regimens have been
used successfully in severe disease, with treatment courses ranging from
6-­12 months followed by close observation. Targeted therapies, including MEK inhibitors, have shown promising early results with studies
ongoing. Radiation therapy has modest efficacy in RDD but has been
used successfully in emergent therapy with visual or airway compromise.
RDD may recur for many years with an unpredictable clinical course.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3072 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

539.3 Castleman Disease (Angiofollicular
Lymph Node Hyperplasia)
Zachary T. Graff and Richard L. Tower
Castleman disease (CD) is an uncommon nonmalignant B-­
cell
lymphoproliferative disorder and is also called angiofollicular
lymph node hyperplasia. CD causes lymph node enlargement and
is classified as either unicentric (involving a single lymph node or
lymph node region) or multicentric (involving multiple lymph node
regions). Unicentric CD typically presents with enlargement of a
single bulky lymph node, most often in the mediastinum, neck, or
abdomen, which can be asymptomatic or present with locally compressive symptoms. Patients may have fever, night sweats, weight loss,
and fatigue. Diagnosis is made by an excisional lymph node biopsy.
Staging imaging is performed with CT scan of chest/abdomen/pelvis
or PET-­CT scan to evaluate for multicentric disease. Management
includes surgical resection when possible and is associated with a
benign course, although patients should be educated on an increased
risk of lymphoma.
Multicentric CD is subclassified based on the etiologic driver of the
disease, either human herpes virus-­8 (HHV-­8), peripheral neuropathy,
organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal plasma cell disorder, skin
changes (POEMS) syndrome, or idiopathic. An underlying immunocompromised state is the primary risk factor for HHV-­8 CD, particularly patients with HIV. Other forms of multicentric CD have no
known risk factors. HHV-­8 and idiopathic multicentric CD are driven
by the excessive production of interleukin-­6 (IL-­6). Lymphadenopathy
is often small volume and is present in peripheral and central lymph

node chains. Constitutional symptoms such as fever, night sweats,
and weight loss are more common at presentation compared to unicentric CD. Fluid collections including ascites, cytopenias, and liver/
kidney dysfunction are also seen and indicate more aggressive disease.
Diagnosis is again made by excisional lymph node biopsy as well as
consistent clinical features. To determine type of multicentric CD,
testing for HIV, HHV-­8, and evaluation for POEMS (polyneuropathy,
organomegaly, edema/endocrinopathy, monoclonal-­
protein, skin)
syndrome is needed. Serum inflammatory markers are often tested at
baseline and used to track disease. The differential diagnosis is broad
even after lymph node biopsy, including infection, autoimmune disease, and malignancy. There is no standard treatment for multicentric
Castleman disease. For symptomatic HHV-­8+ multicentric CD, rituximab +/-­etoposide with antiretroviral therapy for HIV+ patients have
achieved excellent relapse-­free survival. Idiopathic multicentric CD
is managed with anti-­IL-­6 directed therapy (siltuximab) and steroids.
Even after initial responses, symptoms can return after stopping therapy.
Rituximab, steroids, and additional immunomodulatory medications
(particularly the mTOR inhibitor sirolimus) are used next in patients
that have had an inadequate response to therapy. Cytotoxic chemotherapy can be used for severe disease with organ dysfunction after failure
of first-­line therapy.
TAFRO (thrombocytopenia, anasarca, fever, reticulum fibrosis,
organomegaly) syndrome is thought to be a subtype of multicentric
Castleman disease based on the histologic appearance of the lymph
node. Although there are overlapping features, TAFRO may be a distinct entity (Fig. 539.1).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

iMCD-NOS

Histopathologic
findings

Clinical findings

TAFRO syndrome

• Thrombocytopenia
• Severe anasarca
• Abdominal pain
• Elevated serum ALP level
with normal ALT and AST
• Lower level of
serum gamma globulin

• Fever
• Organomegaly
• Anemia
• Hypoalbuminemia
• Elevated serum level
of CRP and IL-6

• Thrombocytosis
• Higher level of
serum gamma globulin

Reticulin fibrosis in BM
• Megakaryocytic hyperplasia with
slight atypia

LN
• Atrophic GC
• Expanded interfollicular area
• HHV-8 negative
• No light chain restriction

LN
• Sheets of plasma cells
• Hyperplastic GC

Slightly enlarged LN in size
• Dense endothelial venules
• Large nuclei of endothelial cells
• Expanded FDC network

Fig. 539.1 Summary of the clinical and histopathologic features of TAFRO syndrome and iMCD-­NOS. Although TAFRO syndrome and iMCD-­
NOS have clinicopathologic features in common, TAFRO syndrome has unique characteristics that can distinguish it from iMCD-­NOS. ALP, alkaline
phosphatase; ALT, Alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase; BM, bone marrow; CRP, C-­reactive protein; FDC, follicular dendritic cell;
GC, germinal center; HHV, human herpes virus; LN, lymph node; iMCD, idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease; NOS, not otherwise specified;
TAFRO, thrombocytopenia, anasarca, fever, reticulin fibrosis, organomegaly. (From Igawa T, Sato Y. TAFRO syndrome. Hematol Oncol Clin N Am.
2018;32:107–118. Fig. 4.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Cancer and Benign Tumors
Chapter 540

Epidemiology of
Childhood and Adolescent
Cancer
Barbara L. Asselin
Cancer in patients younger than 20 years is uncommon, with an
age-­adjusted annual incidence of 19.6 per 100,000 children age 0-­19
years, representing only approximately 1% of all new cancer cases
in a year in the United States, or an estimated 16,000 new cases in
2021. This translates to nearly a 1 in 300 chance of developing cancer by age 20 years. Although the relative 5-­year survival rates have
improved from 61% in 1975–1977 to 85.1% in 2011–2017 in all age-­
groups 0-­19 years (Fig. 540.1), malignant neoplasms remain the
leading cause of disease-­related (noninjury) mortality (9%) among
persons 1-­19 years of age, with 1,800-­1,900 cancer-­related deaths
annually in the United States among children and adolescents
0-­19 years of age. The relative contribution of cancer to the overall
mortality in infants 0-­1 year old and adolescents 15-­19 years old
is lower than for children age 1-­14 years. The impressive improvements in survival over the last four decades are attributed primarily
to advances in treatment, supportive care, and enrollment in clinical trials for the majority of patients. Ongoing multi-­institutional
cooperative clinical trials are investigating novel therapies and ways
to improve survival rates further while decreasing treatment-­related

90
5-yr survival rate (%)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

13
20
14
–1
8

06

06
–
20

01

02
–
20

98

99
–
19

95

96
–
19

92

93
–
19

89

90
–
19

86

87
–
19

83

84
–
19

80

81
–
19

78
–
19

19

75
–

77

0

Year of diagnosis

Fig. 540.1 The 5-­year relative survival rates (%) by year of diagnosis of

all cancers in children ≤19 years old. The difference between the periods 1975–1977 and 2014–2018 is statistically significant (p < .05). Rates
based on follow-­up of patients into 2018 from Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database. (Data compiled from Howlader
N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al., eds. SEER Cancer Statistics Review,
1975-­2018. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. https://seer.canc
er.gov/csr/1975_2018/. Based on November 2020 SEER data submission, posted to the SEER website, April 2021.)

PART

XX

long-­term complications. Because increasingly more patients survive their disease, clinical investigations also are focusing on the
quality of life among survivors and the late outcomes of therapy
for pediatric and adult survivors of childhood cancer. The National
Cancer Institute (NCI; https://www.cancer.gov/types/childhood-­
cancers/) estimated that as of January 1, 2018, there were approximately 483,000 persons alive (in all age-­groups) who had survived
childhood cancer (diagnosed at ages 0-­19 years). Given the overall
improvement in survival rates coupled with the increased incidence
of childhood cancer observed in recent decades, the number of survivors will continue to increase.
Pediatric malignancies differ greatly from adult malignancies
in both prognosis and distribution by histology and tumor site.
Lymphohematopoietic cancers (i.e., acute lymphoblastic leukemia, myeloid leukemia, Hodgkin and non-­Hodgkin lymphomas)
account for approximately 40%, central nervous system cancers
for approximately 30%, and embryonal tumors and sarcomas for
approximately 10% among the broad categories of childhood cancers (Table 540.1). In contrast, the epithelial tumors (or adenocarcinomas) of organs such as lung, colon, breast, and prostate often
seen among adults, are rare malignancies in children. Incidence
patterns in the pediatric age-­group show two peaks, in early childhood and in adolescence (Fig. 540.2). During the first year of life,
embryonal tumors such as neuroblastoma, nephroblastoma (Wilms
tumor), retinoblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, hepatoblastoma, and
medulloblastoma are most common (Figs. 540.3 and 540.4). These
tumors are much less common in older children and adults after
cell differentiation processes have slowed considerably. Embryonal tumors, acute leukemias, non-­Hodgkin lymphomas, and gliomas peak in incidence from 2-­5 years of age. As children age, bone
malignancies, Hodgkin disease, gonadal germ cell malignancies
(testicular and ovarian carcinomas), and other carcinomas increase
in incidence. Adolescence is a transitional period between the common early childhood malignancies and characteristic carcinomas of
adulthood (see Fig. 540.4).
Incidence rates also vary by gender (generally higher in males
vs females), ethnicity (leukemia more common in Hispanic children than White or Black children; brain tumors more common
in White children), and between countries (data assembled by the
International Agency for Research in Cancer in Lyon, France, htt
p://www.iarc.who.int/). These variations are not fully understood
but likely reflect differences in genetic susceptibility and environmental exposures related to both known and unknown causes and
risk factors for cancer (Table 540.2). Over the past four decades,
1975–2018, the U.S. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
Program (SEER) data show some increases in the incidence of children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer (annual percent change
about 1%), particularly in occurrence of leukemia, brain, and lymphoma and among adolescents. Interestingly, a similar increased
incidence of malignancies diagnosed in childhood was observed
between 1980 and 2010 in an international population-­based registry study involving 62 countries. Reasons postulated to explain
these increases include, but are not limited to, improved diagnosis,
better record keeping, and development of data registries. Further
analysis of trends among subpopulations, geographic variations,
and incidence rates in high-­income vs low-­income countries are
needed to clarify the role of genetic ancestry, environmental factors,
and technology as explanations of these time trends in cancer in
children.

3073
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3074 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 540.1  	 Age-­Adjusted Incidence and Survival Rates of Malignant Neoplasms by Tumor Type in U.S. Children
ANNUAL INCIDENCE RATES PER 1 MILLION CHILDREN, 2014–2018
AGE 10-­14
YR

AGE 15-­19
YR

5-­YR SURVIVAL
(%), AGE ≤19 YR
AT DIAGNOSIS,
2011–2017

AGE <1
YR

AGE 1-­4
YR

AGE 5-­9
YR

All malignancies combined

265

227

137

164

252

85.1

All Leukemias (ALL/AML)

51 (18/20)

93 (78/11)

4.5 (37/4)

36 (24/8)

37 (19.5/10)

85 (89/68)

Lymphoma (Hodgkin)

— (—)

9 (1)

17 (3.5)

28 (13)

54 (33)

94 (98)

CNS tumors

46

54

50

52

64

74

Neuroblastoma

56

21

4

1

1

82

Nephroblastoma/Wilms
(renal cell carcinoma)

16 (—)

19 (—)

6 (—)

1 (1)

— (1.5)

93

Bone

—

2

7

16

15

71

Soft tissue sarcomas

14

11

9

13

17

74

Retinoblastoma

31.5

8

—

—

—

96

Hepatoblastoma (hepatic
carcinoma)

14 (—)

6 (—)

0.8 (—)

0.4 (0.7)

— (1.5)

82

Germ cell tumors

20

4

3

9

29

92

Malignant epithelial cancer

2.5

2

6

24

68.5

94

Thyroid / melanoma

–*/–†

–*/1†

2*/2†

11*/3†

35*/9†

(99*/94†)

*Thyroid carcinoma.
†Malignant melanoma.
—, Indicates that the rate could not be calculated with <16 cases for the time interval.
ALL, Acute lymphoid leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; CNS, central nervous system.
Data compiled from Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al., eds. SEER cancer statistics review, 1975-­2018. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 2020. Based on November
2020 SEER data submission, posted to SEER website, April 2021.
Based on the International Classification of Childhood Cancer (ICCC). Rates are per 1 million children and are age-­adjusted to the 2000 U.S. standard population.

250
200
150

100

100

90

50

80

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Age at diagnosis (yr)

Fig. 540.2 Age-­specific cancer incidence rates per 1 million children

within the United States. (Rates based on data from 2000–2017 from
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results [SEER] database http://s
eer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2018/ and data compiled from Marcotte EL,
Domingues AM, Sample JM, et al. Racial and ethnic disparities in pediatric cancer incidence among children and young adults in the United
States by single year of age. Cancer 2021;127[19]:3651–3663. http://se
er.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2018/.)
Acute lymphoid
leukemia
Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma
Glioma

Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
Retinoblastoma
Primitive
neuroectodermal
tumor (PNET)
Birth

5

10
Age (yr)

Sarcomas
Osteosarcoma
Ewing sarcoma
Soft tissue sarcoma
Hodgkin disease
Testicular cancer
Ovarian cancer
18

Fig. 540.3 Generalized incidence of the most common types of cancer in children by age. The cumulative incidence of all cancers is shown
as a dashed green line. (Courtesy Archie Bleyer, MD.)

Rate/1 million children

Rate/1 million children

300

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
<1

1 to 4

5 to 9
10 to 14
Age at diagnosis (yr)

Leukemia
Lymphoma
CNS
Neuroblastoma
Renal

15 to 19

Hepatic
Bone
Soft tissue sarcomas
Germ cell
Carcinomas and melanoma

Fig. 540.4 Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) can-

cer incidence rates per 1 million children by International Classification
of Childhood Cancer (ICCC) and age <20 years. CNS, Central nervous system. (Data compiled from Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho
M, et al., eds. SEER cancer statistics review, 1975-­2018. Bethesda, MD:
National Cancer Institute, 2020. http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2018/.
Based on November 2020 SEER data submission, posted to the SEER
website, April 2021.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 540 u Epidemiology of Childhood and Adolescent Cancer

3075

Table 540.2  	 Known Risk Factors for Selected Childhood Cancers
CANCER TYPE

RISK FACTOR

Acute lymphoid
leukemia

Ionizing radiation

Therapeutic irradiation for cancer treatment

Ethnicity

Hispanic children have higher incidence compared with White or Black children
White children have a higher rate than Black children

Immunodeficiency

SCID, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome

Genetic factors*

Down syndrome is associated with an estimated 10-­20–fold increased risk
NF1
Li-­Fraumeni syndrome (TP53 pathogenic variants)
Noonan syndrome
Chromosome breakage syndromes
Bloom syndrome
Ataxia-­telangiectasia

Acute myeloid
leukemias/
myelodysplastic
syndrome

Chemotherapeutic agents

Alkylating agents and epipodophyllotoxins associated with risk of secondary leukemia

Genetic factors*

Down syndrome (particularly acute megakaryocytic leukemia)
NF1
Fanconi anemia and other inherited marrow failure syndromes
Li-­Fraumeni syndrome
GATA2 deficiency
Noonan syndrome
Familial monosomy 7 and other chromosomal pathogenic variants

Brain cancers

Therapeutic ionizing
radiation to the head

Radiation therapy as part of cancer treatment

Genetic factors*

NF1 is strongly associated with optic gliomas, and, to a lesser extent, with other
central nervous system tumors
Li-­Fraumeni syndrome
Tuberous sclerosis
Noonan syndrome
Von Hippel-­Landau syndrome
FAP syndrome

Family history

Monozygotic twins and siblings of cases are at increased risk

Infections

EBV is associated with increased risk

Immunodeficiency

Congenital immunodeficiency disorders (e.g., SCID and Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome)
Immunosuppressive therapy for other conditions associated with increased risk

Infections

EBV is associated with Burkitt lymphoma
PTLD-­EBV plays role in development of B-­cell lymphoproliferative disease seen in
immunocompromised hosts, especially those on immunosuppression following
organ transplantation

Ionizing radiation

Cancer radiation therapy

Chemotherapy

Alkylating agents increase risk

Genetic factors*

Li-­Fraumeni syndrome
Second malignancy in hereditary retinoblastoma with RB1 pathogenic variant

Ethnicity

White children have about a ninefold higher incidence rate than Black children in the
United States

Hodgkin disease

Non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma

Osteosarcoma

Ewing sarcoma
Neuroblastoma

COMMENTS

Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Li-­Fraumeni

Retinoblastoma

Genetic factors*

Familial; pathogenic variant of RB1 without other syndromic features—also with high
risk of second malignancies

Wilms tumor

Genetic factors*

WAGR syndrome WT1 germline pathogenic variant
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Li-­Fraumeni syndrome

Ethnicity

Asian children reportedly have about half the rates of White and Black children

Genetic factors*

Li-­Fraumeni syndrome
NF1
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
DICER1 syndrome
Gorlin syndrome

Rhabdomyosarcoma

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3076 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 540.2  	 Known Risk Factors for Selected Childhood Cancers—cont’d
CANCER TYPE

RISK FACTOR

Hepatoblastoma

Genetic factors*

Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Gardner syndrome; FAP

COMMENTS

Malignant germ cell
tumors

Cryptorchidism

Cryptorchidism is a risk factor for testicular germ cell tumors

*See Chapter 541 for additional information.
SCID, Severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome; NF1, neurofibromatosis type1; FAP, familial adenomatous polyposis; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; PTLD, posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder; WAGR, Wilms, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and retardation syndrome.
From Ripperger T, Bielack SS, Borkhardt A, et al. Childhood cancer predisposition syndromes – a concise review and recommendations by the Cancer Predisposition Working Group
of the Society for Pediatric Oncology and Hematology. Am J Med Genet. 2017;173:1017–1037, with data compiled from Porter CC, Druley TE, Erez A, et al. Recommendations for
surveillance for children with leukemia-­predisposing conditions. Clin Cancer Res. 2017;23(11):e14–e22.

Childhood cancer includes a diverse array of malignant tumors,
termed “cancers,” and nonmalignant tumors arising from disorders of genetic processes involved in control of cellular growth
and development. Although many genetic conditions are associated with increased risks for childhood cancer, such conditions are
believed to account for 8–10% of all occurrences (see Chapter 541).
The most notable germline genetic conditions that impart susceptibility to childhood cancer are Li-­Fraumeni (P53) syndrome, neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2, Down syndrome, Beckwith-­Wiedemann
syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, von Hippel-­L andau disease, Noonan
syndrome, ataxia-­telangiectasia, and familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome and associated conditions (see Table 540.2). Consensus guidelines for surveillance screening in pediatric cancer
predisposition syndromes were developed during a workshop of
the Pediatric Cancer Working Group of the American Association
for Cancer Research (AACR) and are available online through the
AACR Open Access journal website (http://clincancerres.aacrjourn
als.org/content/23/11).
Compared with adult epithelial tumors, an extremely small fraction of pediatric cancers appears to be explained by known environmental exposures (see Table 540.2). Ionizing radiation exposure
and several chemotherapeutic agents explain only a small number
of pediatric cases (see Chapter 758). The association between fetal
exposures and pediatric cancer is largely not established, with the
exception of maternal diethylstilbestrol intake during pregnancy
and subsequent vaginal adenocarcinoma in adolescent daughters.
Environmental exposures that have been studied without convincing evidence for a causal role include nonionizing power frequency
electromagnetic fields, pesticides, parental occupational chemical
exposures, dietary factors, in vitro fertilization, and tobacco smoke
exposure. Viruses associated with certain pediatric cancers include
polyomaviruses (BK, JC, SV40) associated with brain cancer and
Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) associated with certain subtypes of non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma.
The etiology of cancer in children still is poorly understood,
and epidemiology studies demonstrate that the likely mechanisms
are multifactorial, possibly resulting from potential interactions
between genetic susceptibility traits and environmental exposures.
Ongoing studies are investigating the role of polymorphisms
of genes encoding enzymes, which function in the activation or
metabolism of xenobiotics, protection of cells against oxidative
stress, DNA repair, and/or immune modulation.

Curative therapy with chemotherapy, radiation, and/or surgery can adversely affect a child’s development and result in serious long-­term medical and psychosocial effects in childhood and
adulthood. Potential adverse late effects include subsequent second malignancy, early mortality, infertility, reduced stature, cardiomyopathy, pulmonary fibrosis, osteoporosis, neurocognitive
impairment, affective disorders, and altered social functioning (see
Chapter 542). Much has been learned about the incidence of late
effects from large, multisite cohort studies such as the Childhood
Cancer Survivor Study, an ongoing study of medical and psychosocial outcomes in survivors, which has provided data for the development of clinical care guidelines for survivors (http://www.surviv
orshipguidelines.org).
Given the relative rarity of specific types of childhood cancer
and the sophisticated technology and expertise required for diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring of late effects, all children with
cancer should be treated with standardized clinical protocols in
pediatric clinical research settings whenever possible. Promoting
such treatment, the Children’s Oncology Group is an international
multi-­institutional research consortium that facilitates cooperative clinical, biologic, and epidemiologic research in more than 200
affiliated institutions in the United States, Canada, and other countries (http://childrensoncologygroup.org/). Coordinated participation in such research trials has been a major factor in the increased
survival for many children with cancer.

INFLUENCING THE INCIDENCE OF CANCER

There are only a few recognized environmental causes of childhood
cancer that can be avoided or counteracted. One example is immunization against hepatitis B, which decreases the risk of hepatocellular
carcinoma in adolescence and adulthood, and human papillomavirus
vaccination, which prevents cervical cancer and HPV-­positive oropharyngeal cancers and anal cancers. Associations between cumulative
radiation exposure from common diagnostic radiologic tests such as
CT scans and an increased risk of malignancy later in life are of great
concern for pediatricians. Guidelines to ensure the safe clinical use of
diagnostic imaging are being evaluated (http://www.imagegently.org/).
An objective of pediatric medicine is to teach children how to adopt
healthy lifestyles to reduce their risk of cancer during adulthood, such as
avoiding tobacco, alcohol, high-­fat diets, and obesity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 541 u Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer

Chapter 541

Molecular and Cellular
Biology of Cancer
Kristopher R. Bosse and Stephen P. Hunger
Cancer is a complex of diseases arising from alterations that can occur
in a wide variety of genes. Multiple pathogenic gene variants and other
genetic aberrations, some germline but most acquired (somatic), are
required for cells to become fully malignant. These genetic changes
lead to alterations in normal cellular processes that control cell proliferation and survival, including signal transduction, cell-­cycle control,
DNA repair, cellular growth and differentiation, translational regulation, senescence, and apoptosis (programmed cell death).

GENES INVOLVED IN ONCOGENESIS

Two major classes of genes are implicated in the development of cancer: oncogenes and tumor-­suppressor genes. Protooncogenes are cellular genes that are important for normal cellular function and code for
various proteins, including transcription factors, growth factors, and
growth factor receptors. These proteins are vital components in the
networks of signal transduction that regulate cell growth, division, and
differentiation. Protooncogenes can be altered to form oncogenes—
genes that, when translated, can contribute to malignant transformation of a cell.
Oncogenes can be divided into five different classes based on their
mechanisms of action. Changes in any of these normal cellular components can result in unchecked cell growth. Some oncogenes code for
growth factors that bind to a receptor and stimulate the production of
a protein. Other oncogenes code for growth factor receptors, which
are proteins on the cell surface. When growth factors bind to a growth
factor receptor, they can turn the receptor on or off. Pathogenic genetic
variants or posttranslational modifications of the receptor can result in
it being permanently turned on, with consequent unregulated growth.
Signal transducers or effectors make up another class. Signal transducers are responsible for taking the signal from the cell surface receptor to the cell nucleus. Transcription factors are molecules that bind to
specific areas of the DNA and control transcription. MYC and MYCN
are examples of transcription factors that when activated by pathogenic variants or amplification cause overstimulation of cell division.
The final class of oncogenes interferes with apoptosis, or programmed
cell death. Cells that no longer respond to the signal to die can lead to
uncontrolled cell proliferation.
The three main mechanisms by which protooncogenes are activated
are amplification, pathogenic variants, and translocation or interstitial deletion (Table 541.1). MYC or MYCN, which code for proteins
that regulate transcription, are examples of protooncogenes that are
activated by amplification. Patients with neuroblastoma in which the
MYCN gene is amplified 10-­300–fold have a poorer clinical outcome.
Point pathogenic genetic variants can also activate protooncogenes.
The NOTCH1 protooncogene codes for a membrane-­bound receptor
integral to cell fate and differentiation pathways during normal development that undergoes proteolytic cleavage on ligand-­induced activation, so that the protein can enter the nucleus and activate target gene
transcription. NOTCH1 has pathogenic variants in approximately 75%
of T-­cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs), resulting in a constitutively activated protein important in leukemogenesis.
The third mechanism by which protooncogenes become activated is
chromosomal translocation or interstitial deletion. In some leukemias
and lymphomas, transcription factor–controlling sequences are relocated adjacent to transcriptionally active T-­cell receptors or immunoglobulin genes, resulting in dysregulated transcription of these genes
and leukemogenesis. A prominent example are translocations that

3077

bring c-­MYC under control of the immunoglobulin heavy-­chain gene
(IGH) or kappa (IGκ) or lambda (IGλ) light-­chain genes in Burkitt
lymphoma. Chromosomal translocations that join genes from two
different chromosomes or interstitial deletions or inversions within
a chromosome can also result in fusion genes; transcription of the
fusion gene results in production of a chimeric protein with new and
potentially oncogenic activity. Examples of cancers associated with
fusion genes include the childhood solid tumors Ewing sarcoma
[t(11;22)] and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma [t(2;13) or t(1;13)].
These translocations result in novel messenger RNA transcripts that
are useful as diagnostic markers. The best-­described translocation in
leukemia is the Philadelphia chromosome t(9;22), which produces
the BCR-­ABL1 protein found in chronic myelogenous leukemia and
specific subtypes of ALL. BCR-­ABL1 is a constitutively active tyrosine
kinase. In addition, the protein is localized to the cytoplasm instead of
the nucleus, exposing the kinase to a new spectrum of substrates.
Alteration in the regulation of tumor-­suppressor genes is another
mechanism involved in oncogenesis. Tumor-­
suppressor genes are
important regulators of cellular growth and apoptosis. They have been
called recessive oncogenes because the inactivation of both alleles of a
tumor-­suppressor gene is typically required for expression of a malignant phenotype.
Knudson’s “2-­hit” model of cancer development was based on the
eye tumor retinoblastoma developing at a significantly younger age
in children with the familial versus the sporadic form of the disease,
and that tumors were often multifocal in familial cases but were almost
always unifocal in sporadic cases. Knudson postulated that sporadic
cases of retinoblastoma required somatic pathogenic variants to inactivate both copies of a gene, whereas in familial cases, children must
inherit an inactivated allele from one parent and consequently only
require the somatic inactivation of the remaining normal allele. This
hypothesis was confirmed 15 years later following the discovery of the
RB tumor-­suppressor gene.
Another major tumor-­suppressor protein is TP53, which is known
as the “guardian of the genome” because it detects the presence of chromosomal damage and prevents the cell from dividing until repairs have
been made. In the presence of damage beyond repair, TP53 initiates
apoptosis and the cell dies. More than 50% of all tumors have abnormal
TP53 proteins. Pathogenic variants in the TP53 gene are important in
many cancers, including breast, colorectal, lung, esophageal, stomach,
ovarian, and prostatic carcinomas, as well as gliomas, sarcomas, and
some leukemias.

SYNDROMES PREDISPOSING TO CANCER

Several syndromes are associated with an increased risk of developing malignancies, which can be characterized by different mechanisms
(Table 541.2). One mechanism involves the inactivation of tumor-­
suppressor genes such as RB in familial retinoblastoma. Interestingly,
patients with retinoblastoma in which one of the alleles is inactivated
throughout the patient's body are also at a very high risk for developing osteosarcoma. A familial syndrome, Li-­Fraumeni syndrome, in
which one TP53 pathogenic variant allele is inherited, also has been
described in patients who develop sarcomas, leukemias, adrenocortical
carcinoma, and cancers of the breast, bone, lung, and brain. Neurofibromatosis (NF) is a condition characterized by the proliferation of
cells of neural crest origin. NF patients are at a higher risk of developing nervous system tumors, breast cancer, leukemia, pheochromocytomas, and other tumors. NF is inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner, although 50% of cases present without a family history and
occur secondary to the high rate of spontaneous pathogenic variants
of the NF1 gene.
A second mechanism responsible for an inherited predisposition to
develop cancer involves defects in DNA repair. Syndromes associated with
an excessive number of broken chromosomes caused by repair defects
include Bloom syndrome (short stature, photosensitive telangiectatic
erythema), ataxia-­telangiectasia (childhood ataxia with progressive
neuromotor degeneration, ocular telangiectasias), and Fanconi anemia
(short stature, skeletal and renal anomalies, pancytopenia). As a result
of the decreased ability to repair chromosomal defects, cells accumulate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3078 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 541.1  	 Oncogene Activators of Pediatric Tumors
MECHANISM

CHROMOSOME

Chromosomal
translocation

Gene amplification

Point pathogenic
gene variant

GENES

PROTEIN FUNCTION

TUMOR

t(9;22)

BCR::ABL1

Chimeric tyrosine kinase

CML, ALL

t(1;19)

TCF3 (E2A)::PBX1

Chimeric transcription factor

ALL

t(8;14)

MYC::IGH

Transcription factor

Burkitt lymphoma

t(15;17)

PML::RARA

Chimeric transcription factor

APML

11q23 and others (over
50 fusions partners)

KMT2A (MLL)

Regulation of gene expression

Infant leukemia, ALL, AML,
treatment-­related leukemias

t(12;21)

ETV6::RUNX1

Chimeric protein

ALL

t(2;13) or t(1;13)

PAX3 or PAX7::FOXO1

Transcription factor

Rhabdomyosarcoma

t(11;22)

EWS::­FLI1

Transcription factor

Ewing sarcoma

2p

MYCN

Transcription factor

Neuroblastoma

7p

EGFR

Growth factor receptor, tyrosine kinase

Glioblastoma, lung cancer

1p or 12p

NRAS or KRAS

Guanosine triphosphatase

AML, ALL, JMML,
rhabdomyosarcoma,
neuroblastoma

10q

RET

Tyrosine kinase

MEN2

2p

ALK

Tyrosine kinase

Neuroblastoma

9q

NOTCH1

Transmembrane receptor

ALL

ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; APML, acute promyelocytic leukemia; CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia; JMML, juvenile myelomonocytic
leukemia; MEN2, multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2.

Table 541.2  	 Familial or Genetic Susceptibility to Malignancy
DISORDER

TUMOR/CANCER

CHROMOSOMAL DELETION/ANEUPLOIDY SYNDROMES
Chromosome 11p13 deletion
Wilms tumor
syndrome

COMMENT
Also known as WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia,
genitourinary abnormalities, mental retardation); deletion
typically includes WT1 gene

Chromosome 13q14 deletion
syndrome

Retinoblastoma, sarcoma

Associated with intellectual disability, characteristic craniofacial
abnormalities; deletion typically includes RB1 gene

Trisomy 21

ALL, AML, AMKL, TMD

Risk of ALL is increased 20-­fold, risk of AMKL is increased
500-­fold; high cure rates; more prone to chemotherapy
toxicity; AMKL associated with GATA1 pathogenic variants

Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY)

Breast cancer, extragonadal germ cell tumors

Trisomy 8

Myeloid neoplasms

Monosomy 5 or 7

AML, MDS

CHROMOSOMAL INSTABILITY SYNDROMES
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas,
melanoma

Most commonly mosaic trisomy 8

Autosomal recessive; failure to repair UV-­damaged DNA; XP/
POLH pathogenic variants

Fanconi anemia

AML, MDS, rare head, neck, and skin tumors,
GI and GU cancers

Autosomal recessive; chromosome fragility; positive
diepoxy­butane (DEB) test result; pathogenic variants in
FANCX gene family (includes at least 21 members)

Bloom syndrome

AML, MDS, ALL, lymphoma, and solid tumors

Associated with growth deficiency, malar rash; autosomal
recessive; increase sister chromatid exchange (SCE);
pathogenic variants in BLM gene; member of the RecQ
helicase gene (unwinds DNA)

Ataxia-­telangiectasia

Lymphoma, leukemia, less often central
nervous system and other solid tumors

Associated with progressive ataxia, oculocutaneous
telangiectasias; autosomal recessive; sensitive to
radiation-­induced DNA damage; increased risk of
treatment-­related morbidity; biallelic pathogenic variant in
ATM tumor-­suppressor gene

Nijmegen breakage syndrome

Leukemia, lymphoma

Associated with microcephaly, characteristic facies,
immunodeficiency; biallelic pathogenic variants in NBN gene

Werner syndrome (progeria)

Soft tissue sarcomas, osteosarcoma,
melanoma

Associated with accelerated aging; autosomal recessive;
pathogenic variants in WRN gene

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 541 u Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer

3079

Table 541.2  	 Familial or Genetic Susceptibility to Malignancy—cont’d
DISORDER

TUMOR/CANCER

IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROMES
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Lymphoma, leukemia

COMMENT
Associated with thrombocytopenia, eczema, and recurrent
infections; X-­linked recessive; WASP pathogenic variants

X-­linked lymphoproliferative
syndrome (XLP)

B-­cell lymphoproliferative disease,
lymphomas, HLH

Associated with fulminant and often fatal EBV infection;
X-­linked; pathogenic variants in the SH2D1A gene

X-­linked agammaglobulinemia
(XLA)

Lymphoproliferative disorders, colorectal
cancer

Associated with absence of B cells; X-­linked; pathogenic
variants in BTK gene

Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)

Leukemia, lymphoma

X-­linked or autosomal recessive; pathogenic variants in IL2RG
and ADA genes

SYNDROMES ARISING FROM PATHOGENIC VARIANTS IN TUMOR SUPRESSORS OR ONCOGENES
Neurofibromatosis 1
Neurofibroma, optic glioma, acoustic
Associated with café-­au-­lait macules, axillary/inguinal freckling,
neuroma, astrocytoma, meningioma,
Lisch nodules; autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in
pheochromocytoma, rhabdomyosarcoma,
tumor-­suppressor gene NF1
MPNST, neuroblastoma, leukemias
Neurofibromatosis 2

Bilateral acoustic neuromas, meningiomas

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in tumor-­suppressor
gene NF2

Tuberous sclerosis

Facial angiofibromas, renal cell carcinoma,
renal angiomyolipomas, myocardial
rhabdomyoma

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in tumor-suppressor
gene TSC1 or TSC2

Noonan syndrome

JMML, ALL, neuroblastoma, brain tumors

Associated with distinct facial features, short stature, and heart
defects; autosomal dominant; caused by RAS/MAPK pathway
pathogenic variants (most frequently PTPN11)

Gorlin-­Goltz syndrome (nevoid
basal cell carcinoma
syndrome)

Multiple basal cell carcinomas,
medulloblastoma

Associated with odontogenic keratocysts, skeletal and skin
anomalies; autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in
PTCH1 or SUFU gene

Li-­Fraumeni syndrome

Osteosarcoma, soft tissue sarcoma, acute
leukemias, breast and brain cancer, adrenal
cortical tumors

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in TP53
tumor-­suppressor gene

Beckwith-­Wiedemann
syndrome (BWS)

Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma

Associated with macrosomia, macroglossia, hemihypertrophy,
omphalocele; epigenetic/genomic alterations of
chromosome 11p15

Von Hippel-­Landau syndrome

Hemangioblastomas of the brain and retina,
pheochromocytoma, renal cell carcinoma

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants of tumor-­suppressor
VHL gene

Multiple endocrine neoplasia,
type 1 (Wermer syndrome)

Parathyroid, pancreatic islet cell and pituitary
tumors

Associated with hyperparathyroidism, ZES; autosomal
dominant; pathogenic variants in MEN1 tumor-suppressor gene

Multiple endocrine neoplasia
syndrome, type 2A (Sipple
syndrome)

Medullary thyroid carcinoma, parathyroid
tumors, pheochromocytoma

Associated with hyperparathyroidism; autosomal dominant;
pathogenic variants in RET gene

Multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 2B (multiple mucosal
neuroma syndrome)

Mucosal neuromas, pheochromocytoma,
medullary thyroid carcinoma

Associated with Marfan habitus, neuropathy; autosomal
dominant; pathogenic variants in RET gene

Familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP)

Colorectal, thyroid, stomach and small
intestinal cancer, hepatoblastoma

Associated with multiple colon polyps; autosomal dominant;
pathogenic variants in APC gene

Juvenile polyposis syndrome

Colorectal, stomach, small intestinal and rectal
cancer

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in BMPR1A and
SMAD4 gene

Hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer (HNPCC,
Lynch syndrome)

Colorectal cancer, endometrial and stomach
cancer, many other cancers

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in DNA mismatch
repair genes MSH2, MLH1, PMS1, PMS2, and MSH6

Turcot syndrome

Colorectal cancer, brain tumors (glioblastoma,
medulloblastoma)

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in APC or MLH1
gene

Gardner syndrome

Colorectal cancer, other tumors similar to FAP

Subtype of FAP; autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in
APC gene

Constitutional mismatch repair
deficiency syndrome
(CMMRD)

Many different types of hematologic
malignancies and brain and CNS tumors,
colorectal carcinomas, and several other rare
tumors

Autosomal recessive; homozygous germline pathogenic
variants in the MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, or PMS2 genes; tumors
with very high variant burden, pathogenic variants of only
one allele of the same genes results in Lynch syndrome

Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome

Breast cancer, colorectal cancer, pancreatic
cancer

Associated with hamartomatous polyps of GI tract; freckling of
mouth, lips, fingers, and toes; autosomal dominant;
pathogenic variants in STK11 gene
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3080 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 541.2  	 Familial or Genetic Susceptibility to Malignancy—cont’d
DISORDER

TUMOR/CANCER

COMMENT

Hereditary hemochromatosis

Hepatocellular carcinoma

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in the HFE gene;
malignancy associated with cirrhotic liver

Glycogen storage disease
type 1 (von Gierke disease)

Hepatocellular carcinoma, liver adenomas

Autosomal recessive; pathogenic variants in G6PC or SLC37A4
gene

Diamond-­Blackfan anemia
(DBA)

Colorectal and other GI cancers, AML, MDS,
osteogenic sarcoma

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in the small or large
subunit-­associated ribosomal protein genes (most often RPS19)

Shwachman-­Diamond
syndrome

AML, MDS

Associated with neutropenia, diarrhea, and failure to thrive;
autosomal recessive; pathogenic variants in SBDS gene

DICER1 syndrome

Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB), cystic
nephromas, ovarian Sertoli-­Leydig tumors,
multinodular goiter

Autosomal dominant; associated with pathogenic variants in
DICER1 gene

Familial neuroblastoma

Neuroblastoma

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in ALK or PHOX2B
gene

Hereditary paraganglioma-­
pheochromocytoma
syndrome (PGL/PCC)

PGL, PCCs

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in the mitochondrial
enzyme succinate dehydrogenase protein family (SDHA, B,
C, or D)

Severe congenital or cyclic
neutropenia

AML, MDS

Associated with increased bacterial infections; typically autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in ELANE or HAX1
(Kostmann syndrome) gene

Rhabdoid predisposition
syndrome 1 and 2

Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors, rhabdoid
tumor of kidney, medulloblastoma, choroid
plexus tumor

SMARCB1/SMARCA4 tumor suppression genes

Predisposition to
medulloblastoma

Medulloblastoma

SUFU, tumor suppression gene

Rothmund-­Thomson
syndrome

Skin, bone

ANAPC1/RECQL4 stability gene

Multiple exostosis

Chondrosarcoma

EXT1/EXT2, tumor suppression gene

PTEN
Hamartoma tumor syndromes:
Cowden, Bannayan-­Riley-­
Ruvalcaba, proteus,
proteus-­like syndromes

Breast, thyroid, renal, colon, melanoma

PTEN, AKT1, PIK3CA, AKT3, PIK3R2, WWP1 germline or
somatic pathogenic variants

BRCA1/2

Brain, solid tumors in children

Heterozygous pathogenic variants increase risk

ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; AMKL, acute megakaryocytic leukemia; CNS, central nervous system; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; GI, gastrointestinal; GU, genitourinary; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; JMML, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia; MAPK, mitogen-­activated protein kinase; MDS, myelodysplastic
syndrome; MPNST, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog; TMD, transient myeloproliferative disorder; UV, ultraviolet; ZES, Zollinger-­
Ellison syndrome.

abnormal DNA that results in significantly increased rates of cancer, especially leukemia. Xeroderma pigmentosum likewise increases the risk of
skin cancer because of defects in repair to DNA damaged by ultraviolet
light. Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency syndrome (CMMRD)
is a disorder that results from the loss of both alleles of genes integral in
repairing errors that occur during DNA replication, leading to the accumulation of multiple potentially pathogenic genetic alterations. These disorders display an autosomal recessive pattern.
The third category of inherited cancer predisposition is characterized by defects in immune surveillance. This group includes patients
with Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, severe combined immunodeficiency, common variable immunodeficiency, and the X-­linked lymphoproliferative syndrome. The most common types of malignancy
in these patients are lymphoma and leukemia. Cure rates for immunodeficient children with cancer are much poorer than for immunocompetent children with similar malignancies, suggesting a role for the
immune system in cancer treatment as well as in cancer prevention.
Genome-­wide association studies (GWAS) in a diverse array of childhood tumors, including ALL and neuroblastoma, have defined common
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes that are associated
with cancer predisposition and collectively define regions of the genome
that are critical in tumorigenesis. These alterations may occur in the coding or noncoding regions of the genome and typically lead to a relatively

modest increase in cancer risk (2-­10–fold over background) compared to
the cancer susceptibility syndromes previously discussed, which may be
associated with a lifetime risk of 50–100% of developing cancer. Furthermore, whole genome sequencing efforts across diverse pediatric cancers
have identified that at least 8% of children who develop malignancy have a
germline cancer-­predisposing gene pathogenic variant. Many of these predisposing pathogenic variants occur in children without a family history of
cancer or a known cancer predisposition syndrome.

OTHER FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH
ONCOGENESIS
Viruses

Several viruses have been implicated in the pathogenesis of malignancy. The association of the Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) with Burkitt
lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma was identified more than
40 years ago, although EBV infection alone is not sufficient for malignant transformation. EBV is also associated with mixed cellularity and
lymphocyte-­depleted Hodgkin disease, as well as some T-­cell lymphomas, which is particularly intriguing because EBV normally does not
infect T lymphocytes. The most conclusive evidence for a role of EBV
in lymphogenesis is the direct causal role of EBV for B-­cell lymphoproliferative disease in immunocompromised persons, especially those
with HIV infection or those receiving immunosuppression after organ

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 542 u Principles of Cancer Diagnosis
transplantation. Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-­8) is associated with the
development of Kaposi sarcoma.
Children who are chronically infected with hepatitis B virus (hepatitis B surface antigen positive) have a 100-­fold increased risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma. In adults the latency period between viral
infection and development of hepatocellular carcinoma approaches 20
years. However, in children who acquire the viral infection through perinatal transmission, the latency period can be as short as 6-­7 years. The
additional factors that are required for the malignant transformation of
virally infected hepatocytes are not clear. Hepatitis C virus infection is
another risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma and is also associated with
a subset of B-­cell non-­Hodgkin lymphomas such as splenic lymphoma.
Almost all cervical carcinomas are caused by human papillomaviruses
(HPVs). High-­risk HPVs include types 16 and 18 but also types 31, 33, 34,
45, 52, and 58, which together cause >90% of cervical cancers. Vaccines
against the major oncogenic subtypes are now available and are likely to
save hundreds of millions of lives worldwide. The low-­risk HPVs, including 6 and 11, which are commonly found in genital warts, are almost never
associated with malignancies. Like other virus-­associated cancers, the
presence of HPV alone is not sufficient to cause malignant transformation.
The mechanism by which the HPV-­associated oncoproteins HPV E6 and
E7 induce malignant transformation is thought to involve both the TP53
and the RB tumor-­suppressor proteins, as well as other pathways that are
critical in cell cycle progression, maintenance of telomerase and genomic
stability, and apoptosis.

Radiation

Children who are exposed to ionizing radiation, either via environmental factors or from medical diagnostics or treatment, are also at
an increased of developing cancer over their lifetime, especially leukemias, brain, breast, skin, or thyroid malignancies. This increased pediatric cancer risk is likely due both to the enhanced radiosensitivity of
the developing organs of children and their longer postexposure life
expectancy. Diagnostic imaging (e.g., CT scans) and therapeutic radiation for children with cancer are a major source of childhood radiation
exposure. However, CT scan dose-­reduction strategies, the increased
use of MRI in pediatric medical centers, and the shift in therapeutic
practice in oncology to proton radiotherapy all have been integral in
lowering the exposure of children to ionizing radiation.

Genomic Imprinting

The development of cancer has also been linked to genomic imprinting,
which is the selective inactivation of one of two alleles of certain genes
depending on parental origin. Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS)
(see Chapter 113), the most commonly identified imprinting disorder, is
an overgrowth syndrome characterized by macrosomia, macroglossia,
hemihypertrophy, omphalocele, and renal anomalies that is also associated
with an increased risk of Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, and adrenocortical carcinoma. This increased risk
in developing cancer is directly associated with changes in the promoter
methylation patterns (or loss of heterozygosity) of imprinted genes on
chromosome 11p15.5. Normally, the maternally derived IGF2 (insulin-­
like growth factor receptor 2) allele at this genomic locus is inactivated,
thus suppressing IGF2 expression. However, children with BWS show a
gain of methylation in this promoter region, which allows for expression
from both maternal and paternal IGF2 alleles, leading to growth factor
overexpression. Concurrently, the neighboring maternal H19 gene (which
encodes ncRNA and miRNA critical in growth suppression) is silenced by
this hypermethylation, ultimately resulting in a progrowth phenotype and
predisposition to tumor development.

Telomerase

Telomeres are a series of tens to thousands of TTAGGG DNA sequence
repeats at the ends of chromosomes that are important for stabilizing
the chromosomal ends and limiting breakage, translocation, and loss
of DNA material. With DNA replication there is a progressive shortening of telomere length, which is a hallmark of cellular aging and acts
as a replicative senescence signal. In a majority of cancers, telomerase
(encoded by the TERT gene), an enzyme that adds telomeres to the

3081

ends of chromosomes, becomes activated, usually through pathologic
variants in the TERT promoter. The telomerase-­driven maintenance of
telomere length in tumors enables unrestrained cellular proliferation
by relieving a main checkpoint to cellular life span.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 542

Principles of Cancer
Diagnosis
Julia C. Meade, Erika D. Friehling, and
A. Kim Ritchey
Childhood cancer is uncommon and can manifest with symptoms
seen with nonmalignant illnesses. The challenge for the pediatrician
is to be alert to the clues suggesting a diagnosis of cancer. In addition
to the classic manifestations, any persistent, unexplained symptom or
sign should be evaluated as potentially emanating from a cancerous or
precancerous condition.

SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

The symptoms and signs of cancer are variable and nonspecific in pediatric patients. The types of cancer that occur during the first 20 years of
life vary dramatically as a function of age—more so than at any other
comparable age range (see Chapter 540). Unlike cancers in adults,
childhood cancers usually originate from the deeper, visceral structures and from the parenchyma of organs rather than from the epithelial layers that line the ducts and glands of organs and compose the
skin. In children, dissemination of disease at diagnosis is common, and
presenting symptoms or signs are often caused by systemic involvement. Pain was one of the initial presenting symptoms in >50% of
children with cancer in one study. Infants and young children cannot
express or localize their symptoms well.
Solid tumors may produce mass effects that are nonspecific, such as
compression of the thoracic airways or superior vena cava (lymphoma),
the optic chiasm and hypothalamic-­
pituitary region (craniopharyngioma), and the fourth ventricle (cerebellar astrocytoma). Another factor is the variability in the physiology and biology of the host related to
growth and development during infancy, childhood, and adolescence.
The signs of cancer in children are often attributed to other causes
before the malignancy is recognized. Delays in diagnosis are particularly problematic during late adolescence and are the result of a variety of factors prominent in this age-­group, including historic lack and
complexity of health insurance coverage.
Although there is no clearly established set of warning signs of cancer in young people, the most common cancers in children suggest
some guidelines that may be helpful in early recognition of signs and
symptoms of cancer (Table 542.1). Most of the symptoms and signs
are not specific and might represent other possibilities in a differential
diagnosis. Nonetheless, these clues encompass the common cancers of
childhood and have been very useful in early detection.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Physical examination findings in a child with malignancy are dependent on whether the cancer is systemic or localized. The cancers most
common in children involve the lymphoid and hematopoietic system.
When the bone marrow is compromised by malignancy (e.g., leukemia, disseminated neuroblastoma), typical findings include pallor
from anemia; bleeding, petechiae, or purpura from thrombocytopenia
or coagulopathy; cellulitis or other localized infection from leukopenia; and skin nodules (especially in infants) and hepatosplenomegaly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3082 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 542.1  	 Common Manifestations of Childhood Malignancies
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
Constitutional/
systemic

POTENTIAL ETIOLOGY AND POSSIBLE DIAGNOSIS

Fever, persistent or recurrent infection, neutropenia

Bone marrow infiltration from leukemia, neuroblastoma

Fever of unknown origin, weight loss, night sweats

Hodgkin and non-­Hodgkin lymphoma

Painless, persistent lymphadenopathy

Leukemia, Hodgkin lymphoma, non-­Hodgkin lymphoma, Burkitt
lymphoma, thyroid carcinoma

Hypertension

Renal or adrenal tumor such as neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma,
or Wilms tumor

Soft tissue mass

Ewing sarcoma, osteosarcoma, neuroblastoma, thyroid carcinoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Pain

Bone marrow involvement (ALL) or metastatic disease
(neuroblastoma), primary bone tumors, Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Headache with emesis, visual disturbances, ataxia,
papilledema, cranial nerve palsies

Increased intracranial pressure from primary brain tumor or
metastasis

Leukocoria (white pupil)

Retinoblastoma

Periorbital ecchymosis

Neuroblastoma

Miosis, ptosis, heterochromia

Horner syndrome: compression of cervical sympathetic nerves from
neuroblastoma

Opsoclonus myoclonus, ataxia

Paraneoplastic syndrome from neuroblastoma

Exophthalmos, proptosis

Mass effect from rhabdomyosarcoma, lymphoma, or Langerhans
cell histiocytosis

Cough, stridor, pneumonia, tracheal-­bronchial
compression; superior vena cava syndrome

Anterior mediastinal mass due to germ cell tumor, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, or Hodgkin lymphoma

Vertebral or nerve root compression; dysphagia

Posterior mediastinal mass from neuroblastoma or Ewing sarcoma

Abdominal mass

Neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor, lymphoma

Diarrhea

Vasoactive intestinal peptide secretion from neuroblastoma,
ganglioneuroma

Pallor, anemia

Bone marrow infiltration from leukemia, neuroblastoma

Petechiae, thrombocytopenia

Bone marrow infiltration from leukemia, neuroblastoma

Musculoskeletal

Bone pain, limp, arthralgia

Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, leukemia, metastatic neuroblastoma

Endocrine

Diabetes insipidus

Pituitary tumor, Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Poor growth

Diencephalic syndrome from hypothalamic tumor

Galactorrhea

Pituitary tumor/prolactinoma

Precocious puberty

Germ cell tumor (cranial or extracranial), adrenocortical carcinoma,
hepatoblastoma

Neurologic/
ophthalmologic

Respiratory/
thoracic

Gastrointestinal

Hematologic

ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Adapted from Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011. p. 588.

from malignant leukocytosis. Abnormalities found in lymphatic
malignancies include peripheral adenopathy (Fig. 542.1) and signs
of superior vena cava syndrome from an anterior mediastinal mass
(Fig. 542.2), including respiratory distress, and facial and neck plethora and edema. Enlargement of cervical lymph nodes is common in
children, but when persistent, progressive, and painless, it often suggests lymphoma. Supraclavicular adenopathy suggests underlying
malignancy.
Abnormalities of the central nervous system (CNS) that can
indicate cancer include headaches, vomiting, cranial nerve palsies,
ataxia, afebrile seizures, ptosis, decreased visual activity, neuroendocrine deficits, and increased intracranial pressure, which may be
diagnosed by the presence of papilledema (Fig. 542.3). Any focal
neurologic deficit in the motor or sensory system, especially a

decrease in cranial nerve function, should prompt further investigation for malignancy.
Ophthalmologic presentation of malignancy includes a white
pupillary reflex (Fig. 542.4) rather than the usual red reflection
from incident light. A white pupillary reflex is essentially pathognomonic for retinoblastoma, although some benign conditions can
mimic this finding. Proptosis can be produced by rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, lymphoma, and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. In the few first years of life, Horner syndrome, periorbital
ecchymosis, iris heterochromia, and opsoclonus-­myoclonus all suggest a diagnosis of neuroblastoma.
Abdominal masses can be divided into upper and lower locations.
Malignancies in the upper abdomen include Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, and hepatoblastoma. Enlargement of the liver or spleen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 542 u Principles of Cancer Diagnosis

N

Fig. 542.1 Cervical lymphadenopa-

thy. Manifestations on physical examination (A), and ultrasound examination
(B). N, Abnormally enlarged lymph
nodes. (From Sinniah D, D’Angio GJ,
Chatten J, et al. Atlas of Pediatric Oncology. London: Arnold; 1996.)

3083

N

N
N

A

B

B

A

C

Fig. 542.2 Anterior upper mediastinal mass from non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma. A, Plain chest radiograph. B, CT
scan. C, PET scan.

Fig 542.4 White pupillary reflex in the left eye. (From Sinniah D,

D’Angio GJ, Chatten J, et al. Atlas of Pediatric Oncology. London: Arnold; 1996.)

Fig. 542.3 Papilledema on fundoscopic examination. (From Sinniah
D, D’Angio GJ, Chatten J, et al. Atlas of Pediatric Oncology. London:
Arnold; 1996.)

from leukemia can be mistaken for an upper abdominal mass. Lower
abdominal masses non-­Hodgkin lymphoma, neuroblastoma, germ cell
tumors (ovarian), and sarcomas.
Rhabdomyosarcoma can occur as an extremity mass, particularly in
adolescents, but also as a mass in the head and neck region (e.g., orbit,
nasopharynx, and others). These tumors can be deceptively benign in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3084 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
appearance, but as with all unexplained masses, require immediate
attention. Sacrococcygeal masses in neonates are usually teratomas,
which are usually benign but can undergo malignant transformation
if not removed promptly. Neuroblastoma can present as “blueberry
muffin” spots on the skin of neonates or as periorbital ecchymosis in
older children.

AGE-­RELATED MANIFESTATIONS

Because various types of cancer in children occur at specific ages,
the physician should tailor the history and physical examination
based on the age of the child. The embryonal tumors, including
neuroblastoma, retinoblastoma, and hepatoblastoma usually occur
during the first 2 years of life (see Fig. 540.4). The peak age for presentation of Wilms tumor is 3-­4 years. Two thirds of patients with
rhabdomyosarcoma present before age 6 with another smaller peak
in adolescence. From 1-­4 years of age, acute lymphoblastic leukemia peaks in incidence. Brain tumors have a peak incidence in
the first decade of life. Non-­Hodgkin lymphomas are uncommon
earlier than 5 years of age but steadily increase thereafter. During
adolescence, bone tumors, Hodgkin lymphoma, and gonadal and
soft tissue sarcomas predominate. Hence, for infants and toddlers,
special attention should be paid to the possibility of embryonal
and intraabdominal tumors. Preschool-­age and early school-­age
children showing compatible signs and symptoms should be specifically evaluated for leukemia. School-­age children might present
with lymphoma or with brain tumors. Adolescents require assessment for bone and soft tissue sarcomas and gonadal malignancies,
as well as for Hodgkin lymphoma.

EARLY DETECTION

The prognosis of malignancy in children depends primarily on
tumor type, extent of disease at diagnosis, and rapidity of response
to treatment. Early diagnosis helps to ensure that appropriate therapy is given in a timely manner and thus optimizes the chances of
cure. Because most physicians in general practice rarely encounter
children with undiagnosed cancer, they should remember to investigate the possibility of malignancy, especially when they encounter
an atypical course of a common childhood condition, unusual manifestations that do not fit common conditions, and any persistent
symptom that defies diagnosis. It is also good practice to obtain a
three-­generation family pedigree with specific attention to a family
history of cancer. A strong family history of cancer would suggest a
referral for a cancer predisposition evaluation.
Delays in diagnosis are particularly likely in certain clinical situations. The cardinal symptom of both osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma is localized and usually persistent pain. Because these tumors
occur during the second decade of life, a time of increased physical
activity, patients often assume the pain results from trauma. Prompt
radiologic evaluation can help confirm the diagnosis. Lymphoma,
especially during adolescence, often manifests as an anterior
mediastinal mass. Symptoms such as chronic cough, unexplained
shortness of breath, or “new-­onset asthma” are typical with this presentation and are often overlooked. Tumors of the nasopharynx or
middle ear can mimic infection. Prolonged, unexplained ear pain,
nasal discharge, retropharyngeal swelling, and trismus should be
investigated as possible signs of malignancy.
Early symptoms of leukemia may be limited to prolonged or
unexplained low-­grade fever. Bone and joint pain may present with
refusal to walk. Blood counts with abnormalities in two or more
cell lines might indicate the need for bone marrow examination,

even when leukemic blast cells are not seen in the blood smear (see
Table 542.1).
Mass screening for children with malignancy is not feasible. A
screening program to detect early-­stage neuroblastoma was successful in documenting more cases of the disease but had no impact
on overall outcome. However, certain children are at increased risk
for cancer and require an individualized plan to ensure early detection of malignancy. Select examples include children with certain
chromosome abnormalities, such as Down syndrome, Klinefelter
syndrome, and WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genital abnormalities, mental retardation); children with overgrowth
syndromes, such as Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome or hemihypertrophy; and children with certain inherited single-­gene disorders, including hereditary retinoblastoma, Li-­Fraumeni syndrome,
familial adenomatous polyposis, and neurofibromatosis (see Table
541.2).

ENSURING THE DIAGNOSIS

When a malignant neoplasm is suspected, the immediate goal is
to confirm the diagnosis. A tentative diagnosis can often be established based on the patient’s age, symptoms, and location of masses.
Selected imaging techniques and tumor markers can facilitate the
diagnostic approach (Table 542.2 and Fig. 542.5). Especially when
a solid tumor is present, the pediatric oncologist, surgeon, and
pathologist should work as a team to determine the site of biopsy,
amount of tissue required, and whether percutaneous image-­guided
biopsy, incisional biopsy, or excisional biopsy and tumor resection
are indicated. For select situations, at the time of the initial diagnostic procedure, plans for bone marrow aspiration and biopsy and
placement of central venous access may be appropriate.
Pathologic evaluation of pediatric malignancies requires appropriate handling of tissue so that multiple different techniques can
be used to obtain a diagnosis. It is important that some fresh tissue not be placed in formalin. Along with routine light microscopy,
pathologic evaluation may include immunochemistry, flow cytometry, cytogenetics, molecular genetic studies (e.g., fluorescence in
situ hybridization, tumor whole exome sequencing, and evaluation
of circulating tumor genes with cell-free DNA detection in blood).
Additional technologies include DNA microarray analysis and cancer genome sequencing that can identify specific gene expression
patterns and sequences in tumors, which can facilitate more accurate classification and treatment.

STAGING

Once a specific diagnosis is confirmed, studies to define the extent
of the malignancy are necessary to determine prognosis and treatment. Table 542.2 outlines the minimum evaluation required for
common pediatric malignancies. In addition, for many tumors
(e.g., Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma), a surgical
staging system is used. Surgical stage can be determined at the time
of the initial diagnostic procedure or subsequently. For example,
a patient who has abdominal surgery for possible Wilms tumor
should have careful evaluation and biopsy of all adjacent lymph
nodes. A child with rhabdomyosarcoma can require a subsequent
biopsy of sentinel lymph nodes as determined by scintigraphy or
dye injection adjacent to the primary tumor. The pathologist facilitates staging by examining margins of the specimen to determine
residual tumor.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 542 u Principles of Cancer Diagnosis

3085

Table 542.2  	 Workup of Common Pediatric Malignancies to Assess Primary Tumor and Potential Metastases
BONE MARROW
ASPIRATE OR
BIOPSY

CHEST
X-­RAY
FILM

CT
SCAN

MRI

PET
SCAN

BONE
SCAN

CSF
ANALYSIS

SPECIFIC
MARKERS

OTHER
TESTS

Leukemia

Yes (includes
flow cytometry,
cytogenetics,
molecular
studies)

Yes

—

—

—

—

Yes

—

—

Non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma

Yes (includes
flow cytometry,
cytogenetics,
molecular
studies)

Yes

Yes

—

Yes

Yes
(selected
cases)

Yes

—

—

Hodgkin
lymphoma

Yes (in advanced
stage)

Yes

Yes

—

Yes

—

—

—

—

CNS tumors

—

—

—

Yes

—

—

Yes (selected
cases)

Yes
(selected
cases)

—

Neuroblastoma

Yes (includes
cytogenetics,
molecular
studies)

—

Yes

Yes

—

—

—

Urine VMA,
HVA

MIBG or PET
scan; bone
x-­rays

Wilms tumor

—

Yes

Yes

—

—

—

—

—

—

Rhabdomyosarcoma

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes (select
sites)

—

Yes
(selected
cases)

Yes (for
parameningeal tumors
only)

—

—

Osteosarcoma

—

Yes

Yes (of
chest)

Yes (for
primary
tumors)

—

Yes
(selected
cases)

—

—

—

Ewing
sarcoma

Yes (selected
cases)

Yes

Yes (of
chest)

Yes (for
primary
tumors)

Yes

Yes
(selected
cases)

—

—

—

Germ cell
tumors

—

Yes

Yes

Consider
MRI of
brain

—

—

—

AFP, HCG

—

Liver tumors

—

Yes

Yes

—

—

—

—

AFP, HCG

—

Retinoblastoma

Selected cases

—

Yes

Yes (includes
brain)

—

Yes
(selected
cases)

—

—

MALIGNANCY

Selected
cases

AFP, α-­Fetoprotein; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; HCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; HVA, homovanillic acid; MIBG, metaiodobenzylguanidine; VMA,
vanillylmandelic acid.
Modified from Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011. p. 589.

CT

MRI

PET-CT

PET-MRI

Fig. 542.5 Neuroblastoma PET/CT sagittal fused image demonstrated partial mis-­registration of avid disease, occult on the low-dose noncontrast
CT. PET/MRI sagittal fused image demonstrated correct image co-­registration with corresponding T2-­weighted hyperintensity in L3 vertebra,
confirming L3 marrow involvement, delineated on the MR and not on the CT (arrow). (From Sepehrizadeh T, Jong I, DeVeer M, Malhotra A. PET/MRI
in paediatric disease. Eur J Radiol. 2021;144:109987. Fig. 2.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3086 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

Chapter 543

Principles of Cancer
Treatment
Erika D. Friehling, Julia C. Meade,
Archie Bleyer, and A. Kim Ritchey
Treatment of children with cancer begins with an absolute requirement for
the correct diagnosis (including subtype), proceeds through accurate and
thorough staging of the extent of disease and determination of prognostic
subgroup, provides appropriate multidisciplinary and usually multimodal
therapy, and requires assiduous evaluation for possible recurrent disease
and late effects of the disease and the therapies rendered. Throughout
treatment, every child with cancer should have the benefit of the expertise
of specialized teams of providers of pediatric cancer care, including pediatric oncologists, pathologists, radiologists, surgeons, radiation oncologists,
nurses, and support staff, including nutritionists, social workers, psychologists, pharmacists, other medical specialists, and teachers trained to work
with seriously ill children.
The best chance for cure of cancer is during the initial course of treatment; the cure rates for patients with recurrent disease are much lower
than those for patients with primary disease. All patients with cancer
should be referred to an appropriate specialized center as soon as possible when the diagnosis of cancer is suspected. All such centers in North
America are identified on the Children’s Oncology Group website (http:/
/www.childrensoncologygroup.org) and on the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) cancer trials website (http://www.clinicaltrials.gov). In the United
States, the NCI’s Clinical Trials Cooperative Groups Program is associated
with a >80% reduction in the incidence of mortality from childhood cancer over 40 years despite an overall increase in cancer incidence during
this interval (Fig. 543.1). After what appeared to be a plateau in the rate of
decline in mortality in the early 2000s, there is evidence that the mortality
rate continues to decline. Notably, a greater decline in mortality has been
seen in the adolescent and young adult population when compared with
children <15 years old, reversing prior trends (Fig. 543.2). The most current information on treatment of all types of childhood cancer is available
in the PDQ (Physician Data Query) on the NCI website (http://www.canc
er.gov/cancertopics/pdq/pediatrictreatment).

DIAGNOSIS AND STAGING

Accurate diagnosis and staging of the extent of disease are imperative
because the nature of therapy depends strongly on the type of cancer. In
addition, prognostic subgroups based on the stage of disease have been
established for most cancers that occur in children. Accordingly, children
with a better prognosis are treated with less intensive therapy, including
lower doses of chemotherapy or radiation therapy, a shorter duration of
treatment, or elimination of at least one treatment modality (radiation
therapy, chemotherapy, surgery). Accurate staging thus reduces the risk of
excessive acute toxicity and long-­term effects of therapy in patients whose
prognosis indicates that less therapy is required for cure. Overtreatment
of patients with a more favorable prognosis is a definite risk if the patient
is not referred to a cancer treatment center. Conversely, undertreatment
also is a clear risk if the diagnosis and stage are not correct, resulting in a
compromise of an otherwise high potential for cure.
Diagnostic imaging is a critical phase of evaluation in most children with solid tumors. MRI, CT, ultrasonography, scintigraphy
(nuclear medicine scans), positron emission tomography (PET), and
spectroscopy, as appropriate, all serve a clear purpose in the evaluation
of children with cancer, not only before treatment to determine the
extent of disease and the appropriate therapy but also during follow-­up
to determine whether the therapy was effective (see Chapter 542). In
addition, response to treatment as determined by imaging techniques
is being increasingly used to guide changes in the therapy.

Expertise in pathology and laboratory medicine provides critical
diagnostic support and guides therapy in most children with cancer.
Relatively noninvasive methods of obtaining tumor tissue such as percutaneous image-­guided biopsy can be performed in pediatric centers
with appropriate expertise in diagnostic imaging, interventional radiology, cytology, and anesthesia support. Sentinel node mapping is helpful in the staging of some children’s cancers. Determining the adequacy
of surgery by evaluating frozen sections of the surgical margins for
tumor cells is essential in many tumor operations.

A MULTIMODAL, MULTIDISCIPLINARY APPROACH

Many pediatric subspecialists are involved in the evaluation, treatment,
and management of children with cancer, including provision of primary therapy and supportive care services (Fig. 543.3). More than two
of the primary modalities are often used together, with chemotherapy
the most widely used, followed in order of use by surgery, radiation
therapy, and biologic agent therapy (Fig. 543.4).
The leukemias that occur in childhood usually are managed with chemotherapy alone, with a small proportion of patients receiving cranial
radiation therapy to prevent or treat overt central nervous system (CNS)
leukemia. Children with non-­Hodgkin lymphoma also are treated with
chemotherapy alone, except for radiation therapy for CNS involvement.
Localized therapy with surgery or irradiation, or both, is an important component of treatment of most solid tumors, including Hodgkin
lymphoma, but systemic multiagent chemotherapy usually is necessary
because tumor dissemination generally is present even if undetectable.
Chemotherapy alone usually is not adequate to eradicate gross residual
tumors. Therefore it is not unusual for children with malignant tumors to
require treatment with all three modalities (see Fig. 543.4). Unfortunately,
most treatments that are effective in children with cancer have a narrow
therapeutic index (a low ratio of efficacy to toxicity). The acute and late
effects of these treatments can be minimized but not entirely avoided.
Biologic agent therapy is an important modality in a few childhood
cancers (see Fig. 543.4). This type of treatment generally refers to immunotherapy, biologic response modifiers, or endogenously occurring molecules that have therapeutic effects in supraphysiologic doses. Examples are
retinoic acid therapy in acute promyelocytic leukemia, monoclonal antibody therapy for neuroblastoma and certain non-­Hodgkin lymphomas,
tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as imatinib mesylate for chronic myelogenous and Philadelphia chromosome–positive leukemias, and radioactive
metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) therapy for neuroblastoma. In addition, immune therapy directed at tumor cell antigens with modification
of T-­cell receptors (TCRs) or chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) have
improved survival in patients with chemotherapy-­resistant diseases (leukemia, lymphoma) and have shown promise in solid tumors and brain
tumors.
Chemotherapy is used more widely in children than in adults
because children better tolerate the acute adverse effects, and the
malignant diseases that occur in childhood are more responsive to chemotherapy than are malignant diseases of adults. Radiation therapy
is used sparingly in children because of its association with growth
impairment and with the development of second malignant neoplasms.
Whenever possible, treatment is given on an outpatient basis. Children
should remain living at home and in school as much as possible throughout
treatment. Increasingly, pediatric cancer therapies are being administered
to ambulatory patients, with the advent of such innovations as programmable infusion pumps, oral chemotherapeutic regimens, early discharge
from hospital with intensive outpatient supportive care, and home healthcare services. Some patients miss a considerable amount of school in the
first year after diagnosis because of the intensity of therapy or its adverse
effects and the ensuing complications of the disease or therapy. Tutoring
should be encouraged so that children do not fall behind in their schooling; counseling should be provided as appropriate. In-­hospital school services should be provided for patients who must spend much of their time
as inpatients receiving therapy for disease or for managing adverse effects.
Upon completion of therapy, referral for pediatric neuropsychiatric testing
in a specialized center is often recommended to ensure they are well supported in their education.
De novo or acquired resistance to chemotherapy and radiation therapy
remains an obstacle to cure. Ongoing discoveries of molecular and cellular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 543 u Principles of Cancer Treatment

selumetinib, fall into this category (Table 543.1). Complementary and
alternative therapies are increasingly being provided by parents to their
children with cancer, with or without knowledge of the medical professionals entrusted with the child’s care (see Chapter 7). Collaboration with
the family and a pharmacist specializing in chemotherapy can minimize
unwanted interactions from supplements.

mechanisms that explain the cancer process have led to increasingly specific antineoplastic therapies, generally referred to as molecularly targeted
therapies. Their most prominent feature is a relative lack of normal tissue
toxicity, such that the additional therapeutic benefit occurs with minimum
additional toxicity. Many biologic agent therapies, such as imatinib and
16

Rate per 100,000, Age Adjusted

14

DISCUSSING THE TREATMENT PLAN WITH THE
PATIENT AND FAMILY

U.S. SEER Cancer Incidence
Among Children 15 Yr

The diagnostic and treatment plan must be carefully explained to parents
and, if the child is old enough to understand, to the patient. Children
should be given as much information as they can understand and would
be useful to them. All questions should be answered openly and honestly.
Effects of treatment, such as loss of hair during chemotherapy, the possible
need to amputate a limb, and possible temporary or permanent functional
impairment, must be anticipated and fully discussed. The possibility and
probability of death from cancer should be covered in an age-­appropriate
manner. It usually is necessary to repeat explanations several times before

12
C hi

ldr e n’ s

10
Oncology
Group

8
6
4
2
0

3087

U.S. Cancer Mortality Rate
Among Children 15 Yr

Deaths per 100,000
3
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000
1975-1983 APC = –1.0*
95% Cl = –1.7 to –0.2

Children’s Oncology Group

2.5

Children’s Cancer Group

1983-1986 APC = –4.2
95% Cl = –11.6 to 3.8
1975-1983 APC = –1.0*
95% Cl = –1.7 to –0.2
1997-2003 APC = 0.2
95% Cl = –1.6 to 2.1

Pediatric Oncology Group
Southwest Oncology Group

2

Cancer and Acute Leukemia Group B
National Wilms Tumor Study Group
Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma

1.5

Fig. 543.1 Reduction in the national cancer mortality rate among chil-

dren younger than 15 years of age (triangles) in the United States as a
direct consequence of the National Cooperative Group Program sponsored by the National Cancer Institute and compared with the rising
incidence of cancer before age 15 (circles). The horizontal bars indicate
the duration of the existence of the national pediatric cancer cooperative groups, beginning with the Children’s Cancer Group in 1955.
Other groups are the Pediatric Oncology Group, which was derived
from the Pediatrics Divisions of the Southwest Oncology Group and the
Cancer and Acute Leukemia Group B; the National Wilms Tumor Study
Group; and the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group. In 2000
the four pediatric cooperative groups merged into the Children’s Oncology Group. (Incidence and mortality rate data from Ries LAG, Eisner
MP, Kosary CL, et al., eds. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–2002.
Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/19
75_2002/, based on November 2004 SEER [Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results] data submission. The mortality rate data are national
rates, and the incidence data are derived from the SEER program, representing approximately 15% of the United States. The most current
information on treatment of all types of childhood cancer is available in
the PDQ [Physician Data Query] on the NCI website, http://www.cance
r.gov/cancertopics/pdq/pediatrictreatment.)

2003-2010 APC = –2.0*
95% Cl = –3.1 to –0.8

1975-1999 APC = –3.7*
95% Cl = –3.8 to –3.5

1

1999-2002 APC = –0.4
95% Cl = –8.3 to 8
2002-2010 APC = –3.7*
95% Cl = –4.6 to –2.7

0.5

0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Fig. 543.2 Age-­adjusted mortality trends for all malignant cancers

among children <20 yr old in the United States from 1975 through
2010, along with annual percentage changes (APCs) for join point segments. Asterisk indicates that the slope of the join point segment is
statistically different from zero (p < .05). The green line indicates leukemias and lymphomas, and the blue line indicates all other cancer
sites; CI, confidence interval. (From Smith MA, Altekruse SF, Adamson
PC, et al. Declining childhood and adolescent cancer mortality. Cancer.
2014;120:2497–2506.)
Psychosocial
care

Vascular
access

Child life
care
Blood
products

Antibiotics

Surgery

Nursing

Antiemetics

Chemotherapy
Fine-needle
biopsy
Nutrition

Fig. 543.3 Multidisciplinary care of children with cancer.
The inner circle designates primary modalities, and the
outer ring identifies supportive care elements to which all
children with cancer have access.

Pathology
Diagnostic
imaging

Parenteral
alimentation

Radiotherapy

Child
with
cancer
Molecular
biology

Pharmacy

Growth
factors

Stem cell
transplantation
Sedatives,
anesthetics
Analgesics

Dental care

Cytokines

Supportive care

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3088 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

Dasatinib,
nilotinib

BCR-­ABL

CML
Philadelphia chromosome–positive
ALL

topoisomerase inhibitors (Table 543.2). The increased metabolic and cell
cycle activity of malignant cells makes them more susceptible to the cytotoxic effects of these types of agents (Fig. 543.5).
Because most antineoplastic agents are cell cycle dependent, their
adverse effects usually are related to the proliferation kinetics of individual
cell populations. Most susceptible are tissues or organs with high rates of
cell turnover: bone marrow, oral and intestinal mucosa, epidermis, liver,
and spermatogonia. The most common acute adverse effects are myelosuppression (with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia the most problematic), immunosuppression, nausea and vomiting, hepatic dysfunction,
upper and lower gastrointestinal mucositis, dermatitis, and alopecia. Fortunately, the tissues affected also recover relatively quickly, so that the acute
adverse effects are usually reversible. Life-­threatening effects of many chemotherapy agents include severe neutropenia with infection, fungemia, or
fungal pneumonia as a result of immunosuppression, and septicemia, not
infrequently linked to indwelling intravascular devices (Table 543.3; see
Chapters 223 and 224). Cardiomyopathy caused by anthracyclines (e.g.,
doxorubicin, daunorubicin) and renal failure from platinum-­containing
agents also may be life-­threatening or disabling. Assistance from a supportive care team can also provide safe and effective support for toxicities
associated with chemotherapy, such as pain and nausea.
Least susceptible to chemotherapy and radiation therapy are cells that
do not replicate or that replicate slowly, such as neurons, muscle cells, connective tissue, and bone. Children are not exempt from toxicities of these
tissues, probably because they are still undergoing proliferation, although
at a slower pace than other tissues, during growth and growth spurts.
Physically, children can endure the acute adverse effects of chemotherapy better than adults can in many ways. The maximum tolerated dosage in
children, when expressed based on body surface area or body weight, typically is greater than that in adults. A comparison of anticancer drugs tested
in phase I trials in both adult and pediatric patients showed that the maximum tolerated dosage in children was greater than that in adults for 70%
of the agents, equal to that in adults for 15%, and less than the adult dose
for only 15% of the agents. For all the drugs that were compared, the mean
pediatric maximum tolerated dosage was greater than the adult mean.

Brentuximab

CD30

Hodgkin lymphoma

Pharmacogenomics

Rituximab

CD20

Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma

Selumetinib

MAPK/MEK

Plexiform neurofibroma
Low-­grade glioma

Bevacizumab

VEGFR-­1, -­2

Low-­grade glioma

Crizotinib,
lorlatinib

ALK/ROS

Neuroblastoma
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma
Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor

Dinutuximab

GD2

Neuroblastoma

Blinatumomab

CD19

Leukemia
Lymphoma

Biologic
agents

Radiotherapy

Surgery
Chemotherapy

Fig. 543.4 The primary modalities of therapy used in the treatment of
children with cancer. The relative sizes of the circles designate the approximate proportion of overall role in the management of pediatric cancers.

Table 543.1  Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors and Monoclonal
Antibodies for Pediatric Cancers
AGENT
Imatinib

TARGET
BCR-­ABL

PDGFRα
cKIT

MALIGNANCY
CML
Philadelphia chromosome–positive
ALL
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor

ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia; CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia.

distraught family members fully understand. Throughout treatment, parents, patients, siblings, and medical staff will all need help in expressing
feelings of anxiety, depression, guilt, and anger. The pediatrician, pediatric
oncologist, and nurses should call on experienced professionals, including pediatric social workers, child psychologists and psychiatrists, child life
specialists, and teachers with special expertise in managing students with
cancer, to assist when needed.

TREATMENTS
Chemotherapy

The most widely used modality in pediatric cancer therapy is chemotherapy (see Fig. 543.4). Therapy usually involves a combination of drugs with
different mechanisms of action and non­overlapping toxicities. Sequential single-­drug therapy rarely results in complete responses, and partial
responses usually are infrequent, transient, and grow progressively shorter
in duration with each drug used. Most of the cytotoxic drugs for childhood cancer are selected from several classes of agents, including alkylating agents, antimetabolites, antibiotics, hormones, plant alkaloids, and

Interindividual variability in the response to similar doses of a given
medication is an inherent characteristic of both adult and pediatric
populations. Variations in the germline genome can lead to differences
in drug response at the level of individual patients. Pharmacogenomics represents the combination of pharmacology and genomics and is
defined as the broader application of genetic testing strategies to identify
factors predictive of drug efficacy and risk of adverse drug reactions.
Thiopurine S-­methyltransferase (TPMT) is an enzyme that catalyzes
the methylation of the chemotherapy 6-­mercaptopurine (6MP) used in
the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). To exert its cytotoxic effects, 6MP requires metabolism to thioguanine nucleotides, and
this reaction is prevented by TPMT. Of the general population, 89% has
normal TPMT activity, 11% has intermediate activity, and 0.3% has low
activity. In patients with low or intermediate activity variants of TPMT,
there is accumulation of cytotoxic thioguanine nucleotides (Fig. 543.6).
These patients are at increased risk for severe myelosuppression if treated
with routine doses of thiopurines and require a 10-­15–fold reduction in
dose to minimize this risk.
TPMT genotype is not the only determinant of intolerance to thiopurines; genetic variation in NUDT15, a nucleotide diphosphatase that
reduces the incorporation of thioguanine into DNA, may also be involved.
Reduction or loss of NUDT15 activity results in increased cytotoxicity.
Patients who have inherited reduced-­function NUDT15 alleles tolerate
thiopurine doses that are much lower (10%) than normal. It is reasonable
to expect that both TPMT and NUDT15 genotypes will need to be considered for individualized thiopurine treatment, identifying patients who
will benefit from specific dosing regimens and those who will be at risk for
short-­term and long-­term toxicities.

Immunotherapy

Tumor-­directed immune therapies employ and enhance the patient’s
immune system to kill malignant cells. Tumor antigen–specific monoclonal antibodies have been incorporated into the standard therapy of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 543.2  Common Chemotherapeutic Agents Used in Pediatric Cancer
MECHANISM OF
ACTION OR
CLASSIFICATION

DRUG

INDICATION(S)

ADVERSE REACTIONS
(PARTIAL LIST)

COMMENTS

Methotrexate

Folic acid antagonist;
inhibits dihydrofolate
reductase

ALL, non-­Hodgkin
Myelosuppression, mucositis,
lymphoma, osteosarcoma,
stomatitis, dermatitis, hepatitis
Hodgkin lymphoma,
With long-­term administration,
medulloblastoma
osteopenia and bone fractures
With high-­dose administration, renal
and CNS toxicity
With intrathecal administration,
arachnoiditis, leukoencephalopathy,
and leukomyelopathy

Systemic administration
may be PO, IM, or IV;
also may be
administered
intrathecally
Plasma methotrexate
levels must be
monitored with
high-­dose therapy
and when low doses
are administered to
patients with renal
dysfunction, and
leucovorin rescue
applied accordingly

6-­Mercaptopurine
(Purinethol)

Purine analog; inhibits
purine synthesis

ALL

Myelosuppression, hepatic necrosis,
mucositis; allopurinol increases
toxicity

Allopurinol inhibits
metabolism

Cytarabine (cytosine
arabinoside; Ara-­C)

Pyrimidine analog;
inhibits DNA
polymerase

ALL, AML, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, Hodgkin
lymphoma

Nausea, vomiting, myelosuppression,
conjunctivitis, mucositis, CNS
dysfunction
With intrathecal administration,
arachnoiditis, leukoencephalopathy,
and leukomyelopathy

Systemic administration
may be PO, IM, or IV;
may also be
administered
intrathecally

Cyclophosphamide
(Cytoxan)

Alkylates guanine;
inhibits DNA synthesis

ALL, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, Hodgkin
lymphoma, soft tissue
sarcoma, Ewing sarcoma,
Wilms tumor,
neuroblastoma

Nausea, vomiting, myelosuppression,
hemorrhagic cystitis,
pulmonary fibrosis, inappropriate
ADH secretion, bladder cancer,
anaphylaxis

Requires hepatic
activation and thus is
less effective in
presence of liver
dysfunction
Mesna prevents
hemorrhagic cystitis

Ifosfamide (IFEX)

Alkylates guanine;
inhibits DNA synthesis

Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma,
Wilms tumor, soft tissue
sarcoma

Nausea, vomiting, myelosuppression,
hemorrhagic cystitis, pulmonary
fibrosis, inappropriate ADH
secretion, CNS dysfunction,
cardiac toxicity, anaphylaxis

Mesna prevents
hemorrhagic cystitis

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), daunorubicin
(Cerubidine), and
idarubicin (Idamycin)

Binds to DNA,
intercalation

ALL, AML, osteosarcoma,
Ewing sarcoma, Hodgkin
lymphoma, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, neuroblastoma

Nausea, vomiting, cardiomyopathy,
red urine, tissue necrosis on
extravasation, myelosuppression,
conjunctivitis, radiation dermatitis,
arrhythmia

Dexrazoxane reduces
risk of cardiotoxicity

Dactinomycin

Binds to DNA, inhibits
transcription

Wilms tumor,
rhabdomyosarcoma,
Ewing sarcoma

Nausea, vomiting tissue necrosis on
extravasation, myelosuppression,
radiation dermatitis, mucosal
ulceration

Bleomycin (Blenoxane)

Binds to DNA, cleaves
DNA strands

Hodgkin disease,
non-­Hodgkin lymphoma,
germ cell tumors

Nausea, vomiting, pneumonitis,
stomatitis, Raynaud phenomenon,
pulmonary fibrosis, dermatitis

Vincristine (Oncovin)

Inhibits microtubule
formation

ALL, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, Hodgkin
disease, Wilms tumor,
Ewing sarcoma,
neuroblastoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma

Local cellulitis, peripheral
neuropathy, constipation, ileus, jaw
pain, inappropriate ADH
secretion, seizures, ptosis,
minimal myelosuppression

IV administration only;
must not be allowed
to extravasate

Vinblastine (Velban)

Inhibits microtubule
formation

Hodgkin lymphoma,
non-­Hodgkin lymphoma,
Langerhans cell
histiocytosis, CNS tumors

Local cellulitis, leukopenia

IV administration only;
must not be allowed
to extravasate

l-­Asparaginase

Depletion of
l-­asparagine

ALL; AML, when used in
combination with
cytarabine

Allergic reaction pancreatitis,
hyperglycemia, platelet
dysfunction and coagulopathy,
encephalopathy

Pegaspargase now
preferred to
l-­asparaginase

ALL

Indicated for prolonged asparagine
depletion and for patients with
allergy to l-­asparaginase

Pegaspargase (Oncaspar) Polyethylene glycol
Calaspargase-­pegol-­mknl
conjugate of
l-­asparagine
(Asparlas)

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3090 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 543.2  Common Chemotherapeutic Agents Used in Pediatric Cancer—cont’d
MECHANISM OF
ACTION OR
CLASSIFICATION

DRUG

ADVERSE REACTIONS
(PARTIAL LIST)

INDICATION(S)

COMMENTS

Prednisone and
dexamethasone
(Decadron)

Lymphatic cell lysis

ALL; Hodgkin lymphoma,
non-­Hodgkin lymphoma

Cushing syndrome, cataracts,
diabetes, hypertension,
myopathy, osteoporosis,
avascular necrosis, infection,
peptic ulceration, psychosis

Carmustine (BiCNU)

Carbamylation of
DNA; inhibits DNA
synthesis

CNS tumors, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, Hodgkin
lymphoma

Nausea, vomiting, delayed
myelosuppression (4-­6 wk);
pulmonary fibrosis, carcinogenic
stomatitis

Phenobarbital increases
metabolism, decreases
activity

Carboplatin and
cisplatin (Platinol)

Inhibits DNA synthesis

Osteosarcoma,
neuroblastoma, CNS
tumors, germ cell tumors

Nausea, vomiting, renal
dysfunction, myelosuppression,
ototoxicity, tetany, neurotoxicity,
hemolytic-­uremic syndrome,
anaphylaxis

Aminoglycosides may
increase nephrotoxicity

Etoposide (Vepesid)

Topoisomerase
inhibitor

ALL, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, germ cell
tumor, Ewing sarcoma

Nausea, vomiting, myelosuppression,
secondary leukemia

Tretinoin (all
trans-­retinoic acid)
and isotretinoin
(cis-­retinoic acid;
Accutane)

Enhances normal
differentiation

Acute promyelocytic
leukemia; neuroblastoma

Dry mouth, hair loss, pseudotumor
cerebri, premature epiphyseal
closure, birth defects

ADH, Antidiuretic hormone; ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myelogenous leukemia; CNS, central nervous system; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, oral.

Etoposide
Teniposide
Topotecan
Irinotecan

Dactinomycin
Doxorubicin
Daunomycin
Idarubicin
Mitoxantrone

Doxorubicin
Daunomycin
Idarubicin
Bleomycin

Topoisomerasemediated
Intercalation
Strand Breaks

Cytarabine
CMP

Free Radical
Damage

dCMP
DNA
dTMP
FH2

Alkylation

Replication
Transcription

Fluorouracil
FH4

Purines

dUMP

Fluorouracil

Mercaptopurine
Thioguanine

Methotrexate

Mechlorethamine
Cyclophosphamide
Ifosfamide
Melphalan
Carboplatin
Cisplatin
Nitrosoureas
Busulfan
Dacarbazine
Temozolomide
Procarbazine

RNA
Translation

De Novo
Synthesis

Salvage
Pathway
Protein

Drug inhibits this step
Tubulin
Drug incorporated into
macromolecule

neuroblastoma (anti–ganglioside GD2). The antiangiogenic agent bevacizumab (monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth
factor A) is used in the treatment of low-­grade gliomas.
Chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-­T cells) are genetically
engineered to make new TCRs that can recognize and attach to an
antigen on the tumor cell. This results in T-­cell proliferation, cytolysis, and cytokine release with subsequent tumor cell death (Fig. 543.7).

Asparaginase

Vincristine
Vinblastine
Vinorelbine
Paclitaxel
Docetaxel

Fig. 543.5 Site of action of the commonly used anticancer drugs. CMP,
Cytidine monophosphate; dCMP, deoxycytidine monophosphate; dTMP,
deoxythymidine
monophosphate;
dUMP, deoxyuridine monophosphate;
FH2, dihydrofolate; FH4, tetrahydrofolate. (Redrawn from Adamson PC,
Balis FM, Blaney SM. General principles of chemotherapy. In: Pizzo PA,
Poplack DG, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Oncology. 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2011: p. 283.)

The B-­cell antigen CD19 is the antigen targeted in children with ALL
and some adults with lymphoma. The response to therapy in children
with chemotherapy-­resistant ALL is dramatic. Other antigens may be
targeted, including CD22, CD30 (lymphomas), CD171, GD2 (neuroblastoma), EGFR, and HER2 (glioblastoma).
Side effects of CAR-­T therapy are common and potentially serious
and are caused by the cytokine release syndrome (CRS). Manifestations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 543 u Principles of Cancer Treatment

3091

Table 543.3  Infectious Complications of Malignancy
PREDISPOSING FACTOR
Neutropenia

ETIOLOGY

SITE OF INFECTION

Chemotherapy,
bone marrow
infiltration

INFECTIOUS AGENTS

Sepsis, shock, pneumonia, soft tissue,
proctitis, mucositis

Viridans group streptococcus, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Candida, Aspergillus, anaerobic oral and rectal bacteria

Immunosuppression,
Chemotherapy,
lymphopenia, lymphocyte-­
corticosteroid
monocyte dysfunction

Pneumonia, meningitis,
disseminated viral
infection

Pneumocystis jiroveci, Cryptococcus neoformans, Mycobacterium,
Nocardia, Listeria monocytogenes, Candida, Aspergillus, Strongyloides, Toxoplasma, varicella-­zoster virus, cytomegalovirus,
herpes simplex

Indwelling central venous
catheter

Line sepsis, tract of
tunnel, exit site

S. epidermidis, S. aureus, Candida albicans, P. aeruginosa, Aspergillus, Corynebacterium, Enterococcus faecalis, Mycobacterium
fortuitum, Propionibacterium acnes

Nutrition,
administration of
chemotherapy

Modified from Kliegman RM, Marcdante KJ, Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011.

Active drug
TPMT function

Azathioprine or
6-mercaptopurine
dose

Normal function

Expected drug
effect

Decreased function

Risk of
hematologic
toxicity

No function

High risk of
hematologic
toxicity

Fig. 543.6 The impact of variable pharmacokinetic gene function on

the effect of bioactivation of prodrug versus inactivation of an active
drug. (From Roden DM, McLeod HL, Relling MV, et al. Pharmacogenomics. Lancet. 2019;394[10197]:521–532. Fig. 2)

of CRS include hypotension, vascular leak, myalgias, cerebral edema, seizures, and confusion. Symptoms correlate with the extent of the tumor
burden and require supportive care. Tocilizumab, an anti–interleukin-­6
receptor monoclonal antibody, is the treatment of choice for CRS. B-­cell
aplasia may also develop and requires immune globulin replacement.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors are drugs (monoclonal antibodies)
which enhance the ability of T-­cells to attack cancer cells. Checkpoints
on T-­cells and cancer cells include PD-­1/PD-­L1 (programed death protein and programed death ligand-­1), which normally dampen the T-­cell
response. CTLA-4 and LAG-3 are additional immune checkpoint molecules. Thus checkpoint inhibitors allow the T-­cell to kill the cancer cells
more effectively. Immune-related adverse events (irAEs) due to activated
T cells include autoimmune-like disorders affecting many tissues including skin, liver, lung, CNS, and gastrointestinal and endocrine organs.

Surgery

Superb pediatric surgical and anesthesia services are indispensable for
children with cancer. The pediatric surgeon’s role varies depending on
the type of tumor. For solid tumors, complete resection with documented evidence of negative margins often is required for cure or long-­
term control. Considerable prolongation of life usually depends on the
tumor’s resectability and the actual extent of resection.
Except for pontine gliomas and retinoblastoma, all solid tumors in children require a tissue diagnosis; therefore biopsy of the suspected neoplasm
is paramount. Staging with sentinel node biopsies has become the standard
of care for several pediatric malignancies. Surgical expertise is essential for
implantation of vascular access devices and removal and replacement of
such devices when infection or thrombosis supervenes (see Chapter 224).
Minimally invasive endoscopic surgical techniques are being used
when indicated and, if the patient’s condition permits, for biopsy and
resection of tumor, direct ascertainment of residual disease and assessment of response, lysis of adhesions, and splenectomy.

Radiation Therapy

Radiation therapy is used sparingly in children, who are more susceptible
than adults to the adverse delayed effects of ionizing radiation. A major
advance in pediatric radiation therapy is the application of conformal

radiation to children with cancer. This technique, most often applied as
intensity-­modulated radiation therapy, spares normal tissue by conforming the radiation volume to the shape of the tumor, thereby enabling
delivery of higher doses to the tumor with lower exposure of normal tissue
adjacent to the tumor or in the path of the radiation beam. Another example is proton-­beam radiotherapy. With more focused beams and better
sedation and immobilization techniques, radiation therapy is becoming
more common in children. Acute adverse effects from radiation therapy
depend on which part of the body is irradiated and the means of administration. Dermatitis is the most common general adverse effect because
skin is always in the treatment field. Nausea and diarrhea are common
subacute adverse effects with abdominal radiation therapy. Mucositis
typically occurs to some extent whenever oral or intestinal mucosa is in
the treatment volume. Somnolence is common with cranial irradiation.
Alopecia occurs where hair is in the radiation field.
Most radiation therapy schedules require treatment 5 days per week for
4-­7 weeks, depending on the dose needed to control the tumor and the
amount and nature of normal tissue in the field. Most adverse effects are
not noted until the second half of the course of irradiation. Late effects
can occur months to years after radiation therapy and usually are dose-­
dependent manifestations. The type of delayed toxicity also depends on
the site of irradiation. Examples are impaired growth resulting from cranial or vertebral irradiation, endocrine dysfunction from hypothalamic
irradiation, pulmonary or cardiac insufficiency from chest irradiation,
strictures and adhesions from abdominal irradiation, and infertility from
pelvic irradiation. Second malignancy can also develop in the radiation
field, such as breast cancer from chest irradiation and brain tumors from
CNS irradiation.

ACUTE TOXIC EFFECTS AND SUPPORTIVE CARE

Adverse treatment effects that occur early in therapy can result in
oncologic emergencies. These include metabolic disorders, bone
marrow suppression, and compression by tumors on vital structures
(Table 543.4). In tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), uric acid, phosphate,
and potassium are released in the circulation in large quantities from
death of tumor cells. Hyperuricemia can lead to impairment of renal
function, which further exacerbates the metabolic abnormalities. TLS
can occur before therapy in patients with a large tumor burden (e.g.,
Burkitt lymphoma, lymphoblastic lymphoma, and leukemia presenting
with a high white blood cell count), but it is usually seen within 12-­48
hours of initiating chemotherapy. TLS is infrequently reported in other
tumors (Hodgkin lymphoma, neuroblastoma, hepatoblastoma). Before
therapy is initiated, the serum levels of uric acid, electrolytes, calcium,
phosphorus, and creatinine should be measured, and adequate hydration ensured. Allopurinol (a xanthine oxidase inhibitor) should be
started to prevent further accumulation of uric acid. In patients with
established TLS with high uric acid levels or those at high risk for
TLS, rasburicase (an enzyme that degrades uric acid) should be given.
Symptomatic hyperkalemia and hyperphosphatemia with subsequent
hypocalcemia can develop in the setting of inadequate renal function.
Virtually all chemotherapy regimens can produce myelosuppression,
as can malignancies that invade and replace bone marrow. Anemia can

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3092 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
CAR T-Cell Therapy
CAR
protein

Make CAR T
2 cells in the lab

Insert gene
for CAR
CAR T cell
Grow millions

3 of CAR T cells
T cell

Fig. 543.7 Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-­cell therapy. CAR
Infuse

4 CAR T cells

1 Remove blood from
patient to get T cells

5

into patient

CAR T cells bind
to cancer cells
and kill them
Cancer cell

Antigen

T-­cell therapy is a type of treatment in which a patient’s T cells are
genetically engineered in the laboratory so they will bind to specific proteins (antigens) on cancer cells and kill them. (1) A patient’s
T cells are removed from their blood. Then (2) the gene for a special receptor called a chimeric antigen receptor is inserted into the
T cells in the laboratory. The gene encodes the engineered CAR
protein that is expressed on the surface of the patient’s T cells,
creating a CAR T cell. (3) Millions of CAR T cells are grown in the
laboratory. (4) They are then given to the patient by intravenous infusion. (5) The CAR T cells bind to antigens on the cancer cells and
kill them. (Courtesy National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. https://www.cancer.gov/about-­
cancer/treatment/research/car-­t-­cell-­therapy-­infographic)

Table 543.4  Oncologic Emergencies
CONDITION

MANIFESTATIONS

ETIOLOGY

MALIGNANCY

TREATMENT

METABOLIC
Hyperuricemia

Uric acid nephropathy

Tumor lysis syndrome

Lymphoma, leukemia

Allopurinol, hydration, rasburicase

Hyperkalemia

Arrhythmias, cardiac arrest

Tumor lysis syndrome

Lymphoma, leukemia

Kayexalate, sodium bicarbonate,
calcium gluconate, glucose, and
insulin; check for pseudohyperkalemia from leukemic cell lysis in
test tube

Hyperphosphatemia

Hypocalcemic tetany; metastatic
calcification, photophobia,
pruritus

Tumor lysis syndrome

Lymphoma, leukemia

Hydration, forced diuresis; stop
alkalinization; oral aluminum
hydroxide to bind phosphate

Hyponatremia

Seizure, lethargy (may also be
asymptomatic)

SIADH; fluid, sodium
losses in vomiting

Leukemia, CNS tumor

Restrict free water for SIADH;
replace sodium if depleted

Hypercalcemia

Anorexia, nausea, polyuria,
pancreatitis, gastric ulcers;
prolonged PR, shortened QT
interval

Bone resorption;
ectopic parathormone, vitamin D, or
prostaglandins

Metastasis to bone,
rhabdomyosarcoma,
leukemia

Hydration and furosemide diuresis;
corticosteroids; calcitonin, bisphosphonates

HEMATOLOGIC
Anemia

Pallor, weakness, heart failure

Bone marrow suppression or infiltration;
blood loss

Any with chemotherapy

Packed red blood cell transfusion

Thrombocytopenia

Petechiae, hemorrhage

Bone marrow suppression or infiltration

Any with chemotherapy

Platelet transfusion

Disseminated
intravascular
coagulation

Shock, hemorrhage

Sepsis, hypotension,
tumor factors

Promyelocytic leukemia, others

Fresh-­frozen plasma; platelets,
cryoprecipitate, treat underlying
disorder

Neutropenia

Infection

Bone marrow suppression or infiltration

Any with chemotherapy

If febrile, administer broad-­
spectrum antibiotics, and filgrastim (G-­CSF) if appropriate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 543 u Principles of Cancer Treatment

3093

Table 543.4  Oncologic Emergencies—cont’d
CONDITION

MANIFESTATIONS

ETIOLOGY

Hyperleukocytosis
(>100,000/mm3)

Hemorrhage, thrombosis;
pulmonary infiltrates, hypoxia;
tumor lysis syndrome

Leukostasis; vascular
occlusion

Leukemia

Leukapheresis; chemotherapy;
hydroxyurea

Graft versus host
disease

Dermatitis, diarrhea, hepatitis

Immunosuppression
and nonirradiated
blood products;
bone marrow
transplantation

Any with
immunosuppression

Corticosteroids; cyclosporine;
tacrolimus; antithymocyte globulin

Metastasis to vertebra
and extramedullary
space

Neuroblastoma,
ewing, glioma

Corticosteroids, surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy

SPACE-­OCCUPYING LESIONS
Spinal cord
Back pain ± radicular
compression
Cord above T10: symmetric
weakness, increased deep
tendon reflex; sensory level
present; toes up
Conus medullaris (T10-­L2):
symmetric weakness, increased
knee reflexes; decreased ankle
reflexes; saddle sensory loss;
toes up or down
Cauda equina (below L2):
asymmetric weakness; loss
of deep tendon reflex and
sensory deficit; toes down

MALIGNANCY

TREATMENT

Increased
intracranial
pressure

Confusion, coma, emesis,
headache, hypertension,
bradycardia, seizures,
papilledema, hydrocephalus;
cranial nerve III and VI palsies

Primary or metastatic
brain tumor

Medulloblastoma,
glioma

Corticosteroids, ventriculostomy,
radiotherapy, chemotherapy

Superior vena cava
syndrome

Distended neck veins, plethora,
edema of head and neck,
cyanosis, Horner syndrome

Superior mediastinal
mass

Lymphoma
Germ cell tumor

Chemotherapy, radiotherapy

Tracheal
compression

Respiratory distress

Mediastinal mass compressing trachea

Lymphoma
Neuroblastoma

Radiation, corticosteroids

CNS, Central nervous system; G-­CSF, granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion.
Adapted from Kliegman RM, Marcdante KJ, Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011. p. 590.

be corrected by transfusions of packed erythrocytes, and thrombocytopenia can be corrected by platelet infusions. Patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy should receive irradiated blood products to prevent
graft-­versus-­host disease and leukoreduced blood products to prevent
transfusion-­associated reactions and infections. Neutropenia (neutrophil counts <500/μL) poses a risk of life-­threatening infection. Patients
with febrile neutropenia should be hospitalized and treated with empirical
broad-­spectrum intravenous antimicrobial therapy pending the results of
appropriate cultures of blood, urine, or any obvious sites of infection (see
Chapter 223). Treatment is continued until fever resolves and the neutrophil count rises. If fever persists for more than 3-­5 days while the patient
is receiving broad-­spectrum antibiotics, the possibility of fungal infection
must be considered. Fungal infections caused by Candida and Aspergillus are common in immunosuppressed patients. Opportunistic organisms
such as Pneumocystis jiroveci can produce fatal pneumonia. Prophylactic
treatment with trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole is given when severe or
prolonged immunosuppression is anticipated.
Viruses of low pathogenicity can produce serious disease in the setting
of immunosuppression caused by malignancy or its treatment. Patients
should not be given live-­virus vaccines. Children who are receiving chemotherapy and who are exposed to chickenpox should receive varicella-­
zoster immunoglobulin, or if varicella-­zoster immunoglobulin is not
available, oral acyclovir should be considered. If clinical disease develops,
the child should be hospitalized and treated with intravenous acyclovir.
Depending on the type of cancer therapy, patients can lose >10% body
weight. Patients sometimes reduce their food intake because of temporary, treatment-­
associated nausea, stomatitis, and vomiting. Appetite
loss is not a cause for alarm. Malnutrition is a particular risk in patients
receiving radiation therapy involving the abdomen or the head and
neck, intensive chemotherapy, or total body irradiation and high-­dose

chemotherapy before marrow transplantation. If oral supplementation
proves inadequate, such patients may require enteral tube feedings or parenteral hyperalimentation.
Adequate pain management is critical. The World Health Organization
(WHO) guidelines are particularly useful in the management of pain associated with cancer and cancer therapy (see Chapter 93). Assistance from a
supportive care team can provide safe and effective support for toxicities
associated with chemotherapy, such as pain and nausea.

LATE EFFECTS

Late effects of therapy can cause substantial morbidity (Table 543.5). The
type of late effects depends on the child’s age at treatment, the location(s)
of the cancer, and the therapy administered. These effects can be either
from the tumor or its treatment. For example, a brain or spinal tumor
can leave the child with a permanent paresis or autonomic dysfunction;
anthracycline-­induced cardiomyopathy usually produces refractory cardiac dysfunction; and the leukoencephalopathy caused by intrathecal
methotrexate and CNS radiation therapy often is only partially reversible.
Successful surgical resection can result in loss of important functional
structures. Irradiation can produce irreversible organ damage, with symptoms and functional limitations depending on the organ involved and the
severity of the damage. Many problems related to radiation therapy do
not become obvious until the patient is fully grown, such as asymmetry
between irradiated and nonirradiated areas or extremities. Irradiation of
fields that include endocrine organs can cause hypothyroidism, pituitary
dysfunction, or infertility. In sufficient doses, cranial irradiation can produce neurologic dysfunction, and spinal irradiation can produce growth
deficiency.
Chemotherapy also carries the risk of long-­
lasting organ damage. Of particular concern are leukoencephalopathy after high-­dose

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3094 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
methotrexate therapy; infertility in patients treated with alkylating agents (e.g., cyclophosphamide); myocardial damage caused by
anthracyclines; pulmonary fibrosis caused by bleomycin; renal dysfunction caused by ifosfamide, nitrosourea, or platinum agents; and
hearing loss from cisplatin. Development of these sequelae may
be dose related and usually is irreversible. Appropriate baseline and

intermittent testing should be performed before these drugs are administered to ensure that there is no preexisting damage to the organs likely
to be affected and to permit monitoring of the effects of treatment-­
induced changes.
Perhaps the most serious late effect is the occurrence of second
cancers in patients successfully cured of a first malignancy. The risk

Table 543.5  Late Effects and High-­Risk Features of Childhood Cancer and Its Treatment
LATE EFFECTS

EXPOSURE

SELECTED HIGH-­RISK FACTORS

AT-­RISK DIAGNOSTIC GROUPS

Chemotherapy:
• Methotrexate
Radiation affecting brain:
• Cranial
• Ear/infratemporal
• Total body irradiation (TBI)

Age <3 yr old at time of treatment
Female
Supratentorial tumor
Premorbid or family history of
learning or attention problems
Radiation doses >24 Gy
Whole-­brain irradiation

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Brain tumor
Sarcoma (head and neck or
osteosarcoma)

Chemotherapy:
• Cisplatin
• Carboplatin
Radiation affecting hearing:
• Cranial
• Infratemporal
• Nasopharyngeal

Higher cisplatin dose (360 mg/m2)
Higher radiation dose impacting
ear (>30 Gy)
Concurrent radiation and cisplatin

Brain tumor
Germ cell tumor
Sarcoma (head and neck)
Neuroblastoma
Hepatoblastoma

Hearing loss, conductive
Tympanosclerosis
Otosclerosis
Eustachian tube dysfunction

Radiation affecting hearing:
• Cranial
• Infratemporal
• Nasopharyngeal

Higher radiation dose affecting
ear (>30 Gy)

Brain tumor
Sarcoma (head and neck)

Visual impairment
Cataracts
Lacrimal duct atrophy
Xerophthalmia
Retinopathy
Glaucoma

Chemotherapy:
• Busulfan
• Glucocorticoids
Radiation affecting eye:
• Cranial
• Orbital/eye
• TBI

Higher radiation dose impacting eye (≥15 Gy for cataracts;
>45 Gy for retinopathy and visual
impairment)

Brain tumor
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Retinoblastoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma (orbital)
Allogeneic HSCT

Peripheral neuropathy, sensory

Chemotherapy:
• Vincristine
• Vinblastine
• Cisplatin
• Carboplatin
Brentuximab vedotin

Higher cisplatin dose
(≥300 mg/m2)

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Brain tumor
Hodgkin lymphoma
Germ cell tumor
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Sarcoma
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
Carcinoma

NEUROCOGNITIVE
Neurocognitive deficits
Functional deficits in:
• Executive function
• Sustained attention
• Memory
• Processing speed
• Visual-­motor integration
Learning deficits
Diminished IQ
Behavioral change
NEUROSENSORY
Hearing loss, sensorineural

NEUROMOTOR
Peripheral neuropathy, motor

ENDOCRINE
GH deficiency
Precocious puberty

Chemotherapy:
• Vincristine
• Vinblastine
Brentuximab vedotin

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Sarcoma
Brain tumor
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor

Radiation affecting HPA:
• Cranial
• Orbital/eye

Female
Radiation dose to HPA >18 Gy

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Sarcoma (facial)
Carcinoma (nasopharyngeal)

Obesity

Ear/infratemporal
Nasopharyngeal

Female
Younger age (<4 yr)

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia

Hypothyroidism, central
Gonadotropin deficiency
Adrenal insufficiency, central

TBI

Radiation dose to HPA >18 Gy

Brain tumor
Sarcoma (facial)
Carcinoma (nasopharyngeal)

Hypothyroidism, primary

Neck, mantle irradiation

Radiation dose to thyroid >20 Gy

Hodgkin lymphoma

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 543 u Principles of Cancer Treatment

3095

Table 543.5  Late Effects and High-­Risk Features of Childhood Cancer and Its Treatment—cont’d
LATE EFFECTS
REPRODUCTIVE
Gonadal dysfunction
Delayed or arrested puberty
Premature menopause
Germ cell dysfunction or failure
Infertility

CARDIAC
Cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmias

Cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmias
Pericardial fibrosis
Valvular disease
Myocardial infarction
Atherosclerotic heart disease
PULMONARY
Pulmonary fibrosis
Interstitial pneumonitis
Restrictive lung disease
Obstructive lung disease

GASTROINTESTINAL
Chronic enterocolitis
Strictures
Bowel obstruction

HEPATIC
Hepatic fibrosis
Cirrhosis

RENAL
Renal insufficiency
Hypertension
Glomerular injury
Tubular injury

EXPOSURE

SELECTED HIGH-­RISK FACTORS

AT-­RISK DIAGNOSTIC GROUPS

Chemotherapy, alkylating:
• Busulfan
• Carmustine (BiCNU)
• Chlorambucil
• Cyclophosphamide
• Ifosfamide
• Lomustine (CCNU)
• Mechlorethamine
• Melphalan
• Procarbazine
Radiation affecting reproductive
system:
• Whole abdomen (females)
• Pelvic
• Lumbar/sacral spine (females)
• Testicular (males)
• TBI

Higher alkylating agent dose
Alkylating agent conditioning for
HSCT
Radiation dose ≥15 Gy in prepubertal females
Radiation dose ≥10 Gy in pubertal
females
For germ cell failure in males, any
pelvic irradiation
For androgen insufficiency,
gonadal irradiation, ≥20-­30 Gy
in males

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia,
high risk
Brain tumor
Hodgkin lymphoma, advanced or
unfavorable
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma,
advanced or unfavorable
Sarcoma
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor, advanced
Autologous or allogeneic HSCT

Chemotherapy:
• Daunorubicin
• Doxorubicin
• Idarubicin

Female
Age <5 yr old at time of treatment
Higher doses of chemotherapy
(≥300 mg/m2)
Higher doses of cardiac radiation
(≥30 Gy)
Combined-­modality therapy with
cardiotoxic chemotherapy and
irradiation

Hodgkin lymphoma
Leukemia
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Sarcoma
Wilms tumor
Neuroblastoma

Chemotherapy:
• Bleomycin
• Busulfan
• Carmustine (BiCNU)
• Lomustine (CCNU)
Radiation impacting lungs:
• Mantle
• Mediastinum
• Whole lung
• TBI

Higher doses of chemotherapy
Combined modality therapy with
pulmonary toxic chemotherapy
and irradiation

Brain tumor
Germ cell tumor
Hodgkin lymphoma
Sarcoma (chest wall or intrathoracic)
Autologous or allogeneic HCST

Radiation affecting GI tract
(≥30 Gy)
Abdominal surgery

Higher radiation dose to bowel
(≥45 Gy)
Combined modality therapy
with abdominal irradiation and
radiomimetic chemotherapy
(dactinomycin or anthracyclines)
Combined modality therapy with
abdominal surgery and irradiation

Sarcoma (retroperitoneal or pelvic
primary)

Radiation affecting liver

Higher radiation dose or treatment volume (20-­30 Gy to entire
liver or ≥40 Gy to at least one
third of liver)

Sarcoma
Neuroblastoma

Chemotherapy:
• Ifosfamide
• Cisplatin
• Carboplatin
Radiation affecting kidneys:
• Whole abdomen
• Upper abdominal fields
• TBI

Higher ifosfamide dose (≥60 g/m2)
Higher cisplatin dose (≥200 mg/m2)
Renal radiation dose (≥15 Gy)
Combined modality therapy with
above agents

Brain tumor
Germ cell tumor
Sarcoma
Wilms tumor
Neuroblastoma
Hepatoblastoma
Carcinoma
Autologous or allogeneic HSCT

Radiation affecting heart:
• Chest
• Mantle
• Mediastinum
• Axilla
• Spine
• Upper abdomen

GH, Growth hormone; HPA, hypothalamic-­pituitary-­adrenal axis; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; IQ, intelligence quotient.
From Kurt BA, Armstrong GT, Cash DK, et al. Primary care management of the childhood cancer survivor. J Pediatr. 2008;152:458–466.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3096 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Risk-Stratified Shared Care Model for Cancer Survivors

Pre
CA

CA
Dx

5 Yrs
Off Rx

10 Yrs
Off Rx
Noncancer-related care
Shared-care

Pre
CA

CA
Dx

b

c

c

c

Off
Rx

1–2 Yrs
Off Rx

5 Yrs
Off Rx

10 Yrs
Off Rx
Noncancer-related care

PCP

Shared-care
Oncology
Care*

a

Pre
CA

CA
Dx

b

c

c

Off
Rx

1–2 Yrs
Off Rx

5 Yrs
Off Rx

c

c

10 Yrs
Off Rx
Noncancer-related care

PCP

Shared-care
Oncology
Care*

High Risk:
Any of the following:
• High dose alkylating agent,
anthracycline, bleomycin,
or epipodophyllotoxin
• High dose radiation
• Allogenic stem cell transplant
• High risk of recurrence
• Multi-organ persistent toxicity
of therapy

1–2 Yrs
Off Rx

PCP

a

Moderate Risk:
Any of the following:
• Low or moderate dose alkylating
agent, anthracycline, bleomycin,
or epipodophyllotoxin
• Low to moderate dose radiation
• Autologous stem cell transplant
• Moderate risk of recurrence
• Moderate persistent toxicity
of therapy

Off
Rx

Oncology
Care*

Low Risk:
All of the following:
• Surgery only or chemotherapy that
did not include alkylating agent,
anthracycline, bleomycin,
or epipodophyllotoxin
• No radiation
• Low risk of recurrence
• Mild or no persistent toxicity
of therapy

a

b

c

d

d

Communication Points with Primary Care Physician
a Cancer diagnosis and planned therapeutic approach, brief overview of chemotherapy, radiation therapy and/or surgery.
b Survivorship Care Plan: cancer diagnosis, cancer therapy, surveillance recommendations, contact information.
c Periodic update with changes in surveillance recommendations, and new information regarding potential late effects.
d Periodic update of survivor’s health for primary care physician’s record.

Abbreviations:
Ca=cancer; Dx=diagnosis; Off Rx=completion of cancer therapy; PCP=primary care physician; LTFU=long-term follow-up (survivor) program; Onc=oncologist.
Primary responsibility for cancer-related care; PCP continues to manage noncancer comorbidities and routine preventative health maintenance.
*Cancer Center or Oncologist/oncology group practice; if there is not an LTFU/Survivor Program available, care in the
box is provided by the primary oncologist.

Fig. 543.8 Proposed risk-­stratified shared care model for childhood cancer survivors. Purple solid line denotes primary responsibility cancer-­
related care; risk stratification is based on determination of the long-­term follow-­up staff. (Adapted from McCabe MS, Partridge A, Grunfeld, E,
Hudson MM. Risk-­based health care, the cancer survivor, the oncologist, and the primary care physician. Semin Oncol. 2013;40:804–812; with data
from Oeffinger KC, McCabe MS. Models for delivering survivorship care. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:5117–5124.)

appears to be cumulative, increasing by approximately 0.5% per year,
resulting in approximately a 12% incidence at 25 years after treatment.
Patients who have been treated for childhood cancer should be examined annually with particular attention to possible late effects of therapy, including second malignancies (Fig. 543.8).
Risk-­stratified therapy over the past few decades has been shown to
reduce late morbidity and mortality. A good resource for the pediatrician, patient, and family who must anticipate the possibilities is available at http://www.survivorshipguidelines.org.

PALLIATIVE CARE

At all stages of caring for children with cancer, principles of palliative
care should be applied to relieve pain and suffering and to provide comfort (see Chapter 8). Early involvement of palliative or supportive care
teams is beneficial. Pain is a serious cause of suffering among patients
with cancer. It may be the result of organ obstruction or compression or
bone metastasis, or it may be neuropathic. Pain should be managed in

a stepwise manner, as recommended by the WHO, in accordance with
the principles of selecting the appropriate analgesic, prescribing the
appropriate dosage, administering the drug by the appropriate route,
and choosing an appropriate dosing schedule to prevent persistent pain
and to relieve breakthrough pain (see Chapter 93). In addition, the dosage should be titrated aggressively while attempts are made to prevent,
anticipate, and manage side effects. Adjuvant drugs and sequential trials of analgesic drugs should be considered.
The goals in the care of dying patients are to avoid distress for the
patient, family, and caregivers; to provide care consistent with the
patient’s and family’s wishes; and to comply with and advocate for clinical, cultural, and ethical standards.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 544 u The Leukemias

Chapter 544

The Leukemias
A. Kim Ritchey, Erika D. Friehling,
Julia C. Meade, David G. Tubergen, and
Archie Bleyer
INTRODUCTION

The leukemias are the most common malignant neoplasms in childhood, accounting for approximately 31% of all malignancies that
occur in children younger than 15 years old. Each year, leukemia is
diagnosed in approximately 3,100 children and adolescents <20 years
old in the United States, an annual incidence of 4.8 cases per 100,000
children. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) accounts for approximately 77% of cases of childhood leukemia, acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) for approximately 11%, chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML) for 2–3%, and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) for
1–2%. The remaining cases consist of a variety of acute and chronic
leukemias that do not fit classic definitions for ALL, AML, CML, or
JMML.
The leukemias may be defined as a group of malignant diseases in
which genetic abnormalities in a hematopoietic cell give rise to an
unregulated clonal proliferation of cells. The progeny of these cells
have a growth advantage over normal cellular elements because of
their increased rate of proliferation and a decreased rate of spontaneous apoptosis. The result is a disruption of normal marrow function and, ultimately, marrow failure. The clinical features, laboratory
findings, and responses to therapy vary depending on the type of
leukemia.

544.1 Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Erika D. Friehling, A. Kim Ritchey, Julia C. Meade, and
Archie Bleyer
Leukemia (ALL) was the first disseminated cancer shown to be curable.
It is a heterogeneous group of malignancies with distinctive genetic
abnormalities that result in varying clinical behaviors and responses
to therapy.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is diagnosed in approximately 3,100
children and adolescents <20 years old in the United States each year.
It has a striking peak incidence at 2-­3 years of age and occurs more
in males than in females at all ages. The disease is more common in
children with certain chromosomal abnormalities, such as Down
syndrome, Li-­Fraumeni, Bloom syndrome, and ataxia-­telangiectasia.
Among identical twins, the risk to the second twin if one twin develops leukemia is greater than that in the general population. The risk
is >70% if ALL is diagnosed in the first twin during the first year of
life and the twins shared the same (monochorionic) placenta. If
the first twin develops ALL by 5-­7 years of age, the risk to the second twin is at least twice that of the general population, regardless of
zygosity.

ETIOLOGY

In virtually all cases, the etiology of ALL is unknown, although several genetic and environmental factors are associated with childhood leukemia (Table 544.1). Most cases of ALL are thought to
be caused by post-­conception somatic pathogenic gene variants
in lymphoid cells. However, the identification of the leukemia-­
specific fusion-­gene sequences in archived neonatal blood spots
of some children who develop ALL at a later date indicates the

3097

importance of in utero events in the initiation of the malignant process in some cases. The long lag period before the onset of the disease in some children, reported to be as long as 14 years, supports
the concept that additional genetic modifications are required for
disease expression. Moreover, those same pathogenic variants have
been found in neonatal blood spots of children who never go on to
develop leukemia.
Exposure to medical diagnostic radiation both in utero and in childhood is associated with an increased incidence of ALL (see Chapter
758). In addition, published descriptions and investigations of geographic clusters of cases have raised concern that environmental factors can increase the incidence of ALL. Thus far, no such factors other
than radiation have been identified in the United States. In certain
developing countries, there is an association between B-­cell ALL (B-­
ALL) and Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) infections.

CELLULAR CLASSIFICATION

The classification of ALL depends on characterizing the malignant
cells in the bone marrow to determine the morphology, phenotype as
measured by cell membrane markers, and cytogenetic and molecular
genetic features. Morphology is usually adequate alone to establish a
diagnosis, but the other studies are essential for disease classification,
which can have a major influence on the prognosis and the choice
of appropriate therapy. The current system used is the World Health
Organization (WHO) classification of leukemias. Phenotypically, surface markers show that approximately 85% of cases of ALL are classified
as B-­lymphoblastic leukemia (previously termed precursor B-­ALL or
pre–B-­ALL), approximately 15% are T-­lymphoblastic leukemia, and
approximately 1% are derived from mature B cells. The rare leukemia
of mature B cells is termed Burkitt leukemia and is one of the most
rapidly growing cancers in humans, requiring a different therapeutic
approach than other subtypes of ALL. A small percentage of children
with leukemia have a disease characterized by surface markers of both
lymphoid and myeloid derivation.
Chromosomal abnormalities are used to subclassify ALL into
prognostic groups (Table 544.2). Many genetic alterations, including
inactivation of tumor-­suppressor genes and pathogenic gene variants
that activate the JAK-­STAT or RAS pathways, have been discovered
(Fig. 544.1).
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) techniques offer the ability to pinpoint molecular genetic abnormalities and can be used to detect small numbers
of malignant cells at diagnosis as well as during follow-­up (minimal
residual disease [MRD], see later) and are of proven clinical utility.
DNA microarray and whole genome sequencing make it possible to
analyze the expression of thousands of genes in the leukemic cell.

Table 544.1  Predisposing Factors of Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia
GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY
Congenital syndromes: Down syndrome, Fanconi anemia, ataxia
telangiectasia, Bloom syndrome, Nijmegen breakage syndrome
Inherited gene variants: ARID5B, IKZF1, CEBPE, CDKN2A, or CDKN2B, PIP4K2A, ETV6
Constitutional Robertsonian translocation between chromosomes
15 and 21, rob(15;21)(q10;q10)
Single nucleotide polymorphisms: rs12402181 in miR-­3117 and
rs62571442 in miR-­3689d2
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
Pesticide exposure
Ionizing radiation
Childhood infections
From Malard F, Mohty M. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet. 2020;395:1146–1158.
Panel, p. 1147.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3098 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The initial presentation of ALL usually is nonspecific and relatively brief.
Anorexia, fatigue, malaise, irritability, and intermittent low-­grade fever
are often present. Bone or joint pain, particularly in the lower extremities, may be present. Less often, symptoms may be of several months’
duration, may be localized predominantly to the bones or joints, and
may include joint swelling. Bone pain is severe and can wake the patient
at night. As the disease progresses, signs and symptoms of bone marrow
failure become more obvious with the occurrence of pallor, fatigue, exercise intolerance, bruising, oral mucosal bleeding or epistaxis, and fever,
which may be caused by infection or the leukemia. Organ infiltration can
cause lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, testicular enlargement, or
central nervous system (CNS) involvement (cranial neuropathies, headache, seizures). Respiratory distress may be caused by severe anemia or
mediastinal node compression of the airways.
On physical examination, findings of pallor, listlessness, purpuric and petechial skin lesions, or mucous membrane hemorrhage can
reflect bone marrow failure (see Chapter 542). The proliferative nature
of the disease may be manifested as lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly,
or, less often, hepatomegaly. Patients with bone or joint pain may have
exquisite tenderness over the bone or objective evidence of joint swelling and effusion. Nonetheless, with marrow involvement, deep bone
pain may be present, but tenderness will not be elicited. Rarely, patients
show signs of increased intracranial pressure that indicate leukemic
involvement of the CNS. These include papilledema (see Fig. 542.3),
Table 544.2

retinal hemorrhages, and cranial nerve palsies. Respiratory distress
usually is related to anemia but can occur in patients as the result of
a large anterior mediastinal mass (e.g., in the thymus or nodes). This
problem is most frequently seen in adolescent males with T-­cell ALL
(T-­ALL). T-­ALL also usually has a higher leukocyte count.
B-­lymphoblastic leukemia is the most common immunophenotype,
with onset at 1-­10 years of age. The median leukocyte count at presentation is 33,000/μL, although 75% of patients have counts <20,000/μL;
thrombocytopenia is seen in 75% of patients and hepatosplenomegaly
in 30–40% of patients. In all types of leukemia, CNS symptoms are
seen at presentation in 5% of patients. Leukemia cells can be seen in
the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 10–15% of patients, but only 3–5%
are diagnosed with CNS leukemia, defined as >5 WBCs/μL with blasts
present. Testicular involvement is rarely evident at diagnosis, but prior
studies indicate occult involvement in 25% of males. There is no indication for testicular biopsy.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of ALL is strongly suggested by peripheral blood findings that indicate bone marrow failure. Anemia and thrombocytopenia are seen in most patients. Leukemic cells might not be reported
in the peripheral blood in routine laboratory examinations. Many
patients with ALL present with total leukocyte counts of <10,000/μL.
In such cases, the leukemic cells often are reported initially to be “atypical lymphocytes,” and it is only on further evaluation that the cells are

Main Genetic Subtypes of B-­Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
FREQUENCY

PATHOGENIC VARIANTS

PROGNOSIS

High hyperdiploid
(gain of ≥5 chromosomes)

25% children; 3% AYAs and adults

RTK-­RAS signaling pathway, histone
modifiers

Favorable

Near-­haploid
(24-­31 chromosomes)

2% children; <1% AYAs and adults

RAS-­activating, IKZF3

Poor

Low-­hypodiploid
(32-­39 chromosomes)

<1% children; 5% AYAs; >10%
adults

TP53, IKZF2, RB1

Very poor

MLL (KMT2A) rearrangements

>80% infants; <1% children; 4%
AYAs; 15% adults

MLL (KMT2A) rearrangement, few
additional pathogenic variants (PI3K-­
RAS signaling pathway)

Very poor

ETV6-­RUNX1 translocation, t(12;21)
(q13;q22)

30% children; <5% AYAs and adults

ETV6-­RUNX1

Favorable

TCF3-­PBX1 translocation, t(1;19)
(q23;p13)

5% children, AYAs and adults

TCF3-­PBX1

Favorable

TCF3-­HLF variant of t(1;19)(q23;p13)

<1% acute lymphoblastic leukemia

TCF3-­HLF

Poor

BCR-­ABL1 Philadelphia chromosome, t(9;22)(q34;q11)

2–5% children, 6% AYAs; >25%
adults

BCR-­ABL1 fusion gene, common
deletions of IKZF1, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, and PAX5

Poor (improved with tyrosine
kinase inhibitors)

Philadelphia chromosome-­like
acute lymphoblastic leukemia

10% children; 25–30% AYAs; 20%
adults

Rearrangements of CRLF2 (about
50%), ABL-­class tyrosine kinase genes
(12%) and JAK2 (10%); pathogenic
variants of EPOR (3–10%); pathogenic
variants activating JAK-­STAT (10%)
and RAS (2–8%) signaling pathways

Poor

DUX4 and ERG-­deregulated acute
lymphoblastic leukemia

5–10% acute lymphoblastic
leukemia

DUX4 rearrangement and
overexpression, ERG deletions

Favorable, including if
coexistence of IKZF1
pathogenic variants
(about 40% of patients)

MEF2D-­rearranged acute
lymphoblastic leukemia

4% children; 7% AYAs and adults

MEF2D is fused to BCL9 (most frequent
fusion event), HNRNPUL1, SS18,
FOXJ2, CSF1R, or DAZAP1

Poor

ZNF384-­rearranged acute
lymphoblastic leukemia

5% children; 10% AYAs and adults

ZNF384 rearranged with a tranIntermediate
scriptional regulator or chromatin
modifier (EP300, CREBBP, TAF15, SYNRG, EWSR1, TCF3, ARID1B, BMP2K,
or SMARCA2)

AYAs, Adolescents and young adults.
From Malard F, Mohty M. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet. 2020;395:1146–1158. Table 1, p. 1148.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 544 u The Leukemias
100

TLX3
2.3%

ETP
2%

Relapse-free survival (%)

TLX1
0.3%
LYL1
1.4%

Others (T-ALL)
2%
ETV6-RUNX1
22%

TAL1
7%
Others (B-ALL)
10%
ERG
(Other)
3%
5.5%
(CRLF2)
3.5%
CRLF2
4%

Hyperdiploid
20%

60
40
High hyperdiploidy
ETV6-RUNX1
t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)
iAMP21
MLL translocations

20

Number at risk
High hyperdiploidy
ETV6-RUNX1
t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)
iAMP21
MLL translocations
Abnormal17p
Loss of 13q
Other

Abnormal17p
Loss of 13q
Other

0

2

4
6
Years from diagnosis

8

10

551
365
42
28
30
18
24
644

529
355
22
21
20
15
19
567

470
331
19
14
16
9
17
483

249
167
8
1
9
7
9
258

98
47
2
0
1
2
4
105

434
301
14
6
14
8
15
440

Fig. 544.3 Kaplan-­Meier analysis of relapse-­free survival according to

Fig. 544.1 Estimated frequency of specific genotypes in childhood

acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Teal wedges refer to B-­cell ALL
(B-­ALL), orange to recently identified subtypes of B-­
ALL, and red
wedges to T-­cell ALL (T-­ALL). (From Mullighan CG. Genomic characterization of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Semin Hematol.
2013;50:314–324.)

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Probability

80

0

MLL
rearrangements
6%
TCF3-PBX1
iAMP21
1%
BCR-ABL1 4%
Hypodiploid Dicentric 2%
1%
3%

0.6

biologic subtype of leukemia. (From Moorman AV, Ensor HM, Richards
SM, et al. Prognostic effect of chromosomal abnormalities in childhood
B-­cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: Results from the UK
Medical Research Council ALL97/99 randomised trial. Lancet Oncol.
2010;11:429–438.)

meningeal leukemia is present. This finding reflects a poorer stage and
indicates the need for additional CNS and systemic therapies. The staging lumbar puncture (LP) may be performed in conjunction with the
first dose of intrathecal chemotherapy, if the diagnosis of leukemia was
previously established from bone marrow evaluation. An experienced
proceduralist should perform the initial LP, because a traumatic LP is
associated with an increased risk of CNS relapse.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

0.5
0.4
1–9 yr (n = 598)

0.3

>15 yr (n = 78)

0.2

10–15 yr (n = 153)

0.1

<12 mo (n = 18)

0.0
0
Number
at risk
<12 mo

3099

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Yr from diagnosis

18

11

8

8

6

1

1

0

0

1–9 yr 598

528

378

295

213

149

85

31

4

10–15 yr 153

130

100

77

50

26

11

6

1

>15 yr

60

40

29

20

7

1

0

0

78

Meier estimates of event-­
free survival accordFig. 544.2 Kaplan-­

ing to age at diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. (From Pui
CH, Robinson LL, Look AT. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet.
2008;371:1030–1042.)

The diagnosis of leukemia is readily made in the patient with typical
signs and symptoms, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated WBC
count with blasts present on smear. Elevation of the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is often a clue to the diagnosis of ALL. When pancytopenia is present without peripheral blasts, aplastic anemia (congenital
or acquired), marrow infiltration from metastatic disease, and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis should be considered. Failure of a
single cell line, as seen in transient erythroblastopenia of childhood,
immune thrombocytopenia, and congenital or acquired neutropenia, is rarely the presenting feature of ALL. A high index of suspicion is required to differentiate ALL from infectious mononucleosis
in patients with acute onset of fever and lymphadenopathy and from
juvenile idiopathic arthritis in patients with fever, bone pain but often
no tenderness, and joint swelling. These presentations also can require
bone marrow examination.
ALL must be differentiated from AML and other malignant diseases
that invade the bone marrow and can have clinical and laboratory findings similar to ALL, including neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma,
Ewing sarcoma, and retinoblastoma.

TREATMENT
found to be part of a malignant clone. When the results of an analysis
of peripheral blood suggest the possibility of leukemia, flow cytometry
can rapidly facilitate the diagnosis. The bone marrow should be examined promptly to confirm the diagnosis. It is important that all studies
necessary to confirm a diagnosis and adequately classify the type of
leukemia be performed, including bone marrow aspiration and biopsy,
flow cytometry, cytogenetics, and molecular studies.
ALL is diagnosed by a bone marrow evaluation that demonstrates
>25% of the bone marrow cells as a homogeneous population of lymphoblasts. Initial evaluation also includes CSF examination. If lymphoblasts are found and the CSF leukocyte count is elevated, overt CNS or

The single most important prognostic factor in ALL is the treatment:
without effective therapy, the disease is fatal. Considerable progress has
been made in overall survival for children with ALL through use of
multiagent chemotherapeutic regimens, intensification of therapy, and
selection of treatment based on relapse risk. Survival is also related to
age (Fig. 544.2) and biologic subtype (Fig. 544.3).
Risk-­stratified therapy is the standard of current ALL treatment
and accounts for age at diagnosis, initial WBC count, immunophenotypic and cytogenetic characteristics of blast populations, rapidity
of early treatment response (i.e., how quickly the leukemic cells can
be cleared from the marrow or peripheral blood), and assessment
of MRD at the end of induction therapy (Table 544.3). Different

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3100 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 544.3

Prognostic Factors for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
FAVORABLE FACTOR

ADVERSE FACTOR

DEMOGRAPHIC AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Age
1 year to <10 years
Sex
Female
Ethnicity
White, Asian

<1 year or ≥10 years
Male
Black, Hispanic

CLINICAL, BIOLOGIC, OR GENETIC FEATURES OF LEUKEMIA
CNS involvement
No
Blood count at diagnosis
Low blood count; <50 × 109 cells/L for
B-­cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and
<100 × 109 cells/L for T-­cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia
Immunophenotype
B-­cell lineage
Cytogenetic features
Hyperdiploidy, ETV6-­RUNX, TCF3-­PBX1, and
trisomy of chromosomes 4, 10, or 17
Genomic features

DUX4-­rearrangement (ERG deletion)

RESPONSE TO TREATMENT
Minimal residual disease at
specified time points

Low minimal residual disease <10−3 nucleated
cells or undetectable

Yes
High blood count; ≥50 × 109/L for B-­cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia and ≥100 × 109 cells/L for T-­cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia
T-­cell lineage
Hypodiploidy, BCR-­ABL1 Philadelphia chromosome-­
positive, MLL rearrangements, TCF3-­HLF, and complex
karyotype (≥5 chromosomal abnormalities)
IKZF1 deletions or pathogenic variants, Philadelphia
chromosome-­like, MEF2D-­rearrangement
Persistence of minimal residual disease ≥10−3 nucleated
cells, the higher this value the worse the prognosis

From Malard F, Mohty M. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet. 2020;395:1146–1158. Table 2, p. 1150.

study groups use various factors to define risk, but age 1-­10 years
and a leukocyte count <50,000/μL are used by the National Cancer
Institute (NCI) to define standard risk. Children who are younger
than 1 year or older than 10 years or who have an initial leukocyte count of >50,000/μL are considered to be high risk. Additional
characteristics that adversely affect outcome include T-­cell immunophenotype or a slow response to initial therapy. Chromosomal
abnormalities, including hypodiploidy, the Philadelphia chromosome, and KMT2A (MLL) gene rearrangements, portend a poorer
outcome. Other genetic pathogenic variants, such as in the IKZF1
gene, have been shown to be associated with a poor prognosis
and may become important in treatment algorithms in the future.
More favorable characteristics include a rapid response to therapy,
hyperdiploidy, trisomy of specific chromosomes (4, 10, and 17),
and rearrangements of the ETV6-­RUNX1 (formerly TEL-­AML1)
genes.
The outcome for patients at higher risk can be improved by
administration of more intensive therapy despite the greater toxicity of such therapy. Infants with ALL, along with patients who
present with specific chromosomal abnormalities, such as t(4;11),
have an even higher risk of relapse despite intensive therapy. However, the poor outcome of Philadelphia chromosome–positive
ALL with t(9;22) has been dramatically changed by the addition of
imatinib to an intensive chemotherapy backbone. Imatinib is an
agent specifically designed to inhibit the BCR-­A BL kinase resulting from the translocation. With this approach, the event-­f ree survival has improved from 30% to 70%. Clinical trials demonstrate
that the prognosis for patients with a slower response to initial
therapy may be improved by therapy that is more intensive than
the therapy considered necessary for patients who respond more
rapidly.
Most children with ALL are treated in clinical trials conducted
by national or international cooperative groups. Standard treatment
involves chemotherapy for 2-­3 years, and most achieve remission at
the end of the induction phase. Patients in clinical remission can
have MRD that can only be detected with specific molecular probes
to translocations and other DNA markers contained in leukemic
cells or specialized flow cytometry. MRD can be quantitative and
can provide an estimate of the burden of leukemic cells present in
the marrow. Higher levels of MRD present at the end of induction

suggest a poorer prognosis and higher risk of subsequent relapse.
MRD of >0.01% on the marrow on day 29 of induction is a significant risk factor for shorter event-­free survival for all risk categories, compared with patients with negative MRD. Therapy for ALL
intensifies treatment in patients with evidence of MRD at the end
of induction.
Initial therapy, termed remission induction, is designed to eradicate the leukemic cells from the bone marrow. During this phase,
therapy is given for 4 weeks and consists of vincristine weekly, a corticosteroid such as dexamethasone or prednisone, and usually a single
dose of a long-­acting, pegylated asparaginase preparation. Patients at
higher risk also receive daunorubicin at weekly intervals. With this
approach, 98% of patients are in remission, as defined by <5% blasts
in the marrow and a return of neutrophil and platelet counts to near-­
normal levels after 4-­5 weeks of treatment. Intrathecal chemotherapy
is always given at the start of treatment and at least once more during
induction.
The second phase of treatment, consolidation, focuses on intensive
CNS therapy in combination with continued intensive systemic therapy to prevent later CNS relapses. Intrathecal chemotherapy is given
repeatedly by LP. The likelihood of later CNS relapse is thereby reduced
to <5%, from historical incidence as high as 60%. A small percentage
of patients with features that predict a high risk of CNS relapse may
receive irradiation to the brain in later phases of therapy. This includes
patients who at diagnosis have lymphoblasts in the CSF and either an
elevated CSF leukocyte count or physical signs of CNS leukemia, such
as cranial nerve palsy.
Subsequently, many regimens provide 14-­28 weeks of therapy,
with the drugs and schedules used varying depending on the risk
group of the patient. This period of treatment is often termed
intensification and includes phases of aggressive treatment
(delayed intensification) as well as relatively less toxic phases
of treatment (interim maintenance). Multiagent chemotherapy,
including such medications as cytarabine, methotrexate, asparaginase, and vincristine, is used during these phases to eradicate
residual disease.
Finally, patients enter the maintenance phase of therapy, which
lasts for 2-­3 years, depending on the protocol used. Patients are
given daily mercaptopurine and weekly oral methotrexate, usually
with intermittent doses of vincristine and a corticosteroid.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 544 u The Leukemias
Event-free Survival (EFS)
CCG (n  197)
CALGB (n  124)

7-yr EFS

RHR

Log Rank p

63% (CI:24–44%)
34% (CI:55–72%)

2.2 (CI:1.6–3.0)

0.0001

Estimated EFS probability

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
At Risk
140
124
66

117
47

2

4

0.1 197
0.0

0

A

92
34

55
27

19
21

2 (CCG)
6 (CALGB)

6

8

10

12

Log Rank p

14

Yr followed
Overall Survival
CCG
CALGB

7-yr survival

RHR

67% (CI:58–75%)
46% (CI:36–56%)

1.9 (CI:1.3–2.7)

98
48

57
37

19
30

2 (CCG)
8 (CALGB)

6

8

10

12

0.0002

Estimated survival probability

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

At Risk
151
124
84

131
63

2

4

0.1 197
0.0

0

B

results in accumulation of a toxic metabolite of mercaptopurine and
severe myelosuppression, requiring dose reductions of the chemotherapy (see Chapter 543).

Treatment of Relapse

1.0

0.2

3101

14

Yr followed

Fig. 544.4 Comparison of event-­free survival (A) and overall survival

(B) among Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) (adult protocol,
green line) and Children's Cancer Group (CCG) (pediatric protocol, red
line) patients. CI, Confidence interval; EFS, event-­free survival; RHR,
relative hazard rate. (From Stock W, La M, Sanford B, et al. What determines the outcomes for adolescents and young adults with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia treated on cooperative group protocols? A
comparison of Children’s Cancer Group and Cancer and Leukemia
Group B studies. Blood. 2008;112:1646–1654.)

A small number of patients with particularly poor prognostic
features, such as those with induction failure or extreme hypodiploidy, may undergo bone marrow transplantation during the first
remission.
Adolescents and young adults with ALL have a poor prognosis
compared to children <15 years old. They often have adverse prognostic factors and require more intensive therapy. Patients in this age-­
group have a superior outcome when treated with pediatric rather than
adult treatment protocols (Fig. 544.4). Although the explanation for
these findings may be multifactorial, it is important that these patients
be treated with pediatric treatment protocols, ideally in a pediatric cancer center.
Genetic polymorphisms of enzymes important in drug metabolism may impact both the efficacy and the toxicity of chemotherapeutic medications. Pharmacogenetic testing of the thiopurine
S-­methyltransferase (TPMT) gene, which encodes one of the metabolizing enzymes of mercaptopurine, can identify patients with varying
levels of TPMT enzyme activity. Decreased TPMT enzyme activity

The major impediment to a successful outcome is relapse of the disease. Outcomes remain poor among those who relapse, with the most
important prognostic indicators being time from diagnosis and site of
relapsed disease. In addition, other factors, such as immunophenotype
(T-­ALL worse than B-­ALL) and age at initial diagnosis, have prognostic significance.
Relapse occurs in the bone marrow in 15–20% of patients with ALL
and has the most serious implications, especially if it occurs during
or shortly after completion of therapy. Intensive chemotherapy with
agents not previously used in the patient followed by allogeneic stem
cell transplantation can result in long-­term survival for some patients
with bone marrow relapse (see Chapter 177). Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-­cell technology will have an increasing role in the treatment of patients who have experienced a relapse of ALL (see Chapter
543). In addition, therapy targeted to the possible underlying pathogenic pathways (tyrosine kinase inhibitors) or cell receptors (blinatumomab) have demonstrated promising results in patients with relapsed
or refractory disease (Fig. 544.5)
The incidence of CNS relapse has decreased to <5% since introduction of preventive CNS therapy. CNS relapse may be discovered
at a routine LP in the asymptomatic patient. Symptomatic patients
with relapse in the CNS usually present with signs and symptoms
of increased intracranial pressure and can present with isolated cranial nerve palsies. The diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating the
presence of leukemic cells in the CSF. The treatment includes intrathecal medication and cranial or craniospinal irradiation. Systemic
chemotherapy also must be used, because these patients are at high
risk for subsequent bone marrow relapse. Most patients with leukemic relapse confined to the CNS do well, especially those in whom
the CNS relapse occurs longer than 18 months after initiation of
chemotherapy.
Testicular relapse occurs in <2% of males with ALL, usually after
completion of therapy. Such relapse occurs as painless swelling of one
or both testes. The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of the affected
testis. Treatment includes systemic chemotherapy and possibly local
irradiation. A high proportion of males with a testicular relapse can be
successfully retreated, and the survival rate of these patients is good.
The most current information on treatment of childhood ALL is
available in the PDQ (Physician Data Query) on the NCI website (htt
p://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/childALL/healthprof
essional/).

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Close attention to the medical supportive care needs of the patients
is essential in successfully administering aggressive chemotherapeutic programs. Patients with high WBC counts are especially prone to
tumor lysis syndrome as therapy is initiated. The kidney failure associated with very high levels of serum uric acid can be prevented or
treated with allopurinol or urate oxidase. Chemotherapy often produces severe myelosuppression, which can require erythrocyte and
platelet transfusion and always requires a high index of suspicion and
aggressive empirical antimicrobial therapy for sepsis in febrile children
with neutropenia. Patients must receive prophylactic treatment for
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia during chemotherapy and for several
months after completing treatment.
The successful therapy of ALL is a direct result of intensive and often
toxic treatment. However, such intensive therapy can incur substantial academic, developmental, and psychosocial costs for children with
ALL and considerable financial costs and stress for their families. Both
long-­term and acute toxicity effects can occur. An array of cancer care
professionals with training and experience in addressing the myriad of
problems that can arise is essential to minimize the complications and
achieve an optimal outcome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3102 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Rituximab
Ofatumumab
Blinatumomab
CAR T cell
CAR T cell

CD20

Daratumumab

CD38
CD19

NOTCH1

CD22

Ph+(BCR-ABL1)

γ-secretase inhibitors

t (9:22)

Fig. 544.5 New targeted therapy for

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors
CAR T cell

acute lymphoblastic leukemia. CAR, Chimeric antigen receptor. (From Malard F,
Mohty M. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.
Lancet. 2020;395:1146–1158. Fig. 2, p.
1153.)

Epratuzumab

Therapeutic targets
Inotuzumab ozogamicin
Moxetumomab pasudotox

544.2 Acute Myelogenous Leukemia

1.0
Overall survival (probability)

B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia

Julia C. Meade, Erika D. Friehling, A. Kim Ritchey,
David G. Tubergen, and Archie Bleyer

0.8

EPIDEMIOLOGY
0.6

0.4
1990-1994 (n  7,304)
1995-1999 (n  7,169)
2000-2005 (n  7,153)

0.2
P  0.0001
0.0
0

5

10

15

Times (yr)

Fig. 544.6 Overall survival probabilities by treatment era for patients

with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in Children’s Oncology Group
trials in 1990–1994, 1995–1999, and 2000–2005. (From Hunger SP, Lu
X, Devidas M, et al. Improved survival for children and adolescents with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia between 1990 and 2005: a report from
the Children’s Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:1663–1669.)

PROGNOSIS

Improvements in therapy and risk stratification have resulted in significant increases in survival rates, with current data showing overall 5-­year
survival of approximately 90% (Fig. 544.6). Although survivors are more
likely to experience significant chronic medical conditions compared
with siblings, including musculoskeletal, cardiac, and neurologic conditions, risk-­adapted therapy has resulted in a decrease in late effects.
Overall, long-­term management following ALL should be conducted in
a clinic where children and adolescents can be followed by a variety of
specialists to address the challenges of these unique patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

AML accounts for 11% of the cases of childhood leukemia in the
United States; it is diagnosed in approximately 370 children annually.
The relative frequency of AML increases in adolescence, representing
36% of cases of leukemia in 15-­19 year olds. Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype that is more common in certain regions of
the world, but the incidence of the other types is generally uniform.
Environmental risk factors have been identified, including ionizing
radiation, chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., alkylating agents, epipodophyllotoxin), and organic solvents (benzene). Approximately 10% of
children with AML are found to have a germline pathogenic variant
predisposing them to leukemia. Certain syndromes are also known
to increase the risk of leukemia: Down syndrome, Fanconi anemia,
Bloom syndrome, Kostmann syndrome, Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome, Diamond-­
Blackfan syndrome, Li-­
Fraumeni syndrome, and
neurofibromatosis type 1 (see Table 544.1).

CELLULAR CLASSIFICATION

The characteristic feature of AML is that >20% of bone marrow cells
on bone marrow aspiration or biopsy touch preparations constitute
a fairly homogeneous population of blast cells, with features similar
to those that characterize early differentiation states of the myeloid-­
monocyte-­
megakaryocyte series of blood cells. Current practice
requires the use of flow cytometry to identify cell surface antigens and
use of chromosomal and molecular genetic techniques for additional
diagnostic precision and to aid the choice of therapy. The WHO has
proposed a new classification system that incorporates morphology,
chromosome abnormalities, and specific gene pathogenic variants.
This system provides significant biologic and prognostic information
(Table 544.4).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The production of symptoms and signs of AML is a result of replacement of bone marrow by malignant cells and caused by secondary bone

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 544 u The Leukemias
marrow failure. Patients with AML can present with any or all of the
findings associated with marrow failure in ALL. In addition, patients
with AML may present with signs and symptoms that are uncommon in ALL, including subcutaneous nodules or “blueberry muffin”
lesions (especially in infants), infiltration of the gingiva (especially in
monocytic subtypes), signs and laboratory findings of disseminated
intravascular coagulation (especially indicative of APL), and discrete
masses, known as chloromas or granulocytic sarcomas. These masses
can occur in the absence of apparent bone marrow involvement and
typically are associated with a t(8;21) translocation. Chloromas also
may be seen in the orbit and epidural space.

DIAGNOSIS

Analysis of bone marrow aspiration and biopsy specimens of patients
with AML typically reveals the features of a hypercellular marrow

Table 544.4  WHO Classification of Acute Myeloid
Neoplasms
Acute myeloid leukemia with recurrent genetic abnormalities
• AML with t(8;21)(q22;q22.1); RUNX1-­RUNX1T1
• AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22); CBFB-­MYH11
• APL with PML-­RARA
• AML with t(9;11)(p21.3;q23.3); MLLT3-­KMT2A
• AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34.1); DEK-­NUP214
• AML with inv(3)(q21.3q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21.3;q26.2); GATA2,
MECOM
• AML (megakaryoblastic) with t(1;22)(p13.3;q13.3); RBM15-­MKL1
• Provisional entity: AML with BCR-­ABL1
• AML with variant NPM1
• AML with biallelic pathogenic variants of CEBPA
• Provisional entity: AML with variant RUNX1
AML with myelodysplasia-­related changes
Therapy-­related myeloid neoplasms
Acute myeloid leukemia, not otherwise specified
• AML with minimal differentiation
• AML without maturation
• AML with maturation
• Acute myelomonocytic leukemia
• Acute monoblastic/monocytic leukemia
• Pure erythroid leukemia
• Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
• Acute basophilic leukemia
• Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis
Myeloid sarcoma
Myeloid proliferations related to Down syndrome
• Transient abnormal myelopoiesis
• Myeloid leukemia associated with Down syndrome
Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
AML, Acute myelogenous leukemia; APL, acute promyelocytic leukemia.
Adapted from Arber DA, Orazi A, Hasserjian R, et al. The 2016 revision to the World
Health Organization classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia. Blood.
2016;127:2391–2405.

Table 544.5

3103

consisting of a monotonous pattern of cells. Flow cytometry and
special stains assist in identifying myeloperoxidase-­containing cells,
thus confirming both the myelogenous origin of the leukemia and
the diagnosis. Some chromosomal abnormalities and molecular
genetic markers are characteristic of specific subtypes of disease
(Table 544.5).

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Aggressive multiagent chemotherapy is successful in inducing remission in approximately 85–90% of patients. Survival has increased dramatically since the 1970s, when only 15% of newly diagnosed patients
survived, compared with a current survival rate of 60–70% with modern therapy (Fig. 544.7). Various induction chemotherapy regimens
exist, typically including an anthracycline in combination with high-­
dose cytarabine. Targeting therapy to genetic markers may be beneficial (see Table 544.5). Up to 5% of patients die of either infection or
bleeding before a remission can be achieved. Post-­remission therapy
is chosen based on a combination of cytogenetic and molecular markers of the leukemia as well as the response to induction chemotherapy (MRD assessment). Selected patients with favorable prognostic
features [t(8;21); t(15;17); inv(16); NPM1 pathogenic variants] and
robust response to induction chemotherapy have improved outcomes
with chemotherapy alone, with stem cell transplantation only recommended after a relapse. However, patients with unfavorable prognostic features (e.g., monosomies 7 and 5, 5q−, and 11q23 abnormalities)
who have inferior outcomes with chemotherapy might benefit from
stem cell transplant in first remission. With improvements in supportive care, there is no longer a substantial difference in mortality when
comparing matched-­related stem cell transplants to matched-­unrelated
stem cell transplants for AML.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia, characterized by a gene rearrangement involving the retinoic acid receptor [t(15;17); PML-­
RARA], is very responsive to all-­trans-­
retinoic acid (ATRA,
tretinoin) combined with anthracyclines and cytarabine. The success of this therapy makes marrow transplantation in first remission
unnecessary for patients with this disease. Arsenic trioxide is an
effective noncytotoxic therapy for APL. Data from trials in adults
and children show that the use of combined ATRA and arsenic
without cytotoxic drugs for initial therapy for selected patients is
feasible and highly effective.
Increased supportive care is needed in patients with AML
because the intensive therapy they receive produces prolonged bone
marrow suppression with a very high incidence of serious infections, especially viridans streptococcal sepsis and fungal infection.
These patients require prolonged hospitalization and prophylactic
antimicrobials.
The most current information on treatment of AML is available in
the PDQ (Physician Data Query) on the NCI website (http://www.ca
ncer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/childAML/healthprofessional/).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Prognostic Implications of Common Chromosomal Abnormalities in Pediatric Acute Myelogenous Leukemia

CHROMOSOMAL
ABNORMALITY

GENETIC ALTERATION

USUAL MORPHOLOGY

PROGNOSIS

t(8;21)

RUNX1-­RUNX1T1

Myeloblasts with differentiation

Favorable

inv(16)

CBFB-­MYHII

Myeloblasts plus abnormal eosinophils
with dysplastic basophilic granules

Favorable

t(15;17)

PML-­RARA

Promyelocytic

Favorable

11q23 abnormalities

KMT2A(MLL) rearrangements

Monocytic

Unfavorable

FLT3 alterations

FLT3-­ITD

Any

Unfavorable

del(7q), −7

Unknown

Myeloblasts without differentiation

Unfavorable

Adapted from Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and Childhood. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003: p. 1177.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3104 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
1.0

0.8
Overall survival

21c

(2003-2005)
(2000-2002)
(1989-1995)
(1985-1989)
(1979-1983)
(1975-1977)

21 21 21

Expansion of fetal
liver progenitors
Age 1-5 yr
Window or
opportunity for
GATA1 variants

0.6

0.4
TL

0.2

In 5% of DS
newborns

Fetal liver
hematopoiesis

0.0
0

5

10
15
Yr from study entry

20

80% of patients survive
without developing ML DS

25

Fig. 544.7 Overall survival showing incremental improvements over

the last 40 years in Children’s Oncology Group and legacy trials in childhood acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). (From Gamis AS, Alonzo
TA, Perentesis JP, Meshinchi S. On behalf of the COG Acute Myeloid
Leukemia Committee: Children’s Oncology Group’s 2013 blueprint for
research: acute myeloid leukemia. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013;60:964–
971.)

544.3 Down Syndrome and Acute
Leukemia and Transient
Abnormal Myelopoiesis
A. Kim Ritchey, Julia C. Meade, Erika D. Friehling,
David G. Tubergen, and Archie Bleyer
Acute leukemia occurs about 15-­20 times more frequently in children with Down syndrome than in the general population (see
Chapters 57 and 541). The ratio of ALL to AML in patients with
Down syndrome is the same as that in the general population. The
exception is during the first 3 years of life, when AML is more common. In children with Down syndrome who have ALL, the expected
outcome of treatment has been slightly inferior to that for other
children, a difference that can be partially explained by a lack of
good prognostic characteristics, such as ETV6-­RUNX1 and trisomies, as well as the presence of genetic abnormalities associated with
an inferior prognosis, such as IKZF1. However, studies of patients
with Down syndrome and standard risk ALL show a 94% 10-­year
event-­free survival. Patients with Down syndrome demonstrate a
remarkable sensitivity to methotrexate and other antimetabolites,
resulting in substantial toxicity if standard doses are administered.
However, in the case of AML, patients with Down syndrome have
much better outcomes than children without Down syndrome,
with a >90% long-­term survival rate. After induction therapy, these
patients receive therapy that is less intensive to decrease toxicity
while maintaining excellent cure rates.
Approximately 10% of neonates with Down syndrome develop
a transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM), a unique myeloproliferative disorder characterized by high leukocyte counts, blast cells
in the peripheral blood, and associated anemia, thrombocytopenia,
jaundice, and hepatosplenomegaly. Hydrops fetalis is an uncommon manifestation of TAM and is associated with pleural effusions,
ascites, cardiac infiltration, hepatic dysfunction, and anemia. Mortality is rare from TAM but is associated with hyperleukocytosis,

ML DS

20% of
• Spontaneous patients Additional genetic
resolution or
aberrations?
treatment
• 10-15% death
Bone marrow
due to TL or other
causes

Fig. 544.8 Stepwise development of myeloid leukemia in Down

syndrome (ML DS) following transient leukemia (TL). TL arises from
expanded fetal liver progenitors as a result of constitutional trisomy
21, providing a window of opportunity for the occurrence of acquired
mutations in the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1. In most
cases, TL spontaneously disappears, but some children need treatment because of severe TL-­related symptoms. Approximately 20%
of children with TL subsequently develop ML DS, which requires additional hits. (From Zwaan MC, Reinhardt D, Hitzler J, Vyas P. Acute
leukemias in children with Down syndrome. Pediatr Clin North Am.
2008;55:53–70.)

prematurity, ascites, coagulopathy, and renal or hepatic dysfunction. These features usually resolve within the first 3 months of
life. Although these neonates can require temporary transfusion
support, they usually do not require chemotherapy. Low-­dose cytarabine has been used to decrease mortality in patients with high
WBC counts and life-­threatening complications. Patients who have
Down syndrome and who develop TAM require close follow-­up,
because 20–30% will develop typical leukemia (often acute megakaryocytic leukemia) by 3 years of age (mean onset, 16 months).
GATA1 variants (a transcription factor that controls megakaryopoiesis) are present in blasts from patients with Down syndrome who
have TAM and also in those with leukemia (Fig. 544.8). The presence of flow cytometry minimal residual disease at 3 months after a
diagnosis of TAM is a risk factor for the development of myeloid
leukemia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

544.4 Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
Erika D. Friehling, Julia C. Meade, A. Kim Ritchey,
David G. Tubergen, and Archie Bleyer
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a clonal disorder of
the hematopoietic tissue that accounts for 2–3% of all cases of
childhood leukemia. Approximately 99% of the cases are
characterized by a specific translocation, t(9;22)(q34;q11), known
as the Philadelphia chromosome, resulting in a BCR-­ABL fusion
protein.
The presenting symptoms of CML are nonspecific and can
include fever, fatigue, weight loss, and anorexia. Splenomegaly also
may be present, resulting in pain in the left upper quadrant of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 544 u The Leukemias
abdomen. The diagnosis is suggested by a high WBC count with
myeloid cells at all stages of differentiation in the peripheral blood
and bone marrow. It is confirmed by cytogenetic and molecular
studies that demonstrate the presence of the characteristic Philadelphia chromosome and the BCR-­ABL gene rearrangement. This
translocation, although characteristic of CML, is also found in a
small percentage of patients with ALL.
The disease is characterized by an initial chronic phase in which
the malignant clone produces an elevated leukocyte count with a
predominance of mature forms but with increased numbers of
immature granulocytes. In addition to leukocytosis, blood counts
can reveal mild anemia and thrombocytosis. Typically, the chronic
phase terminates 3-­4 years after onset, when the CML moves into
the accelerated or “blast crisis” phase. At this point, the blood
counts rise dramatically, and the clinical picture is indistinguishable
from acute leukemia. Additional manifestations can occur, including neurologic symptoms from hyperleukocytosis, which causes
increased blood viscosity with decreased CNS perfusion.
Imatinib (Gleevec), an agent designed specifically to inhibit the
BCR-­ABL tyrosine kinase, has been used in adults and children
and has shown an ability to produce major cytogenetic responses
in >70% of patients (see Table 542.1). Experience in children suggests it can be used safely with results comparable to those seen
in adults. Second-­generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
dasatinib and nilotinib, have improved remission rates in adults
and are now included in the first-­line therapy in that population.
Both agents have been studied in children and have been found to
be effective and safe. While waiting for a response to the tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, disabling or threatening signs and symptoms of
CML can be controlled during the chronic phase with hydroxyurea,
which gradually returns the leukocyte count to normal. Treatment
with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor is the current standard for pediatric CML. Although not considered curative at this time, prolonged responses can be seen, and studies in adults have shown that,
in select cases, treatment with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor can be
stopped. The role of potentially curative human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-­matched family donor stem cell transplant in management
of pediatric CML is debated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

544.5 Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia
Julia C. Meade, Erika D. Friehling, A. Kim Ritchey,
David G. Tubergen, and Archie Bleyer
JMML, formerly termed juvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia,
is a clonal proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells that typically
affects children <2 years old. JMML is rare, constituting <1% of
all cases of childhood leukemia. Patients with this disease do not
have the Philadelphia chromosome characteristic of CML. Patients
with JMML present with rashes, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly,
and hemorrhagic manifestations. Analysis of the peripheral blood
often shows an elevated leukocyte count with increased monocytes, thrombocytopenia, and anemia with the presence of erythroblasts. The bone marrow shows a myelodysplastic pattern, with
blasts accounting for <20% of cells. Most patients with JMML have
been found to have pathogenic variants that lead to activation of
the RAS oncogene pathway. About 90% have molecular changes in

3105

NRAS, KRAS, NF1, CBL, and PTPN11. Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 and Noonan syndrome have a predilection for this
type of leukemia because they have germline mutations involved
in RAS signaling. JMML in the setting of Noonan syndrome and
CBL syndrome is unique, with most patients having a spontaneous
resolution. However, for other patients with JMML, stem cell transplantation offers the best opportunity for cure, although outcomes
are still poor.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

544.6 Infant Leukemia
A. Kim Ritchey, Erika D. Friehling, Julia C. Meade,
David G. Tubergen, and Archie Bleyer
The incidence of infant acute leukemia is about 40 cases per million, or about 160 cases per year in the United States. Approximately
2% of cases of childhood leukemia occur before age 1 year. In contrast to the situation in older children, the ratio of ALL in infants to
AML is 2:1. Leukemic clones have been noted in cord blood at birth
before symptoms appear, and in one case, the same clone was noted
in maternal cells (maternal-­to-­fetal transmission). Chromosome
translocations can also occur in utero during fetal hematopoiesis,
leading to malignant clone formation.
Several unique biologic features and a particularly poor prognosis are characteristic of ALL during infancy. Almost all are B
cell with infrequent T cell. Seventy to 80% of the cases demonstrate rearrangements of the KMT2A (MLL) gene, found at the
site of the 11q23 band translocation, the majority of which are the
t(4;11). This subset of patients largely accounts for the very high
relapse rate. These patients often present with hyperleukocytosis
and extensive tissue infiltration producing organomegaly, including CNS disease. Subcutaneous nodules, known as leukemia cutis,
and tachypnea caused by diffuse pulmonary infiltration by leukemic cells are observed more often in infants than in older children.
The leukemic cell morphology is usually that of large, irregular lymphoblasts, with a phenotype negative for the CD10 (common ALL
antigen) marker (pro-­B), unlike most older children with B-­ALL,
who are CD10+.
Very intensive chemotherapy programs, including stem cell
transplantation, are being explored in infants with KMT2A (MLL)
gene rearrangements, but none has yet proved satisfactory. Infants
defined as high risk (KMT2A, age <6 months and WBC ≥300,000)
have survival of only 30%, whereas infants with the KMT2A without
other high-­risk features have survival of 58%. Infants with leukemia
who lack the KMT2A rearrangement have a prognosis somewhat
inferior to that of older children with ALL.
Infants with AML often present with CNS or skin involvement
and have a subtype known as acute myelomonocytic leukemia.
The treatment may be the same as that for older children with
AML, with similar outcome. Meticulous supportive care is necessary because of the young age and aggressive therapy needed in
these patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3106 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

Chapter 545

Lymphoma
Jessica Hochberg, Stanton C. Goldman,
and Mitchell S. Cairo
INTRODUCTION

Lymphoma is the third most common cancer among U.S. children (≤14
years old), with an annual incidence of 15 cases per 1 million children.
It is the most common cancer in adolescents, accounting for >25% of
newly diagnosed cancers in those 15-­19 years old. The two broad categories of lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and non-­Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), have different clinical manifestations and treatments.*

545.1 Hodgkin Lymphoma
Stanton C. Goldman, Jessica Hochberg, and
Mitchell S. Cairo
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a malignant process involving the lymphoreticular system that accounts for 6% of childhood cancers. In the
United States, HL accounts for approximately 5% of cancers in children
≤14 years old; it accounts for approximately 15% of cancers in adolescents (15-­19 years), making HL the most common malignancy in this
age-­group.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The worldwide incidence of HL is approximately 2-­4 new cases per
100,000 population per year. There is a bimodal age distribution, with
peaks at 15-­35 years of age and again after 50 years. HL is the most
common cancer seen in adolescents and young adults and the third
most common in children <15 years old. In developing countries, the
early peak tends to occur before adolescence. A male predominance
is found among young children but lessens with age. Infectious agents
may be involved, such as human herpesvirus 6, cytomegalovirus, and
Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV). The role of EBV is supported by prospective serologic studies. Infection with EBV confers a fourfold higher risk
of developing HL and may precede the diagnosis by years. EBV antigens have been demonstrated in HL tissues, particularly type II latent
membrane proteins 1 and 2. Some studies have suggested that elevated
copies of EBV by polymerase chain reaction correspond to worse prognosis. The EBV antigens latent membrane protein 1 and 2 have been
used as targets for cytotoxic T-­lymphocyte therapy in patients with
relapsed/refractory HL.

PATHOGENESIS

The Reed-­Sternberg (RS) cell, a pathognomonic feature of HL, is a
large cell (15-­45 μm in diameter) with multiple or multilobulated
nuclei. This cell type is considered the hallmark of HL, although similar
cells are seen in infectious mononucleosis, NHL, and other conditions.
The RS cell is clonal in origin and arises from the germinal center B
cells but typically has lost most B-­cell gene expression and function.
There is no single simple genetic aberration that leads to malignant
transformation of the RS cell; rather, a combination of somatic pathogenic variants, chromosomal instability, and complex chromosomal
rearrangements has been reported with no particular pattern or frequency. This typically leads to cell regulation defects such as constitutive activation of the nuclear factor (NF)-­κB pathway or abnormal
regulation of the Bcl-­2 family of proteins. HL is characterized by a
variable number of RS cells surrounded by an inflammatory infiltrate
* The views expressed are the result of independent work and do not necessarily represent
the views or findings of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or the United States.

of lymphocytes, macrophages, plasma cells, and eosinophils in different proportions, depending on the HL histologic subtype. The interaction between the RS cell and these background inflammatory cells
with their associated cytokine release is important in the development
and progression of HL. Reactive infiltration of eosinophils and CD68+
macrophages and increased concentrations of cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-­1 and IL-­6 and tumor necrosis factor, are all associated
with an unfavorable prognosis. Other factors associated with a worse
prognosis include advanced stage, the presence of systemic symptoms,
decreased response to therapy, and slow response to therapy. In addition, evidence of CD8+ T cells surrounding the RS cell offers evidence
of an important role in T-­cell promotion of malignant cell survival,
perhaps through the CD30 and CD40 ligands found on RS cells as well
as immune checkpoint inhibition pathways. Other features that distinguish the histologic subtypes include various degrees of fibrosis and the
presence of collagen bands, necrosis, or malignant reticular cells (Fig.
545.1). The distribution of subtypes varies with age.
The Revised World Health Organization Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms includes two modifications of the older Rye system.
HL appears to arise in lymphoid tissue and spread to adjacent lymph
node areas in a relatively orderly manner (Table 545.1). Hematogenous
spread also occurs, leading to involvement of the liver, spleen, bone,
bone marrow (BM), or brain, and is usually associated with systemic
symptoms.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients typically present with painless, nontender, firm, rubbery cervical or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy and usually some degree of
mediastinal involvement. Clinically detectable hepatosplenomegaly
may be encountered. Depending on the extent and location of nodal
and extranodal disease, patients may present with symptoms and signs
of airway obstruction (dyspnea, hypoxia, cough), pleural or pericardial effusion, hepatocellular dysfunction, or BM infiltration (anemia,
neutropenia, or thrombocytopenia). Systemic symptoms, classified as
B symptoms, that are considered important in staging are unexplained
fever >38°C (100.4°F), weight loss >10% total body weight over 6
months, and drenching night sweats. Less common and not considered
of prognostic significance are symptoms of pruritus, lethargy, anorexia,
or pain. Patients also exhibit immune system deficiencies that often
persist during and after therapy.

DIAGNOSIS

Any patient with persistent, unexplained lymphadenopathy unassociated with an obvious underlying inflammatory or infectious process
should undergo chest radiography to identify the presence of a large
mediastinal mass before undergoing lymph node biopsy (Fig. 545.2).
Formal excisional biopsy is preferred over needle biopsy to ensure that
adequate tissue is obtained, both for light microscopy and for appropriate immunohistochemical and molecular studies. Once the diagnosis
of HL is established, extent of disease (stage) should be determined
to allow selection of appropriate therapy (Table 545.2). Evaluation
includes history, physical examination, and imaging studies, including
chest radiograph; CT scans of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis;
and PET scan (Fig. 545.3). Laboratory studies should include a CBC to
identify abnormalities that might suggest marrow involvement, ESR,
and measurement of serum ferritin, which is of some prognostic significance and, if abnormal at diagnosis, serves as a baseline to evaluate the
effects of treatment. A chest radiograph is particularly important for
measuring the size of the mediastinal mass in relation to the maximal
diameter of the thorax (see Fig. 545.2). This determines “bulk” disease
and becomes prognostically significant. Chest CT more clearly defines
the extent of a mediastinal mass if present and identifies hilar nodes
and pulmonary parenchymal involvement, which may not be evident
on chest radiographs (see Fig. 545.3). BM aspiration and biopsy should
be performed to rule out advanced disease. Bone scans are performed
in patients with bone pain and/or elevation of alkaline phosphatase.
Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET imaging has advantages over traditional gallium scanning, with higher resolution, better dosimetry, less
intestinal activity, and the potential to quantify disease (Table 545.3).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 545 u Lymphoma

D

C

B

A

G

F

E

3107

Fig. 545.1 Histologic subtypes of Hodgkin lymphoma. A, Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains of nodular lymphocyte–predominant Hodgkin

lymphoma (NLPHL) demonstrating a nodular proliferation with a moth-­eaten appearance. B, High-­power view demonstrating the neoplastic L and
H cells found in NLPHL. C, Classic Hodgkin lymphoma, nodular sclerosis subtype. Large mononuclear and binucleate Reed-­Sternberg cells are
seen admixed in the inflammatory cell background. D, Classic Hodgkin lymphoma, mixed cellularity subtype, demonstrating increased numbers of
Reed-­Sternberg cells in a mixed inflammatory background without sclerotic changes. E, High-­power view of a classic Reed-­Sternberg cell showing
binucleate cells with prominent eosinophilic nucleoli and relatively abundant cytoplasm. F, Few CD68+ macrophages in a patient with successful
treatment. G, Many CD68+ macrophages in a treatment failure patient.

Table 545.1  New World Health Organization/Revised
­European–American Classification of ­Lymphoid
Neoplasms for Hodgkin Lymphoma
Nodular lymphocyte predominance
Classical Hodgkin lymphoma
Lymphocyte rich
Mixed cellularity
Nodular sclerosis
Lymphocyte depletion
From Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Diebold J, et al. The World Health Organization classification
of neoplastic diseases of the haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues: report of the Clinical Advisory Committee Meeting, Airlie House, Virginia, November 1997. Histopathology. 2000;36:69–87.

Table 545.2  Lugano Classification for Hodgkin Lymphoma*
STAGE

EXTRANODAL
STATUS

INVOLVEMENT

I

One node or group of adjacent
nodes

Single extranodal
­lesions without
nodal involvement

II

Two or more nodal groups
on the same side of the
diaphragm

Stage I or II by nodal
extent with limited
contiguous extra­
nodal involvement

II bulky

II as above with “bulky” disease

Not applicable

III

Nodes on both sides of the
diaphragm; nodes above
the diaphragm with spleen
involvement

Not applicable

IV

Additional noncontiguous
­extralymphatic involvement

Lung, liver, bone
marrow, bone
­marrow, bone

*The absence or presence of fever >38°C (100.4°F) for 3 (some suggest 7) consecutive
days, drenching night sweats, or unexplained loss of >10% of body weight in the 6
months preceding admission are to be denoted in all cases by the suffix letter A or B,
respectively.
From Cheson BD, Fisher RI, Barrington SF, et al. Recommendations for initial evaluation, staging and response assessment of Hodgkin and non-­Hodgkin lymphoma: the
Lugano classification. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(27):3059–3067.

A

B

Fig. 545.2 A, Anterior mediastinal mass in a patient with Hodgkin

disease before therapy. B, After 2 months of chemotherapy, the mediastinal mass has disappeared.

PET scans are essential as a prognostic tool in HL, enabling therapy to
be reduced in those predicted to have a good outcome and identifying
those at risk of relapse.
The staging classification currently used for HL was initially adopted
at the Ann Arbor Conference in 1971 and was revised in 1989. The
Lugano classification was developed in 2014 and incorporates

standardized staging and response criteria for FDG-­PET–avid lymphomas (see Table 545.2). HL can be subclassified into A or B categories: A is used to identify asymptomatic patients, and B is used for
patients who exhibit any B symptoms. Extralymphatic disease resulting
from direct extension of an involved lymph node region is designated
by category E. A complete response in HL is defined as the complete
resolution of disease on clinical examination and imaging studies, or
at least 70–80% reduction of disease and a change from initial positivity to negativity on PET scanning, reflecting residual fibrosis, which is
common.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3108 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
TREATMENT

A

A

A

*
*

B
Fig. 545.3 Hodgkin lymphoma in a young individual. A, CT shows

a homogeneous anterior mediastinal mass (arrows). The arrowhead
points to the superior vena cava. B, PET/CT in the coronal plane. The
mass shows marked fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) activity (arrows). Note
the associated left neck mass (arrowhead). The left ventricle activity (asterisks) is normal. A, Ascending aorta. (From Haaga JR, Boll DT, et al.,
eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body [Vol, 1]. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2017: Fig. 38-­89, p. 1065.)

Table 545.3  TEP Evaluation After Two Chemotherapy
­Cycles Using Deauville Criteria 5-­Point Scale
18F-­FDG UPTAKE

1

No uptake

2

Uptake lower than or equal to that of mediastinal
blood pool

3

Uptake higher than that of mediastinum and lower
than or equal to that of the liver

4

Uptake moderately higher than that of the liver at
any site

5

Uptake markedly higher than that of the liver at any
site or at new sites of disease, or both

X

New areas of uptake unlikely to be related to
lymphoma

18F-­FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose F18; TEP, technical expert panel.

From Brice P, de Kerviler E, Friedberg JW. Classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Lancet.
2021;398:1518–1526. Table 2.

Multiple agents allow different mechanisms of action to have nonoverlapping toxicities so that full doses can be given to each patient.
Chemotherapy and radiation therapy are both effective in the treatment of HL. Treatment of HL in pediatric patients is risk adapted
and involves the use of combined chemotherapy with or without
low-­dose involved-­field radiation therapy based on response. Treatment is determined largely by disease stage, presence or absence of
B symptoms, and the presence of bulky nodal disease. The development of effective multiagent combination chemotherapy and immunotherapy is a major milestone in the treatment of HL, resulting
in a complete response rate of 70–80% and cure rate of 40–50% in
patients with advanced-­stage disease. However, this regimen also led
to significant acute and long-­term toxicity. The desire to reduce side
effects and morbidity has stimulated attempts to reduce the intensity
of chemotherapy, as well as radiation dose and volume. Combinations of chemotherapy have reduced the risk of secondary cancers.
Also, current radiation therapy uses lower amounts of overall radiation in addition to narrowing the radiation treatment field to either
involved-­field or even involved-­node irradiation. The current Children’s Oncology Group and other trials are investigating whether
radiation therapy can be eliminated altogether in patients who have a
very good rapid early response to induction chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy agents used to treat children and adolescents with
HL include cyclophosphamide, procarbazine, vincristine or vinblastine, prednisone or dexamethasone, doxorubicin, bleomycin,
dacarbazine, etoposide, methotrexate, and cytosine arabinoside.
The combination chemotherapy regimens in current use are based
on COPP (cyclophosphamide, vincristine [Oncovin], procarbazine,
and prednisone) or ABVD (doxorubicin [Adriamycin], bleomycin,
vinblastine, and dacarbazine), with the addition of prednisone, cyclophosphamide, and etoposide (ABVE-­PC and BEACOPP) or BAVD
(brentuximab vedotin, doxorubicin [Adriamycin], vincristine, dacarbazine) in various combinations for intermediate-­and high-­risk
groups (Table 545.4). Risk-­adapted protocols are based on both staging criteria and rapidity of response to initial chemotherapy. The aim
is to reduce total drug doses and treatment duration and to eliminate
radiation therapy, if possible.
Agents such as those that disrupt the NF-­κB pathway or monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that target RS tumor cells, as well as the benign
reactive cells that surround them, are being investigated. Ongoing
clinical trials report encouraging results with anti-­CD20 antibody
(rituximab), particularly in nodular lymphocyte-­predominant HL, for
which trials in relapsed disease have shown an overall response rate of
94%. In addition, anti-­CD30 agents are being used that target the RS
cells themselves, where CD30 is abundantly expressed. Brentuximab
vedotin is an antibody–drug conjugate approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration to treat HL. It combines the chimeric anti-­CD30
antibody brentuximab linked to the antimitotic agent monomethyl
auristatin E. This agent shows impressive efficacy as single-­agent therapy in refractory HL and is being tested as part of up-­front therapy
combined with chemotherapy in patients with newly diagnosed disease
where pediatric trials incorporating brentuximab to replace vincristine
in the OEPA/COPDac backbone have demonstrated overall safety, tolerability, and efficacy with 97% event-­free survival (EFS) and the ability
to limit radiation to involved node radiation sites only. Furthermore,
the combination of both brentuximab and rituximab, together with
AVD chemotherapy in newly diagnosed patients, has shown 100% efficacy while allowing for the elimination of toxic alkylator agents, topoisomerase inhibitors, bleomycin, and any radiation in the majority of
patients. EBV-­specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) can also be
generated from allogeneic donors for patients with advanced HL. In
clinical trials, these cells show promising results, with enhanced antiviral activity and stabilization of disease. EBV-­CTLs have been developed
and are currently being investigated. These enhanced EBV-­CTLs are
designed to be latent membrane protein 1 and 2 specific and can be
generated from second-­party (in the case of BM transplant recipients)
or even third-­party donors for patients with refractory disease. These
approaches represent an exciting direction in adoptive cellular tumor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 545 u Lymphoma
Table 545.4  Chemotherapy Regimens for Children,
Adolescents, and Young Adults with Hodgkin
Lymphoma
CHEMOTHERAPY
REGIMEN

CORRESPONDING AGENTS

ABVD

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin,
­vinblastine, dacarbazine

ABVD-­Rituxan

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin,
­vinblastine, dacarbazine, rituximab

ABvVD

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), brentuximab,
vinblastine, dacarbazine

ABvVD-­R

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), brentuximab,
vinblastine, dacarbazine, rituximab

AEPA/CAPDac

Brentuximab, etoposide, prednisone, and
doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide, ­
brentuximab, prednisone, and ­dacarbazine

ABVE (DBVE)

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin,
­vincristine, etoposide

VAMP

Vincristine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
methotrexate, prednisone

OPPA ± COPP
(females)

Vincristine (Oncovin), prednisone,
­procarbazine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin),
prednisone, procarbazine

OEPA ± COPP (males)

Vincristine (Oncovin), etoposide,
­prednisone, doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin),
prednisone, procarbazine

COPP/ABV

Cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin),
prednisone, procarbazine, doxorubicin
(Adriamycin), bleomycin, vinblastine

BEACOPP
(advanced stage)

Bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin
(Adriamycin), cyclophosphamide, ­vincristine
(Oncovin), prednisone, ­procarbazine

COPP

Cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin),
prednisone, procarbazine

CHOP

Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
vincristine (Oncovin), ­prednisone

ABVE-­PC (DBVE-­PC)

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin,
vincristine, etoposide, prednisone,
­cyclophosphamide

ICE ± (Brentuximab)

Ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide ±
­brentuximab

Ifos/Vino ±
(Brentuximab)

Ifosfamide, vinorelbine ± brentuximab

immunology, and it remains to be determined whether CTLs will have
improved cytotoxicity that can overcome inhibitory signals.

RELAPSE

Most relapses occur within the first 3 years after diagnosis, but relapses
as late as 10 years have been reported. Relapse cannot be predicted
accurately with this disease. Poor prognostic features include tumor
bulk, stage at diagnosis, extralymphatic disease, and presence of B
symptoms. Patients who achieve an initial chemosensitive response
but relapse or progress before 12 months from diagnosis are candidates
for myeloablative chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation (SCT), with or without radiation therapy. Retrospective studies
show a significant decrease in relapse in patients with HL following
allogeneic vs autologous SCT. Reduced-­intensity conditioning or nonmyeloablative regimens are successful at reducing regimen-­related

3109

morbidity and mortality associated with myeloablative allogeneic SCT
while still achieving a strong graft versus HL effect. For more difficult-­
to-­treat refractory cases, radioimmunotherapy agents such as Zevalin
and Bexxar are being trialed, often in combination with SCT strategies. Both are monoclonal anti-­CD20 antibodies to which a radioactive isotope is directly linked. Clinical trials show each to be more
effective than rituximab in NHL patients, and there is some interest in
studying their use in the CD20 subpopulation of HL patients. Tumors
can evade the host immune system by exploiting immune checkpoint pathways, such as the CTL-­associated protein four (CTLA-­4)
and programmed-­death protein 1 (PD-­1) pathways. PD-­1 is a negative co-­stimulatory receptor with increased expression reported on T
cells. PD-­1 is critical for suppression of T-­cell activation, with binding
of programmed-­death ligand 1 (PD-­L1) resulting in “T-­cell exhaustion.” Blockade of this interaction renders previously anergic T cells
responsive to antigen. Evidence has shown that antitumor immune
responses can be improved by blocking immune checkpoint inhibitors
in the tumor microenvironment. Phase I trials of the PD-­1 blocking
mAbs nivolumab and pembrolizumab have shown significant promise in refractory patients. Phase II clinical trials suggest that combining
immunotherapy such as rituximab or brentuximab with PD-­1 checkpoint blockade will be highly effective against relapsed lymphomas
and well tolerated, without treatment-­related adverse events. With the
success seen in relapsed or refractory patients, PD-­1 blockade likely
will have a role in frontline therapy as well where studies have shown
promise in combination with chemotherapy in adults, with pediatric
trials currently under investigation.

PROGNOSIS

With the use of current therapeutic regimens, patients with favorable
prognostic factors and early-­stage disease have an EFS of 85–90% and
an overall survival (OS) at 5 years of >95%. Patients with advanced-­stage
disease have slightly lower EFS (80–85%) and OS (90%), respectively,
although OS has approached 100% with dose-­intense chemotherapy
(Table 545.5). Prognosis after relapse depends on the time from completion of treatment to recurrence, site of relapse (nodal vs extranodal),
and presence of B symptoms at relapse. Patients whose disease relapses
>12 months after chemotherapy alone or combined-­modality therapy
have the best prognosis, and their relapses usually respond to additional standard therapy, resulting in a long-­term survival of 60–70%.
A myeloablative autologous SCT in patients with refractory disease or
relapse within 12 months of therapy results in a long-­term survival rate
of only 40–50%. Allogeneic SCT has shown promise in patients with
poor-­risk features at relapse/progression.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

545.2 Non-­Hodgkin Lymphoma
Stanton C. Goldman, Jessica Hochberg, and Mitchell
S. Cairo
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) accounts for approximately 60% of
lymphomas in children and is the second most common malignancy
between ages 15 and 35 years. The annual incidence of pediatric NHL
in the United States is 750-­800 cases per year. In contrast to adult NHL,
which is predominantly indolent, pediatric NHL is usually high grade.
Although >70% of patients present with advanced disease, the prognosis has improved dramatically, with survival rates of 90–95% for localized disease and 80–95% for advanced disease.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although most children and adolescents with NHL present with de
novo disease, a small number of patients have NHL secondary to specific etiologies, including inherited or acquired immunodeficiencies
(e.g., severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome, Wiskott-­Aldrich
syndrome), virus-­associated malignancy (e.g., HIV, EBV), and as part
of genetic syndromes (e.g., ataxia-­telangiectasia, Bloom syndrome).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3110 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 545.5  Treatment Regimens and Outcome by Disease Staging
Hodgkin lymphoma

Treatment

Prognosis

LOCALIZED/LOW STAGE

INTERMEDIATE

POG study 9426/GPOH-­HD 95:
ABVD-­type therapy ± IFRT
(risk adapted based on early
response to chemotherapy)

Stanford/DAL-­HD-­90:
COPP-­based or dose-­intense
multiagent chemotherapy +
low-­dose RT
POG 9426/CCG 5942:
ABVD-­type therapy ± IFRT (risk
adapted)
ABvVD-­R
Stanford/DAL-­HD-­90:
5-­yr EFS: 89–92%

5-­yr EFS: 85–90%
5-­yr OS: 95%

POG 9426/CCG 5942:
5-­yr EFS: 84%
5-­yr OS: 91%
ABvVD-­R:
5-­yr EFS/OS: 100%

Burkitt lymphoma
and diffuse large
B-­cell lymphoma

Treatment

Prognosis

Lymphoblastic
lymphoma

4-­yr EFS:
98% (CI95 94-­99.5%)
4-­yr OS: 99% (CI95 96-­99.9%)

FAB/LMB 96 Group B therapy:
Reduced cyclophosphamide
and no maintenance therapy
COG ANHL01P1:
FAB/LMB Group B therapy +
rituximab
FAB/LMB96:
4-­yr EFS: 92% (CI95 90–94%)
4-­yr OS: 95% (CI95 93–96%)
*PMB DLBCL has worse
prognosis (EFS/OS: 66/73%)
COG ANHL01P1:
3-­yr EFS 93% (CI95 79-­98%)
3-­yr OS 95% (CI95 83–99%)

NHL-­BFM86/90/95:
Two cycles of ALL-type therapy
COG A5971:
ALL-­type therapy × 2 yr without
prophylactic cranial RT
COG A5971:
5-­yr EFS: 90 (CI95 78–96%)
5-­yr OS: 96 (CI95 84–99%)

No intermediate group;
disease classified as localized
(stages I/II) or advanced
(stages III/IV)

Treatment

EICHNL ALCL 99: Short intensive
chemotherapy + HD MTX
Completely resected stage I
disease may be treated with
surgery alone

Prognosis

EICHNL database:
5-­yr PFS: 89% (CI95 82–96%)
5-­yr OS: 94% (CI95 89–99%)

No intermediate group;
disease classified as standard
risk (no skin, visceral, or
mediastinal involvement)
or high risk (presence of
skin, mediastinal, or visceral
involvement)
No intermediate group; see
above

Treatment

Prognosis

Anaplastic large
cell lymphoma

FAB/LMB 96 Group A therapy:
Complete surgical resection
followed by two cycles of
chemotherapy

No intermediate group; see
above

ADVANCED
POG 8725/DAL-­HD-­90:
Dose-­intense multiagent
chemotherapy + low-­dose RT
HD9/HD12/CCG 59704:
Dose-­intense BEACOPP ± IFRT
AEPA/CAPDac
ABvVD-­R
POG 8725:
5-­yr EFS:
72–89% (age-­based)
DAL-­HD-­90:
5-­yr EFS: 86%
5-­yr OS: 85–90%
HD9/HD12/CCG 59704:
5-­yr EFS/OS: 88-­93/∼100%
AEPA/CAPDac:
3 yr EFS/OS: 97.4%/98.7%
ABvVD-­R:
5-­yr EFS/OS: 100%
FAB/LMB 96 standard-­intensity
Group C therapy:
Reduction, induction, intensification,
and maintenance therapy
COG ANHL01P1:
FAB/LMB Group C therapy +
rituximab
FAB/LMB96:
4-­yr FS:BM−/CNS−: 91% ±
3%BMCNS+: 85% ± 6%BM+/
CNS+: 66% ± 7%
COG ANHL01P1:
3-­yr EFS/OS:BM+ or CNS+: 90%
(CI95 75–96%)
CNS+: 93% (CI95 61–99%)
NHL-­BFM86/90/95:
ALL-­type therapy × 2 yr ± px CRT
CCG 5941:
Intensive chemotherapy × 1 yr +
cranial RT if CNS + at diagnosis
NHL-­BFM95:
5-­yr EFS: 90% ± 3% (III), 95 ± 5% (IV)
CCG 5941:
5-­yr EFS/OS: 78% ± 5%/85% ± 4%
ALCL 99, CCG 5941:
Short intensive chemotherapy +
HD MTX
COG ANHL0131: APO (doxorubicin, prednisone, vincristine) ±
vinblastine
ALCL 99:
2-­yr EFS: 71% (CI95 75–77%)
2-­yr OS: 94% (CI95 89-­95%)
COG 5941:
5-­yr EFS 68% (CI95 57–78%)
5-­yr OS: 80% (CI95 69–87%)
COG ANHL0131:
2-­yr EFS 79% (CI95 71–88%)
2-­yr OS 89% (CI95 83–95%)

ABVD, Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine; ABvVD-R, doxorubicin (adriamycin), bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine rituximab; AEPA/CAPDac, Adcetris (brentuximab vedotin), etoposide, prednisone, doxorubicin (adriamycin), cyclophosphamide, adcetris (brentuximab vedotin), prednisone, cacarbazine; ALCL, anaplastic large cell lymphoma;
ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; ANHL, Children’s Oncology Group non-hodgkin lymphoma study; BEACOPP, bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), cyclophosphamide,
vincristine (Oncovin), prednisone, procarbazine; BM, bone marrow (involvement); CCG, Children’s Cancer Group; CI95, 95% confidence interval; CNS, central nervous system (involvement); COG, Children’s Oncology Group; COPP, cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin), prednisone, procarbazine; CRT, chemoradiotherapy; DAL-HD, German-Austrian Lymphoma
Froup Hodgkin 90 Study; EFS, event-­free survival; EICHNL, European Intergroup for Childhood Non-­Hodgkin Lymphoma; FAB, French-­American-­British; HD MTX, high-­dose methotrexate; IFRT, involved-­field radiation therapy; LMB, Lymphome Malins de Burkitt; MTX, methotrexate; NHL-­BFM, non-­Hodgkin lymphoma Berlin-­Frankfurt-­Munster; OS, overall survival;
PFS, progression-­free survival; PMB DLBCL, primary mediastinal B-­cell diffuse large B-­cell lymphoma; POG, Pediatric Oncology Group; px, prophylactic; RT, radiation therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 545 u Lymphoma
However, most children in North America and Europe in whom NHL
develops have no obvious genetic or environmental etiology.

PATHOGENESIS

Three most prevalent subtypes of childhood and adolescent NHL with
different treatment approaches are lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL),
mature B-­
cell lymphoma, and anaplastic large cell lymphoma
(ALCL; Figs. 545.4 and 545.5). LBL arises from precursor T lymphocytes and less often from precursor B lymphocytes, with biology and
treatment approaches similar to acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Mature
B-­cell lymphomas comprise two main pathologies, Burkitt lymphoma
(BL) and diffuse large B-­cell lymphoma (DLBCL). DLBCL is further
divided into several subtypes: the germinal center B-­cell–like subtype,
which carries a favorable prognosis and accounts for most pediatric
cases of DLBCL, and the subtypes with poorer prognosis, including
activated B-­cell–like and primary mediastinal B-­cell subtypes. Primary
mediastinal B-­cell subtype of DLBCL shares molecular signature more

Burkitt
38%

Follicular
1%

DLBCL
20%

Burkitt
21%

Other
6%

ALCL
10%

Other
2%

A

Lymphoblastic
29%

DLBCL
37%

Lymphoblastic
19%

ALCL
17%

B

Fig. 545.4 Incidence of non-­Hodgkin lymphoma subtypes. A, In 0- to

14-­yr-­old children. B, In 15- to 19-­yr-­old adolescents. ALCL, Anaplastic
large cell lymphoma; DLBCL, diffuse large B-­cell lymphoma. (Adapted from Hochberg J, Waxman IM, Kelly KM, et al. Adolescent non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma and Hodgkin lymphoma: state of the science. Br J
Haematol. 2008;144:24–40.)

A

akin to HL then germinal center–derived DLBCL. Most cases of ALCL
are of mature T-­cell origin, with a smaller percentage of null-­cell and
B-­cell origin. Cellular surface markers can aid in differentiating NHL
subtypes and present opportunities for specific antibody-­
targeted
treatments. BL and DLBCL express the mature B-­cell antigens CD20
(the target of rituximab) and CD22, whereas ALCL expresses the
CD30 antigen (the target of the antibody conjugate brentuximab vedotin). Some pathologic subtypes have specific cytogenetic aberrations.
Children with BL frequently have a driver genetic change involving the
MYC gene juxtaposed to an immunoglobulin chain in the form of translocations: t(8;14) (90%) or, less often, a t(2;8) or t(8;22) translocation
(10%). Children with BL who have additional chromosomal aberrations such as 13q deletion or complex karyotype have a poorer prognosis. Unlike adult DLBCL, a higher proportion of pediatric DLBCL may
also have c-­myc dysregulation with t(8;14) translocation (30%) and
often have a complex (80%) and aneuploid (80%) karyotype. In recent
years a Burkitt morphology lymphoma (Burkitt-­like) that lacks a c-­myc
driver has been categorized by findings of 11q aberrations and several
target genes such as chromatin remodeling complex pathogenic variants (INO80) that likely contribute to lymphomagenesis (Fig. 545.6).
Patients with ALCL usually have a driver t(2;5) translocation (90%),
which results in the formation of a fusion gene encoding the constitutively active nucleophosmin–anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
tyrosine kinase and can be targeted by the oral agent, crizotinib. T-­cell
LBL harbors many of the same cytogenetic abnormalities as T-­cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-­ALL), including rearrangements with
breakpoints at 14q11.2 involving the T-­cell receptor and multiple other
rearranged genes. Loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 6q defines a
poor-­risk subgroup of T-­LBL patients.
Genomic studies have offered insights into NHL pathogenesis as
well as elucidated potential targets for novel therapies. Gene expression profiling of T-­LBL and T-­ALL has implicated the activation of
oncogenic transcription factors as a result of aberrant T-­cell receptor gene rearrangement. One of the most frequently activated signaling pathways is NOTCH1, which may be amenable to therapeutic
targeting with γ-­secretase inhibitors. In BL and DLBCL, extensive
genomic work has identified unique gene expression signatures that

D

C

B

8
CD30

CD20

E

F

3111

G

14
H

Fig. 545.5 Histologic subtypes of childhood and adolescent non-­Hodgkin lymphoma. A-­D, Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains showing morphol-

ogy of Burkitt lymphoma (A, high power), diffuse large B-­cell lymphoma (B, high power), precursor T-­lymphoblastic lymphoma (C, high power), and
anaplastic large cell lymphoma (D, high power). E and F, Characteristic surface markers for anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) (CD30; E) and BL
(CD20; F). G and H, Cytogenetic analysis of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) demonstrating t(8;14). G, Karyotype showing the conventional t(8;14)(q24;q32).
H, Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization showing a balanced translocation involving MYC and immunoglobulin (Ig) H loci. The chromosome
eight centromere is labeled with spectrum aqua, MYC probe is labeled with spectrum orange, and IgH is labeled with spectrum green. Two fusion
signals are seen, as well as one red and one green, representing the normal chromosomes. (A-­D from Cairo MS, Raetz E, Lim MS, et al. Childhood
and adolescent non-­Hodgkin lymphoma: new insights in biology and critical challenges for the future. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005;45:753–769;
E-­H from Giulino-­Roth, Cesarman E. Molecular biology of Burkitt lymphoma. In Robertson ES, ed. Burkitt’s Lymphoma. New York: Springer; 2012.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3112 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
MYC- Burkitt lymphoma
(mnBLL, 11q,)
CD20+
11q
GNA13
NFRKB

MYC+ Burkitt lymphoma
CD20+
MYC-IGH
MYC-IGL
TCF
ID3
TP53
SMARCA4
DLEU1

Follicular lymphoma
CD20+
t(14;18) (IGH-BCL2)
CXCR4
TNFRSF14
CREBBP
MLL2
EZH2

T cell
Somatic
hypermutation
(SHM)

Antigen

Follicular
dendritic cell

Plasma cell

Centrocyte

Centroblast
Naive B cell

Memory B cell

Plasmablast
Dark
zone

Light zone

*GCB DLBCL
CD20+
TNFRSF14
CREBBP
BCL2
β2M
EZH2

Germinal center

*Unclassified DLBCL
CD20+
NOTCH2
BCL6

*ABC DLBCL
CD20+
CDKN2A
PIM1
MYD88
PRDM1

Fig. 545.6 Germinal center–derived B-­cell lymphomagenesis. *Diffuse large B-­cell lymphoma (DLBCL), recently subclassified as MCD, BNS, N1,
and EZB subgroups. (From Cairo, MS. A new Burkitt “look-­alike” lymphoma. Blood. 2019;133[9]:889–891.)

differentiate these two mature B-­cell neoplasms. In addition, next-­
generation sequencing of BL has identified genetic lesions in TCF3
and ID3, which lead to activation of the AKT/PI3 kinase pathway.
Other genetic lesions that have been described in BL include loss of
function of the chromatin remodeling genes ARID1A and SMARCA4.
Importantly, many of these alterations are potentially targetable by
agents that are in development.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of childhood and adolescent NHL depend
primarily on pathologic subtype and sites of involvement. The current revised staging system used for NHL is the International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging System (IPNHLSS), which
reflects our increasing ability to diagnose lower levels of organ involvement with disease. For instance, the older staging system (St. Jude/
Murphy classification) did not account for molecular or flow cytometry involvement of BM, which is now reflected in the new system
(Tables 545.6 and 545.7). Patients are further classified based on risk
categories according to pediatric international cooperative group trials. Approximately 70% of patients with NHL present with advanced
disease (stage III or IV), including extranodal disease with BM and
CNS involvement. B symptoms of fever, weight loss, and night sweats
can be seen, particularly in ALCL, but unlike HL, are not prognostic.
The primary site of tumor involvement and the pattern of metastasis
vary by pathologic subtype. LBL typically manifests as a symptomatic

mediastinal mass and also has a predilection for spreading to the BM,
CNS, and testes in males. BL commonly manifests as a diffuse leukemia presentation or massive abdominal (sporadic type) or head and
neck (endemic type) tumor and can metastasize to the BM or CNS.
DLBCL usually manifests as either an abdominal or a mediastinal
primary tumor and, rarely, disseminates to the BM or CNS. ALCL
manifests either as a primary cutaneous manifestation (10%) or as
systemic disease (90%) with dissemination to liver, spleen, lung, or
mediastinum. BM or CNS disease is rare in ALCL. Site-­specific manifestations of NHL include painless, rapid lymph node enlargement;
cough or dyspnea with thoracic involvement; superior mediastinal
syndrome; ascites, increased abdominal girth or intestinal obstruction with an abdominal mass; nasal congestion, earache, hearing loss,
or tonsil enlargement with Waldeyer ring involvement; and localized
bone pain.
NHL can present as a life-­threatening oncologic emergency. These
manifestations are important to recognize because these patients
require intensive supportive care and, in some cases, alternative treatment. Superior mediastinal syndrome can occur as a consequence of
a large mediastinal mass causing obstruction of blood flow or respiratory airways. Spinal cord tumors can cause cord compression and
acute paraplegias requiring emergent radiation therapy. Tumor lysis
syndrome (TLS) can occur from rapid cell turnover, which is especially common in BL. TLS can result in severe metabolic abnormalities, including hyperuricemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperkalemia, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 545 u Lymphoma
Table 545.6  International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin
­Lymphoma Staging System (IPNHLSS)*
STAGE I
• A single tumor with the exclusion of the mediastinum and ­abdomen
(N: nodal; EN: extranodal; bone (B) or skin (S): EN-­B, EN-­S)
STAGE II
• A single extranodal tumor with regional node involvement
• Two or more nodal areas on the same side of the diaphragm
• A primary gastrointestinal tract tumor (usually in the ­ileocecal
area), with or without involvement of associated mesenteric
nodes, that is completely resectable (if malignant ascites or
­extension of the tumor to adjacent organs, it should be regarded
as stage III)
STAGE III
• Two or more extranodal tumor(s) (including bone or skin: EN-­B,
EN-­S) above and/or below the diaphragm
• Two or more nodal areas above and below the diaphragm
• Any intrathoracic tumor (mediastinal, hilar, pulmonary, pleural, or
thymic)
• Intraabdominal and retroperitoneal disease, including liver,
spleen, kidney, and/or ovary localizations, regardless of degree of
resection (except a primary gastrointestinal tract tumor [usually in
the ileocecal region], with or without involvement of associated
mesenteric nodes, that is completely resectable)
• Any paraspinal or epidural tumor, whether or not other sites are
involved
• Single bone lesion with concomitant involvement of extranodal
and/or nonregional nodal sites
STAGE IV
• Any of the previous findings with initial involvement of the central
nervous system (stage IV CNS), bone marrow (stage IV BM), or
both (stage IV combined) based on conventional methods, see
Table 545.7
• For each stage, type of examination and degree of BM and CNS
involvement should be specified, using the abbreviations listed in
Table 545.7 to identify involvement
*Based on the classification proposed by Murphy (Murphy SB. Classification, staging
and end results of treatment of childhood non-­Hodgkin’s lymphomas: dissimilarities
from lymphomas in adults. Semin Oncol. 7:332–339, 1980.)
From Rosolen A, Perkins SL, Pinkerton CR, et al. Revised International Pediatric Non-­
Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging System. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(18):2112–2118.

hypocalcemia. This can rapidly lead to renal insufficiency/failure, as
well as cardiac abnormalities, if not aggressively treated.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Recommended laboratory and radiologic testing includes CBC; measurements of electrolytes, lactate dehydrogenase, uric acid, calcium,
phosphorus, BUN, creatinine, bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase, and
aspartate aminotransferase; BM aspiration and biopsy; lumbar puncture with cerebrospinal fluid cytology, cell count, and protein; chest
radiographs; and abdominal ultrasound for initial diagnosis. Staging
relies on more detailed anatomic imaging, with CT for neck, chest,
abdomen, and pelvic imaging and MRI the preferred modality for suspected CNS disease of brain and spine (Fig. 545.7). PET scan, usually
with radioactive FDG for functional imaging, is more sensitive and has
replaced gallium imaging. It is also an excellent modality for judging
treatment response to therapy. Tumor tissue (i.e., biopsy, BM, cerebrospinal fluid, pleurocentesis/paracentesis fluid) should be tested by flow
cytometry for immunophenotypic origin (T, B, or null) and cytogenetics (karyotype). Additional tests might include fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) or quantitative reverse-­transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-­PCR) for specific genetic translocations, T-­and
B-­cell gene rearrangement studies, and molecular profiling by oligonucleotide microarray or next-­generation sequencing.

TREATMENT

The primary modality of treatment for childhood and adolescent
NHL is multiagent systemic chemotherapy and/or immunotherapy with

3113

Table 545.7  Additional IPNHLSS Information*
BONE MARROW (BM) INVOLVEMENT
Stage IV disease, caused by BM involvement, is currently defined by
morphologic evidence of ≥5% blasts or lymphoma cells by bone
marrow aspiration. This applies to any histologic subtype and will
be maintained in the IPNHLSS.
However, for each stage, type and degree of BM involvement (by
bone marrow aspiration) should be specified, using the abbreviations
below to identify involvement:
BMm = BM positive by morphology (specify % lymphoma cells).
BMi = BM positive by immunophenotypic methods (immunohistochemical/flow cytometry analysis) (specify % lymphoma cells).
BMc = BM positive by cytogenetic/FISH analysis (specify %
­lymphoma cells).
BMmol = BM positive by molecular techniques (PCR based)
(specify level of involvement).
Same approach should be used for peripheral blood (PB) involvement
(i.e., PBm, PBi, PBc, PBmol).
Note: Definition of BM involvement should be obtained from analysis
of bilateral BM aspirates and BM biopsy.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (CNS) INVOLVEMENT
CNS is considered involved in case of:
1.	Any CNS tumor mass (identified by imaging techniques; i.e., CT,
MRI).
2.	In case of cranial nerve palsy that cannot be explained by extradural lesions.
3.	In case of blasts morphologically identified in the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF).
Condition that defines CNS positivity should be specified: CNS
­positive/mass; CNS positive/palsy; CNS positive/blasts.
CSF status: CSF positivity is based on morphologic evidence of
lymphoma cells.
CSF should be considered positive when any number of blasts is
detected.
CSF unknown (e.g., not performed, technical difficulties).
Similar to BM, type of CSF involvement should be described
­whenever possible:
CSFm = CSF positive by morphology (specify the number of blasts
per microliter).
CSFi = CSF positive by immunophenotype methods (immunohistochemical/flow cytometry analysis) (specify % lymphoma cells).
CSFc = CSF positive by cytogenetic/FISH analysis (specify %
­lymphoma cells).
CSFmol = CSF positive by molecular techniques (PCR based)
(specify level of involvement).
*Until sufficient data are available, PET should be used with caution for staging, and
PET results should be compared and discussed in light of other, more consolidated
imaging approaches.
IPNHLSS, International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging System Information;
FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
From Rosolen A, Perkins SL, Pinkerton CR, et al. Revised International Pediatric Non-­
Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging System. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(18):2112–2118.

intrathecal chemotherapy (see Table 545.5). An international pediatric
NHL response classification has been developed (IPNHLRC) (Tables
545.8 and 545.9). Surgery is used mainly for diagnosis. Radiation
therapy is used only in special circumstances, such as CNS involvement in LBL or the presence of acute superior mediastinal syndrome
or paraplegias. Newly diagnosed patients, especially those with BL or
LBL, are at high risk for TLS. These patients require vigorous hydration, frequent electrolyte monitoring, and either a xanthine oxidase
inhibitor (e.g., allopurinol, 10 mg/kg/day orally in three divided doses
daily) or a recombinant urate oxidase (e.g., rasburicase, 0.2 mg/kg/day
intravenously once daily for up to 5 days). Recombinant urate oxidase
is preferred in patients with a high risk of tumor lysis but is contraindicated in patients with a history of G6PD deficiency.

Burkitt Lymphoma and Diffuse Large B-­Cell
Lymphoma

Pediatric BL and DLBCL (except mediastinal primary B cell) are treated
with the same mature B-­
cell NHL chemoimmunotherapy regimens

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3114 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

A

B

C

D

Fig. 545.7 Lymphoma. Coronal postcontrast CT images demonstrate extensive cervical (A) and mediastinal (B) lymphadenopathy (arrows). C,

Sonographic image demonstrates two enlarged lymph nodes with abnormal internal morphology (arrow). D, PET scan demonstrates metabolically
active conglomeration of right-­sided cervical lymph nodes (arrow). (From Haaga JR, Boll DT, et al., eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body (Vol. 1).
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 26-­15, p. 768.)

Table 545.8  International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin
­Lymphoma Response Criteria (IPNHLRC)
Complete Response (CR): disappearance of all disease (three
­designations)
1.	Complete (CR):
a.	CT or MRI reveals no residual disease or new lesions.
b.	Resected residual mass that is pathologically (morphologically)
negative for disease (detection of disease with more sensitive
techniques, as described in “supporting data,” Table 545.9).
c.	Bone marrow (BM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) morphologically
free of disease (detection of disease with more sensitive
techniques, as described in Table 545.9).
2.	Complete Response, biopsy negative (CRb):
a.	Residual mass has no morphologic evidence of disease from
limited or core biopsy (detection of disease with more
sensitive techniques, as described in Table 545.9) with no new
lesions by imaging examination.
b.	BM and CSF morphologically free of disease (detection of
disease with more sensitive techniques, as described in Table
545.9).
c.	No new and/or progressive disease elsewhere.
3.	Complete Response, unconfirmed (CRu):
a.	Residual mass is negative by FDG-­PET; no new lesions by
imaging examination.
b.	BM and CSF morphologically free of disease (detection of
disease with more sensitive techniques, as described in Table
545.9).
c.	No new and/or progressive disease elsewhere.
Partial Response (PR): 50% decrease in the sum of the product of the
greatest perpendicular diameters (SPD) on CT or MRI. FDG-­PET
may be positive (Deauville score of 4 or 5 with reduced lesional
uptake compared with baseline). No new and/or PD. Morphologic
evidence of disease may be present in the BM or CSF if present at
diagnosis (detection of disease with more sensitive techniques, as
described in Table 545.9); however, there should be a 50% reduction in the percentage of lymphoma cells.
Minor Response (MR): Decrease in SPD is >25% but <50% on CT or
MRI. No new and/or PD. Morphologic evidence of disease may be
present in the BM or CSF if present at diagnosis (detection of disease
with more sensitive techniques, as described in Table 545.9);
however, there should be a 25–50% reduction in the percentage of
lymphoma cells.
No Response (NR): For those who do not meet CR, PR, MR, or PD
criteria.
Progressive Disease (PD): For those with >25% increase in the SPD
on CT or MRI, Deauville score 4 or 5 on FDG-­PET with an increase
in lesional uptake from baseline, or the development of new morphologic evidence of disease in the BM or CSF.
FDG-­PET, Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography.
From Sandlund JT, Guillerman RP, Perkins SL, et al. International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin
Lymphoma Response Criteria. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(18):2106–2111.

Table 545.9  Supporting IPNHLRC Data
BONE MARROW (BM) INVOLVEMENT
BM involvement is currently defined by morphologic evidence of
lymphoma cells. This applies to any histologic subtypes.
Type and degree of BM involvement should be specified, using the
following abbreviations:
BMm = BM positive by morphology (specify % lymphoma cells).
BMi = BM positive by immunophenotypic methods (histochemical/
flow cytometry analysis) (specify % lymphoma cells).
BMc = BM positive by cytogenetic/FISH analysis (specify %
­lymphoma cells).
BMmol= BM positive by molecular techniques.
Same approach should be used for peripheral blood (PB) involvement (i.e., PBm, PBi, PBc, PBmol).
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (CNS) INVOLVEMENT
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) status: CSF positivity is based on morphologic evidence of lymphoma cells.
CSF should be considered positive when any number of blasts is
detected.
CSF unknown (e.g., not performed, technical difficulties).
Similar to BM, type of CSF involvement should be described
­whenever possible:
CSFm = CSF positive by morphology (specify the number of
blasts/μL).
CSFi = CSF positive by immunophenotypic methods (histochemical/
flow cytometry analysis) (specify % lymphoma cells).
CSFc = BM positive by cytogenetic/FISH analysis (specify %
­lymphoma cells).
CSFmol = CSF positive by molecular techniques.
RESIDUAL MASS (RM)
RMm = Tumor detected by standard morphologic evaluation.
RMi = Tumor detected by immunophenotypic methods (immunohisto­
chemical or flow cytometry analysis).
RMc = Tumor detected by cytogenetic/FISH analysis.
RMmol = Tumor detected by molecular techniques.
FISH, Fluorescence in situ hybridization.
From Sandlund JT, Guillerman RP, Perkins SL, et al. International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin
Lymphoma Response Criteria. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(18):2106–2111.

based on stage and risk stratification. For patients with localized disease, multiagent chemotherapy is given over 6 weeks, and the prognosis
is excellent. In the international French-­American-­British Lymphoma,
mature B cell [FAB/LMB 96] trial, patients with localized, completely
resected disease received two cycles of COPAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, and doxorubicin), resulting in a 4-­year OS of 99%.
Advanced disease is usually treated with a 4-­to 6-­month regimen of multiagent chemoimmunotherapy, such as FAB/LMB 96 protocol therapy or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 545 u Lymphoma
NHL-­Berlin-­Frankfurt-­Mulnster-­95 (BFM 95) protocol therapy with the
addition of rituximab, with an OS of 79–90%. A subset of patients who
likely require a different treatment approach have primary mediastinal
B-­cell lymphoma (PMBCL). PMBCL is a histologic subtype that represents 2% of mature B-­NHLs. Pediatric patients with PMBCL had an
inferior outcome when treated with standard mature B-­NHL protocols
(EFS of only 66%). Alternative treatment strategies, including prolonged
infusional chemotherapy, rituximab, and chimeric antigen receptor T cells
expressing anti-­CD19 mAbs, may benefit this group (see Chapter 543).
Rituximab is a mAb directed at CD20 that, when combined with standard chemotherapy, improves outcomes in adult patients with aggressive
B-­NHL (usually DLBCL). A window study of rituximab given to pediatric
patients with newly diagnosed BL and DLBCL demonstrated its activity as
a single agent with a response rate of 41%. Additionally, a Children’s Oncology Group study examined the safety and pharmacokinetics of rituximab
when added to standard chemotherapy for intermediate-­risk patients.
Rituximab was found to be safe, and survival in this cohort was the best
reported to date (3-­year OS of 95%). In a similar cohort of CNS-­positive
patients, the addition of rituximab to the chemotherapy backbone resulted
in a 93% EFS. Based on this pilot data, an international randomized study
of rituximab added to standard multiagent chemotherapy in advanced-­
stage pediatric patients enrolled over 300 patients. The randomized trial
demonstrated that the addition of rituximab markedly prolonged EFS and
OS. The EFS at 3 years was 94% compared to 82% in patients who received
chemotherapy alone. As expected with an antibody to a protein on the surface of normal mature B cells, there was a higher incidence of low immunoglobulin levels in rituximab-­treated patients up to 1 year poststudy
entry. Rituximab is standard-of-care therapy for pediatric mature B-­NHL
with advanced disease at presentation. These patients make up roughly
∼30% of all mature B-­NHL. A study of dose substitution of anthracycline
(doxorubicin) intensity with rituximab in children and adolescents with
good-­risk mature B-­cell lymphoma noted reduction of anthracycline dramatically reduced mucositis and febrile admissions during the intensive
induction phases of therapy and was associated with 100% EFS and OS.
With the success of rituximab in pediatric mature B-­NHL and the poor
outcome of recurrent or refractory disease, there is interest in improving
immunotherapy in up-­front patients. Polatuzumab vedotin is a CD79b-­
directed antibody conjugated to an antimitotic agent. The therapy has
been approved in conjunction with rituximab and chemotherapy for adult
refractory DLBCL. A study to determine the feasibility and safety of the
addition of polatuzumab vedotin in combination with rituximab and FAB
chemotherapy in patients with intermediate and high-­risk mature B-­NHL
is in progress.

Lymphoblastic Lymphoma

Localized or advanced LBL requires 12-­24 months of therapy, including
chemotherapy, intrathecal therapy, and cranial radiation in CNS-­positive
lymphomas. The best results in advanced LBL have been obtained using
therapeutic approaches mirroring those for childhood acute leukemia,
including induction, consolidation, interim maintenance, and reinduction (advanced disease only) phases, as well as a year-­long maintenance
phase with 6-­
mercaptopurine and methotrexate. For patients with
relapsed disease, the outcome is poor (OS of 10%), and novel treatments
are needed. Nelarabine, a purine analog with significant T-­lymphocyte
toxicity, has completed testing in primary therapy for T-­LBL in conjunction with a much larger cohort of T-­ALL patients. Nelarabine was
demonstrated in the trial to improve disease-­free survival at 4 years and
to reduce the risk of CNS relapses. The smaller subset of patients with
advanced LBL did not have a benefit demonstrated to nelarabine, but
this subset was underpowered, and most U.S. centers are now including
nelarabine in the up-­front treatment of all T-­LBL patients.

Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma

For patients who present with localized disease, surgical resection alone
is sufficient. The majority of patients, however, have advanced disease,
which requires multiagent chemotherapy. Various chemotherapy regimens have been studied, with similar outcomes and survival of 70–79%.
CNS prophylaxis consists of intrathecal chemotherapy, although this
may be omitted with the substitution of high-­dose methotrexate.

3115

Two novel targeted agents have shown substantial promise in
early-­phase trials in ALCL. The CD30 antibody–drug conjugate brentuximab vedotin and the ALK inhibitor crizotinib both have impressive activity and minimal toxicity in patients with relapsed ALCL. A
trial piloted the addition of brentuximab vedotin in newly diagnosed
advanced ALCL patients with impressive 2-­year EFS of 79% and OS of
97% among ∼70 patients. There were no toxic deaths with combination
brentuximab and chemotherapy and no severe neurotoxicity.

Relapsed Non-­Hodgkin Lymphoma

Patients with NHL in whom progressive or relapsed disease develops require reinduction chemotherapy and may require either allogeneic or autologous SCT. A notable exception is ALCL, where low-­dose
approaches such as prolonged vinblastine have been efficacious for
some patients. The specific reinduction regimen or transplantation type
depends on the pathologic subtype, previous therapy, site of reoccurrence, and stem cell donor availability. Novel reinduction approaches are
being investigated, including a type II CD20 antibody, obinutuzumab,
alone and in combination with chemotherapy, ibrutinib, a BTK inhibitor
alone and in combination with chemotherapy, and idelalisib, a PI3K delta
inhibitor alone and in combination with chemotherapy. Although there
are no randomized trials examining autologous versus allogeneic SCT
for relapsed NHL, data from retrospective studies suggest that outcomes
are similar, with the exception of LBL and ALCL, for which allogeneic
SCT is superior, perhaps because of a graft versus lymphoma effect.
Native (autologous) patient T cells have been genetically manipulated to produce a T-­cell vs leukemia or lymphoma response. Tisagenlecleucel (Kymriah) is a CD19-­
directed genetically modified
autologous T-­cell immunotherapy first approved for patients under
25 years with precursor B-­
ALL. The immunotherapy has been
approved in adults with relapsed mature DLBCL after two prior lines
of systemic therapy. An additional CD19-­directed immunotherapy,
axicabtagene ciloleucel, has been approved for recurrent adult mature
B-­NHL. The responses have been less impressive in adult DLBL to
those seen in childhood adolescent and young adult ALL, but continued work with different target antigens and genetic manipulation of
the constructs is ongoing. These T-­cell–modified products, although
autologous, can lead to a cytokine release syndrome and CNS toxicities that can be severe.
Because relapsed NHL can be difficult to treat, efforts have been made
to identify patients at higher risk of relapse to tailor initial therapy. The
measurement of minimal residual disease may serve as a prognostic
marker and aid in risk stratification. Minimal residual disease is prognostic in ALCL and LBL. In ALCL, there is also evidence that a humoral
response to the ALK kinase can be used to predict outcome, with a superior outcome in patients who mount an antibody titer to ALK.

COMPLICATIONS

Patients receiving multiagent chemotherapy for advanced disease are
at acute risk for mucositis, infections, cytopenias that require red blood
cell and platelet blood product transfusions, electrolyte imbalances, and
poor nutrition. Long-­term complications include the risk of growth retardation, cardiac toxicity, gonadal toxicity with infertility, and secondary
malignancies.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis is excellent for most forms of childhood and adolescent
NHL (see Table 545.5). Patients with localized disease have a 90–100%
survival rate, and those with advanced disease have an 80–95% survival
rate. Because outcomes for pediatric patients with NHL have improved
substantially, the focus has now shifted to minimizing the long-­term toxicity of therapy. Novel targeted agents are desirable because they have the
potential to improve outcomes and decrease the reliance on toxic conventional chemotherapy. An ongoing multi-­institutional study is testing
the reduction of anthracycline to decrease short-­term (mucositis) and
long-­term (cardiac health) complications of therapy by incorporation of
immunotherapy in mature B-­NHL, with promising results to date.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3116 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

545.3 Late Effects in Children and
Adolescents with Lymphoma

Chapter 546

Jessica Hochberg, Stanton C. Goldman, and
Mitchell S. Cairo
The majority of patients with newly diagnosed HL and NHL have OS
rates >90%. There are approximately 270,000 survivors of childhood
cancer in the United States, or about one of every 640 adults between
ages 20 and 40. However, this survival has often been achieved at
the expense of an increased relative risk of long-­term complications,
including solid tumors, leukemia, cardiac disease, pulmonary complications, thyroid disease, and infertility. An analysis of >1,000 long-­
term childhood NHL survivors found increased rates of death >20
years after treatment. A review of the National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results data over a 25-­year follow­up demonstrates that the relative survival curves do not plateau after
10 years following diagnosis of HL, but rather accelerate. This finding highlights the importance of late morbidity and mortality among
survivors of lymphoma. The incidence of Grade 3-­5 adverse health
conditions is >15% in adult survivors of childhood HL treated with
chemoradiotherapy regimens. Radiation therapy has been shown to
further compound the risk for late mortality, obesity, and organ dysfunction with worsening effects on cardiovascular, pulmonary, and
thyroid function. The first Childhood Cancer Survivor Study, a retrospective cohort study of 10,397 cancer survivors, shows that 62.3% of
survivors report at least one chronic condition, with 27.5% reporting
severe or life-­threatening conditions. The survivor’s adjusted relative
risk of a severe or life-­threatening chronic condition, compared with
that of a sibling, was 8.2 (95% confidence interval, 6.9-­9.7). Studying
disease-­specific health outcomes, both HL and NHL were found to be
associated with a cumulative incidence of chronic health conditions
approaching 70–80%, with severe conditions reported in ∼50% of
HL survivors (Fig. 545.8).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Wafik Zaky
Primary central nervous system (CNS) tumors are a heterogeneous
group of diseases that are, collectively, the most common malignancy
in childhood and adolescence. The overall mortality among this
group approaches 30%. Patients with CNS tumors have the highest
morbidity, primarily neurologic, of all children with malignancies.
Outcomes have improved with innovations in neurosurgery, imaging, and radiation therapy as well as the introduction of chemotherapy and biologic agents as a therapeutic modality. The treatment
approach for the majority of these tumors is multimodal. Surgery
with complete resection, if feasible, is the foundation, with radiation therapy and chemotherapy utilized according to the diagnosis,
patient age, and other factors.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of pediatric CNS tumors is not well defined. An overall
female predominance exists in the incidence of CNS tumors, but male
predominance is noted in the incidence of high-­grade tumors like glioblastoma multiforme, medulloblastoma, and ependymoma. Familial
syndromes associated with an increased incidence of brain tumors
account for approximately 5% of cases (Table 546.1). Cranial exposure to ionizing radiation also is associated with a higher incidence of
CNS tumors. There are sporadic reports of CNS tumors within families
without evidence of a heritable syndrome.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

90

Approximately 5,550 primary brain tumors are diagnosed each year in
children and adolescents in the United States, with an average annual
age adjusted incidence rate of 5.65 per 100,000 population. It is the
most common cancer in patients 0-­14 years of age and the leading
cause of cancer-­related death in this age-­group.

80

PATHOGENESIS

100

Attributable proportion
of overall mortality risk, %

Central Nervous System
Tumors in Childhood

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10

20

30
40
50
Time since diagnosis (yr)

60

Background mortality
Excess other causes of mortality
Excess pulmonary mortality
Excess cardiac mortality
Excess subsequent cancer mortality
Late-recurrence mortality

Fig. 545.8 Percentage of attributable proportions of overall mortality risk in survivors of childhood cancer. (Adapted from Yeh JM,
Nekhlyudov L, Goldie SJ, et al. A model-­based estimate of cumulative excess mortality in survivors of childhood cancer. Ann Intern Med.
2010;152[7]:409– 417.)

More than 100 histologic categories and subtypes of primary brain
tumors are described in the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors of the CNS. In children 0-­14 years of age, the
most common tumors are pilocytic astrocytomas (PAs) and embryonal tumors (i.e., medulloblastoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors
[PNETs]). In adolescents (15-­19 years), the most common tumors are
pituitary/craniopharyngeal tumors and PAs (Fig. 546.1).
There is a slight predominance of infratentorial tumor location
(43.2%), followed by the supratentorial region (40.9%), spinal cord
(4.9%), and multiple sites (11%) (Fig. 546.2, Table 546.2). There are
age-­related differences in the primary location of tumor. During the
first year of life, supratentorial tumors predominate and include, most
commonly, choroid plexus complex tumors and germ cell tumors. In
children 1-­10 years of age, infratentorial tumors predominate, due
to the high incidence of juvenile PA and medulloblastoma. After 10
years of age, supratentorial tumors predominate, with diffuse astrocytomas (DAs) most common. Tumors of the optic pathway and hypothalamus region, the brainstem, and the pineal–midbrain region are
more common in children and adolescents than in adults. Additionally, some tumors are more common in males (astrocytic and germ
cell tumors), whereas meningioma and craniopharyngiomas are
more common in females. Malignant tumors are more common in
White children (embryonal and astrocytic neoplasms), whereas low-­
grade tumors are more common in Black children (meningiomas and
craniopharyngiomas).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3116 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

545.3 Late Effects in Children and
Adolescents with Lymphoma

Chapter 546

Jessica Hochberg, Stanton C. Goldman, and
Mitchell S. Cairo
The majority of patients with newly diagnosed HL and NHL have OS
rates >90%. There are approximately 270,000 survivors of childhood
cancer in the United States, or about one of every 640 adults between
ages 20 and 40. However, this survival has often been achieved at
the expense of an increased relative risk of long-­term complications,
including solid tumors, leukemia, cardiac disease, pulmonary complications, thyroid disease, and infertility. An analysis of >1,000 long-­
term childhood NHL survivors found increased rates of death >20
years after treatment. A review of the National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results data over a 25-­year follow­up demonstrates that the relative survival curves do not plateau after
10 years following diagnosis of HL, but rather accelerate. This finding highlights the importance of late morbidity and mortality among
survivors of lymphoma. The incidence of Grade 3-­5 adverse health
conditions is >15% in adult survivors of childhood HL treated with
chemoradiotherapy regimens. Radiation therapy has been shown to
further compound the risk for late mortality, obesity, and organ dysfunction with worsening effects on cardiovascular, pulmonary, and
thyroid function. The first Childhood Cancer Survivor Study, a retrospective cohort study of 10,397 cancer survivors, shows that 62.3% of
survivors report at least one chronic condition, with 27.5% reporting
severe or life-­threatening conditions. The survivor’s adjusted relative
risk of a severe or life-­threatening chronic condition, compared with
that of a sibling, was 8.2 (95% confidence interval, 6.9-­9.7). Studying
disease-­specific health outcomes, both HL and NHL were found to be
associated with a cumulative incidence of chronic health conditions
approaching 70–80%, with severe conditions reported in ∼50% of
HL survivors (Fig. 545.8).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Wafik Zaky
Primary central nervous system (CNS) tumors are a heterogeneous
group of diseases that are, collectively, the most common malignancy
in childhood and adolescence. The overall mortality among this
group approaches 30%. Patients with CNS tumors have the highest
morbidity, primarily neurologic, of all children with malignancies.
Outcomes have improved with innovations in neurosurgery, imaging, and radiation therapy as well as the introduction of chemotherapy and biologic agents as a therapeutic modality. The treatment
approach for the majority of these tumors is multimodal. Surgery
with complete resection, if feasible, is the foundation, with radiation therapy and chemotherapy utilized according to the diagnosis,
patient age, and other factors.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of pediatric CNS tumors is not well defined. An overall
female predominance exists in the incidence of CNS tumors, but male
predominance is noted in the incidence of high-­grade tumors like glioblastoma multiforme, medulloblastoma, and ependymoma. Familial
syndromes associated with an increased incidence of brain tumors
account for approximately 5% of cases (Table 546.1). Cranial exposure to ionizing radiation also is associated with a higher incidence of
CNS tumors. There are sporadic reports of CNS tumors within families
without evidence of a heritable syndrome.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

90

Approximately 5,550 primary brain tumors are diagnosed each year in
children and adolescents in the United States, with an average annual
age adjusted incidence rate of 5.65 per 100,000 population. It is the
most common cancer in patients 0-­14 years of age and the leading
cause of cancer-­related death in this age-­group.

80

PATHOGENESIS

100

Attributable proportion
of overall mortality risk, %

Central Nervous System
Tumors in Childhood

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10

20

30
40
50
Time since diagnosis (yr)

60

Background mortality
Excess other causes of mortality
Excess pulmonary mortality
Excess cardiac mortality
Excess subsequent cancer mortality
Late-recurrence mortality

Fig. 545.8 Percentage of attributable proportions of overall mortality risk in survivors of childhood cancer. (Adapted from Yeh JM,
Nekhlyudov L, Goldie SJ, et al. A model-­based estimate of cumulative excess mortality in survivors of childhood cancer. Ann Intern Med.
2010;152[7]:409– 417.)

More than 100 histologic categories and subtypes of primary brain
tumors are described in the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors of the CNS. In children 0-­14 years of age, the
most common tumors are pilocytic astrocytomas (PAs) and embryonal tumors (i.e., medulloblastoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors
[PNETs]). In adolescents (15-­19 years), the most common tumors are
pituitary/craniopharyngeal tumors and PAs (Fig. 546.1).
There is a slight predominance of infratentorial tumor location
(43.2%), followed by the supratentorial region (40.9%), spinal cord
(4.9%), and multiple sites (11%) (Fig. 546.2, Table 546.2). There are
age-­related differences in the primary location of tumor. During the
first year of life, supratentorial tumors predominate and include, most
commonly, choroid plexus complex tumors and germ cell tumors. In
children 1-­10 years of age, infratentorial tumors predominate, due
to the high incidence of juvenile PA and medulloblastoma. After 10
years of age, supratentorial tumors predominate, with diffuse astrocytomas (DAs) most common. Tumors of the optic pathway and hypothalamus region, the brainstem, and the pineal–midbrain region are
more common in children and adolescents than in adults. Additionally, some tumors are more common in males (astrocytic and germ
cell tumors), whereas meningioma and craniopharyngiomas are
more common in females. Malignant tumors are more common in
White children (embryonal and astrocytic neoplasms), whereas low-­
grade tumors are more common in Black children (meningiomas and
craniopharyngiomas).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 546 u Central Nervous System Tumors in Childhood

3117

Table 546.1  	 Familial Syndromes Associated with Pediatric Brain Tumors
SYNDROME

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM MANIFESTATIONS

CHROMOSOME

GENE

Neurofibromatosis type 1
(autosomal dominant)

Optic pathway gliomas, astrocytoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors, neurofibromas

17q11

NF1

Neurofibromatosis type 2
(autosomal dominant)

Vestibular schwannomas, meningiomas, spinal cord ependymoma,
spinal cord astrocytoma, hamartomas

22q12

NF2

von Hippel-­Lindau (autosomal
dominant)

Hemangioblastoma

3p25-­26

VHL

Tuberous sclerosis (autosomal
dominant)

Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma, cortical tubers

Li-­Fraumeni (autosomal dominant)

9q34

TSC1

16q13

TSC2

Astrocytoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumor

17q13

TP53

Cowden (autosomal dominant)

Dysplastic gangliocytoma of the cerebellum (Lhermitte-­Duclos disease)

10q23

PTEN

Turcot (autosomal dominant)

Medulloblastoma

5q21

APC

Glioblastoma

3p21

hMLH1

7p22

hPSM2

9q31

PTCH1

Nevoid basal cell carcinoma
Gorlin (autosomal dominant)

Medulloblastoma

Modified from Kleihues P, Cavenee WK. World Health Organization Classification of Tumors: Pathology and Genetics of Tumors of the Nervous System. Lyon: IARC Press, 2000.
Ages 15–19 years (n=7,259)

Ages 0–14 years (n=17,273)
Meninglomas
1.7%
Glloblastomas
2.9%

Oligodendrogliomas
1.5%
Craniopharyngiomas
2.4%
Ependymal tumors
3.3%

Pilocytic astrocytomas
17.9%

Germ cell tumors
3.7%
Craniopharynglomas
3.9%

Glioma malignant, NOS
13.8%

Tumors of the pituitary
29.0%

Embryonal tumors
3.3%
Glioblastomas
3.5%
Germ cell tumors
3.7%

Nerve sheath tumors
5.0%
Tumors of the pituitary
5.2%

Medulloblastoma
62.4%

Ependymal tumors
5.7%

Embryonal tumors
13.3%

Neuronal and mixed
neuronal-glial tumors
7.0%
Other astrocytomas
8.1%

All others
11.7%

ATRT 16.6%
PNET 11.8%
All other
embryonal
tumors
9.2%

Meningiomas
5.1%

All others
12.7%

Glioma malignant, NOS
5.6%
Nerve sheath tumors
5.8%
Other astrocytomas
7.1%

Pilocytic astrocytomas
9.0%
Neuronal and mixed
neuronal-glial tumors
8.0%

Fig. 546.1 Distribution of childhood primary brain and central nervous system (CNS) tumors by histology. ATRT, Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor;
NOS, not otherwise specified; PNET, primitive neuroectodermal tumor. (From Ostrom QT, Patil N, Cioffi G, et al. CBTRUS Statistical Report: Primary
Brain and Other Central Nervous System Tumors Diagnosed in the United States in 2013-­2017. Neuro Oncol. 2020;30;22:iv1–iv96.)
Hemispheric

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Gliomas: 37%
Low-grade astrocytomas: 23%
High-grade astrocytomas: 11%
Other: 3%
Midline:
1. Chiasmal gliomas: 4%
2. Craniopharyngiomas: 8%
3. Pineal region tumors: 2%

3

2
1

2
1

Posterior fossa:
1. Brainstem gliomas: 15%
2. Medulloblastomas: 15%
3. Ependymomas: 4%
4 4. Cerebellar astrocytomas: 15%

3

Fig. 546.2 Childhood brain tumors occur at any location within the
central nervous system. The relative frequency of brain tumor histologic
types and the anatomic distribution are shown. (Redrawn from Albright
AL. Pediatric brain tumors. CA Cancer J Clin 1993;43:272–288.)

The clinical presentation of the patient with a brain tumor depends
on the tumor location, the tumor type, and the age of the child. Signs
and symptoms are related to obstruction of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
drainage paths by the tumor, leading to increased intracranial pressure (ICP) or causing focal brain dysfunction. In young children, the
diagnosis of a brain tumor may be delayed because the symptoms are
similar to those of more common illnesses, such as gastrointestinal
disorders, with associated vomiting. Infants with open cranial sutures
may present with signs of increased ICP, such as vomiting, lethargy,
and irritability, as well as the later finding of macrocephaly. The classic triad of headache, nausea, and vomiting as well as papilledema
is associated with midline or infratentorial tumors. Disorders of
equilibrium, gait, and coordination occur with infratentorial tumors.
Torticollis may occur in cases of cerebellar tonsil herniation. Blurred
vision, diplopia, and nystagmus also are associated with infratentorial tumors. Tumors of the brainstem region may be associated with
gaze palsy, multiple cranial nerve palsies, and upper motor neuron
deficits (e.g., hemiparesis, hyperreflexia, and clonus). Supratentorial tumors are more commonly associated with focal motor weakness, focal sensory changes, language disorders, focal seizures, and
reflex asymmetry. Infants with supratentorial tumors may present

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3118 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 546.2  	 Posterior Fossa Tumors of Childhood
TUMOR

RELATIVE INCIDENCE
(%)

PRESENTATION

DIAGNOSIS

PROGNOSIS

Medulloblastoma

35-­40

2-­3 mo of headaches, vomiting,
truncal ataxia

Heterogeneously or
homogeneously enhancing
fourth ventricular mass; may
be disseminated

65–85% survival;
dependent on stage/type;
poorer (20–70%) in infants

Cerebellar
­astrocytoma

35-­40

3-­6 mo of limb ataxia; secondary
headaches, vomiting

Cerebellar hemisphere mass,
usually with cystic and solid
(mural nodule) components

90–100% survival in totally
resected pilocytic type

Brainstem glioma

10-­15

1-­4 mo of double vision,
unsteadiness, weakness, and
cranial nerve dysfunction,
including facial weakness,
swallowing dysfunction, and
oculomotor abnormalities

Diffusely expanded, minimally
or partially enhancing mass
in 80%; 20% more focal
tectal or cervicomedullary
lesion

>90% mortality in diffuse
tumors; better in
localized

Ependymoma

10-­15

2-­5 mo of unsteadiness,
headaches, double vision, and
facial asymmetry

Usually enhancing, fourth
ventricular mass with
cerebellopontine
predilection

>75% survival in totally
resected lesions

Atypical teratoid/
rhabdoid

5–10% of infantile
­malignant tumors

As in medulloblastoma, but
primarily in infants; often
associated facial weakness and
strabismus

As in medulloblastoma,
but often more laterally
extended

≤20% survival in infants

Modified from Packer RJ, MacDonald T, Vezina G. Central nervous system tumors. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2008;55:121–145.

with premature hand preference. Optic pathway tumors manifest
as visual and/or afferent oculomotor disturbances, such as decreased
visual acuity, Marcus Gunn pupil (afferent pupillary defect), nystagmus, and/or visual field defects. Suprasellar region tumors and third
ventricular region tumors may manifest initially as neuroendocrine
deficits, such as subacute development of obesity, abnormal linear
growth velocity, diabetes insipidus, galactorrhea, precocious puberty,
delayed puberty, and hypothyroidism. In fact, signs of endocrine
dysfunction preceded symptoms of neuroophthalmologic dysfunction by an average of 1.9 years, and their recognition as a possible
sign of hypothalamic or pituitary neoplasm can hasten diagnosis and
improve outcome. The diencephalic syndrome, which manifests as
failure to thrive but normal linear growth, emaciation despite normal caloric intake, and inappropriately normal or happy (euphoric)
affect, occurs in infants and young children with tumors (most often
low-­grade hypothalamic or thalamic glioma). Parinaud syndrome
is seen with pineal region tumors and is manifested by paresis of
upward gaze, pupillary caliber reactive to accommodation but not
to light (pseudo-­Argyll Robertson pupil), nystagmus to convergence
or retraction, and eyelid retraction. Spinal cord tumors and spinal
cord dissemination of brain tumors may manifest as long nerve tract
motor and/or sensory deficits often localized to below a specific spinal level, bowel and bladder deficits, resistance to back flexion, scoliosis, bowel and bladder dysfunction, and back or radicular pain.
The signs and symptoms of meningeal metastatic disease from brain
tumors or leukemia include head or back pain and symptoms referable to compression of cranial nerves or spinal nerve roots.

DIAGNOSIS

The evaluation of a patient when a CNS tumor is suspected is an emergency. Initial evaluation should include a complete history (including endocrine), physical (including ophthalmic) examination, and
full neurologic assessment with neuroimaging. For primary brain
tumors, MRI with and without gadolinium is the neuroimaging standard. Tumors in the pituitary/suprasellar region, optic pathway, and
infratentorium are better delineated with MRI than with CT. Patients
with tumors of the midline and the pituitary/suprasellar/optic chiasmal region should undergo evaluation for neuroendocrine dysfunction. Formal ophthalmologic examination is beneficial in patients with
optic path region tumors to document the impact of the disease on

Fig. 546.3 Axillary T1 weighted MR image with gadolinium of a
10-­yr-­old male presenting with mixed germ cell tumor of the pineal region, with early onset of puberty, headaches, and elevated α-­fetoprotein
and β-­human chorionic gonadotropin in the spinal fluid and serum.
oculomotor function, visual acuity, and fields of vision. The suprasellar and pineal regions are preferential sites for germ cell tumors (Fig.
546.3). Both serum and CSF measurements of β-­human chorionic
gonadotropin and α-­fetoprotein can assist in the diagnosis of germ
cell tumors. In tumors with a propensity for spreading to the leptomeninges, such as medulloblastoma/PNET, ependymoma, and germ
cell tumors, lumbar puncture with cytologic analysis of the CSF is
indicated; lumbar puncture is contraindicated in individuals with
newly diagnosed hydrocephalus secondary to CSF flow obstruction, in
tumors that cause supratentorial midline shift, and in individuals with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 546 u Central Nervous System Tumors in Childhood

3119

pathway region (Fig. 546.5A-­B). The classic but not exclusive neuroradiologic finding in PA is the presence of a contrast-­enhancing nodule
within the wall of a cystic mass (Fig. 546.5A). The microscopic findings
include the biphasic appearance of bundles of compact fibrillary tissue interspersed with loose microcystic, spongy areas. The presence of
Rosenthal fibers, which are condensed masses of glial filaments occurring in the compact areas, with low mitotic potentials helps establish
the diagnosis. A small proportion of these tumors can progress and
develop leptomeningeal spread, particularly in the optic path region
and very rarely transform to higher grade aggressive type. A PA of
the optic nerve and chiasmal region is a relatively common finding in
patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (15% incidence). Molecularly,
PA has activation of the MAPK pathway in the form of BRAF fusion
or duplication and less commonly BRAF pathogenic variant (V600E)
(see Fig. 546.4). Other low-­grade tumors occurring in the pediatric
age-­group with clinic pathologic characteristics similar to PA include
pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma, pilomyxoid astrocytoma, and subependymal giant cell astrocytoma.

infratentorial tumors. Lumbar puncture in these individuals may lead
to brain herniation, resulting in neurologic compromise and death.
Therefore, in children with newly diagnosed intracranial tumors and
signs of increased ICP, the lumbar puncture usually is delayed until
surgery or shunt placement.

SPECIFIC TUMORS
Astrocytoma

Astrocytomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors that account for
approximately 40% of pediatric CNS malignancies. These tumors
occur throughout the CNS.
Low-­
grade astrocytomas (LGAs), the predominant group of
astrocytomas in childhood, are characterized by an indolent clinical
course. PA is the most common astrocytoma in children, accounting
for approximately 15.2% of all brain tumors (Fig. 546.4). Based on
clinicopathologic features using the WHO Classification System, PA is
classified as a WHO grade I tumor. Although PA can occur anywhere
in the CNS, the classic sites are the cerebellum followed by the optic

FGFR1 NRTK1

P
P
P

P
P
P

PTPN11

KRAS

KIAA1549
BRAF Fus

BRAF

Other BRAF
Fusions

MEK

NF1

MAPK Alterations

BRAF
V600E

(67%)
KIAA1549-BRAF
Other BRAF or C-RAF Fusion (5-10%)
(5-10%)
BRAF V600E
(5-10%)
NF1
FGFR1
(5%)
NRTK1
(<3%)
(<2%)
KRAS

CRAF
Fusions

PTPN11

(<2%)

ERK

Fig. 546.4 A, Schematic of the frequen-

cy of MAPK pathway alterations detected
by biopsy of pilocytic astrocytomas. This
underestimates the frequency of NF1
pathogenic variants among children with
low-­
grade gliomas (LGGs) because the
tumors in patients affected by NF1 often
do not undergo biopsy. Although BRAF fusions (BRAF Fus) constitute the majority of
alterations in pilocytic astrocytoma, BRAF
pathogenic variants are more commonly
observed in pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas and gangliogliomas. B, Frequency
of the different BRAF abnormalities as a
function of tumor location and histological diagnosis. (From Pollack IF, Agnihotri
S, Broniscer A. Childhood brain tumors:
current management, biological insights,
and future directions. J Neurosurg Pediatr.
2019;23:261–273. Fig. 1.)

TF
Cell Growth

A
BRAF alterations per location
and histology
8

Pilocytic Astrocytoma

7
1

6
9

Pleomorphic
xanthoastrocytoma

KIAA1549:BRAF
1. Cerebral Cortex:
25%
2. Optic Pathways:
50%
3. Brain Stem:
60%
4. Spinal Cord:
55%
5. Posterior Fossa: 80%
6. Deep Gray Matter: 40%

BRAF V600E
8. Cerebral Cortex: 60%

Pilocytic Astrocytoma
BRAF V600E
7. Cerebral Cortex: 12%

Ganglioglioma

2
3
5

B

4

BRAF V600E
9. Temporal Lobe: 25%

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3120 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
The second most common astrocytoma is DA, which consists of a
group of tumors characterized by a pattern of diffuse infiltration of
tumor cells amidst normal neural tissue. Histologically, these low-­
grade tumors demonstrate greater cellularity, with few mitotic figures,
nuclear pleomorphism, and microcysts. They occur anywhere in the
CNS with predilection to supratentorial location. The characteristic
MRI finding is a lack of enhancement after contrast agent infusion.
Molecular genetic abnormalities found in DA include pathogenic
variants of P53 and overexpression of platelet-­derived growth factor
receptor-­α. Evolution of DA into malignant astrocytoma is associated with cumulative acquisition of multiple molecular abnormalities.
Overactivation of the MAPK pathway has been detected in DA in the
form of the BRAF V600E pathogenic variant and FGFR1 duplication.
Pilomyxoid astrocytoma occurs most commonly in the hypothalamic/optic chiasmic region and carries a high risk of local as well as
cerebrospinal spread. This astrocytoma affects young children and
infants. It is classified as a WHO grade II tumor.
The clinical management of LGAs focuses on a multimodal approach
incorporating surgery if feasible as the primary treatment as well as
radiation therapy and chemotherapy. With complete surgical resection,
the overall survival approaches 80–100%. In patients with partial resection, overall survival varies from 50–95%, depending on the anatomic
location of the tumor. In the patient who has undergone partial tumor
resection and has stable neurologic status, the current approach is to
follow the patient closely by examination and imaging. With evidence
of progression, a second surgical resection should be considered. In
patients in whom a second procedure was less than complete or is not
feasible, radiation therapy is beneficial. Radiation therapy is delivered to
the tumor bed at a total cumulative dose ranging from 50-­55 Gy. Modern surgical techniques and innovative radiation therapy methodology,
including proton-­beam radiation, may have a positive impact on the survival and clinical outcome of these patients. Chemotherapy for LGAs has
become the standard of care for progressive LGAs. Because of concerns
regarding morbidity from radiation therapy in young children, several
chemotherapy approaches have been evaluated, especially in children
younger than 10 years of age. Complete response to chemotherapy is
uncommon; however, these approaches have yielded durable control of
disease in 70–100% of patients with clinical improvement. Patients with
midline tumors in the hypothalamic/optic chiasmatic region (see Fig.
546.5B) have tended to do less well. The chemotherapy approaches have
permitted delay and, potentially, avoidance of radiation therapy. Chemotherapy agents given singly or in combination for LGA include carboplatin, vincristine, lomustine, procarbazine, temozolomide, and vinblastine.
Observation is the primary approach in clinical management of selected
patients with LGAs that are biologically indolent (neurofibromatosis

A

B

Fig. 546.5 A, Gadolinium-­enhanced axial T1-­weighted MR image in

a 4-­yr-­old child with cerebellar pilocytic astrocytoma presenting with
headaches, emesis, and ataxia demonstrates a predominantly cystic
mass with enhancement of the solid component and enhancement of
the capsule. B, Gadolinium-­enhanced coronal view of a cystic juvenile
pilocytic astrocytoma of the suprasellar region from a 4-­yr-­old child presenting with visual loss and headaches.

type 1 and tectal gliomas and indolent LGA variants like angiocentric
gliomas). Astrocytomas associated with tuberous sclerosis have responded
to everolimus, a mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor.
Malignant astrocytomas are less common in children and adolescents than in adults, accounting for 7–10% of all childhood brain
tumors. Among this group, anaplastic astrocytoma (WHO grade III;
Fig. 546.6) is more common than glioblastoma multiforme (WHO
grade IV). The histopathology of anaplastic astrocytomas demonstrates
greater cellularity than that of LGA, with cellular and nuclear atypia,
and the presence of mitoses. Characteristic histopathologic findings in
glioblastoma multiforme include dense cellularity, high mitotic index,
microvascular proliferation, and foci of tumor necrosis with pseudopalisading. Genome-­wide DNA methylation patterns have identified
five molecular subgroups of pediatric high-­grade glioma. These subgroups appear to have distinct cellular origins and biological drivers.
Common genetic alterations include gene pathogenic variants in histone H3.3 or H3.1, p53, and BRAF in addition to focal amplifications
of oncogene (PDGFRA and EGFR) and deletions of tumor-suppressor
genes (CDKN2A, CDKN2B, PTEN).
Optimal therapeutic approaches for malignant astrocytomas have
yet to be defined. Standard therapy continues to be surgical resection followed by involved-­field radiation therapy with evolving role of
maintenance alkylator chemotherapy (temozolomide ± lomustine). A
study of adult glioblastoma showed significantly better survival with
temozolomide during and after irradiation than with irradiation alone.
Current therapeutic approaches incorporate novel chemotherapeutic
agents with radiation therapy.
Oligodendrogliomas are uncommon tumors of childhood. These
infiltrating tumors occur predominantly in the cerebral cortex and
originate in the white matter. Histologically, oligodendrogliomas
consist of rounded cells with little cytoplasm and microcalcifications.
Observation of a calcified cortical mass on CT in a patient presenting with a seizure is suggestive of oligodendroglioma. The definition
of oligodendroglioma requires two diagnostic genotypic features:
pathogenic gene variants in isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) and the
co-­deletions of the short arm of chromosome 1 (1p) and the long arm
of chromosome 19 (19q). Treatment approaches are similar to those for
infiltrating astrocytomas.

Ependymal Tumors

Ependymal tumors are derived from the ependymal lining of the ventricular system. Cellular ependymoma (WHO grade II) is the most
common of these neoplasms, accounting for 5% of childhood CNS
tumors. Approximately 70% of ependymomas in childhood occur in the
posterior fossa. The mean age of patients is 6 years, with approximately

A

B

Fig. 546.6 A, Nonenhanced axial T2-­weighted MR image of grade III

astrocytoma of the right thalamus demonstrating diffuse hyperintensity
and area of necrotic cyst formation. B, Gadolinium-­enhanced sagittal
T1-­weighted MR image showing slight enhancement and hypodensity
of grade III astrocytoma of the thalamus. This 14-­yr-­old child presented
with left arm and leg numbness and weakness and right-­sided headaches.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 546 u Central Nervous System Tumors in Childhood
40% of cases occurring in children younger than 4 years of age. The
incidence of leptomeningeal spread approaches 10% overall. Clinical presentation can be insidious and often depends on the anatomic
location of the tumor. MRI demonstrates a well-­circumscribed tumor
with variable and complex patterns of gadolinium enhancement, with
or without cystic structures (Fig. 546.7). These tumors usually are
noninvasive, extending into the ventricular lumen and/or displacing
normal structures, sometimes leading to significant obstructive hydrocephalus. Histologic characteristics include perivascular pseudorosettes, ependymal rosettes, monomorphic nuclear morphology, and
occasional nonpalisading foci of necrosis. Other histologic subtypes
include anaplastic ependymoma (WHO grade III), which is much less
common in childhood and is characterized by a high mitotic index and
histologic features of microvascular proliferation and pseudopalisading necrosis. Myxopapillary ependymoma (WHO grade II) is a slow-­
growing tumor arising from the filum terminale and conus medullaris
and appears to be a biologically different subtype. Preliminary studies
suggest that there are genetically distinct subtypes of ependymoma,
exemplified by an association between alterations in the NF2 gene
and spinal ependymoma. Surgery is the primary treatment modality,
with extent of surgical resection a major prognostic factor. Two other
major prognostic factors are age, with younger children having poorer
outcomes, and tumor location, with localization in the posterior fossa,
which often is seen in young children, associated with poorer outcomes. Surgery alone is rarely curative. Multimodal therapy incorporating irradiation with surgery has resulted in long-­term survival in
approximately 40% of patients with ependymoma undergoing gross
total resection. Recurrence is predominantly local. The role of chemotherapy in multimodal therapy of ependymoma is still unclear. Current
investigations are directed toward identification of optimal radiation
dose, surgical questions addressing the use of second-­look procedures
after chemotherapy, and further evaluation of classic as well as novel
chemotherapeutic agents. Genome-­wide DNA methylation patterns
have identified nine molecular subgroups in these tumors across three
anatomic compartments including supratentorial (ST), posterior fossa
(PF), and the spinal locations (Fig. 548.8). Two subgroups (group A
and B) of PF ependymoma have been identified with distinct molecular and clinical characteristics, and the use of targeted chemotherapy
against these subtypes is being evaluated.

Choroid Plexus Tumors

Choroid plexus tumors account for 2–4% of childhood CNS tumors.
They are the most common CNS tumors in children younger than 1
year of age and account for 10–20% of CNS tumors in infants. These

546.7 A, Sagittal T1-­
weighted MR image of a 6-­yr-­old
patient
with
ependymoma,
demonstrating a hypointense
mass within the fourth ventricle
compressing the brainstem. B,
Gadolinium-­
enhanced axial T1-­
weighted image of an ependymoma showing an enhancing
mass within the fourth ventricle.

tumors are intraventricular epithelial neoplasms arising from the choroid plexus. Children present with signs and symptoms of increased
ICP. Infants may present with macrocephaly and focal neurologic deficits. In children, these tumors predominantly occur supratentorially
in the lateral ventricles. The group of choroid plexus tumors is made
up of choroid plexus papillomas (WHO grade I), atypical choroid
plexus papillomas (WHO grade II), and choroid plexus carcinomas
(WHO grade III). Choroid plexus papilloma, the most common of
this group, is a well-­circumscribed lesion with focal calcification on
neuroimaging. Choroid plexus carcinoma is a malignant tumor with
metastatic potential to seed into the CSF pathways. This malignancy
has the following histologic characteristics: nuclear pleomorphism,
high mitotic index, necrosis, and increased cell density. MRI typically
demonstrates a large, hyperdense, contrast-­enhancing, intraventricular mass with peritumoral edema, hemorrhage, and hydrocephalus.
The tumor suppressor p53 is crucially involved in the biology of this
cancer and may contribute to aggressive tumor behavior. Molecular
data subclassify choroid plexus tumors into three distinct subgroups
with different molecular aberrations and clinical outcomes. These
tumors are associated with the Li-­Fraumeni syndrome. After complete surgical resection, the frequency of cure for choroid plexus papilloma approaches 100%, whereas the frequency of cure for choroid
plexus carcinoma approaches 20–40%. Reports suggest that radiation
therapy and/or chemotherapy may lead to better disease control for
choroid plexus carcinoma.

Embryonal Tumors

Embryonal tumors or primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs)
are one of the most common groups of malignant CNS tumors of childhood, accounting for approximately 9% of pediatric CNS tumors. They
have the potential to metastasize to the neuraxis and extracranial tissues. The group includes medulloblastoma, supratentorial PNET, atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor, and other rare embryonal tumors, all of
which are histologically classified as WHO grade IV tumors.
Medulloblastoma, which accounts for ∼62% of embryonal CNS
tumors, is a cerebellar tumor occurring predominantly in males and
at a median age of 5-­7 years. CT and MRI demonstrate a solid, homogeneous, contrast medium–enhancing mass in the PF causing fourth
ventricular obstruction and hydrocephalus (Fig. 546.9). Up to 30% of
patients with medulloblastoma present with neuroimaging evidence of
leptomeningeal spread. Among a variety of diverse histologic patterns
of this tumor, the most common is a monomorphic sheet of undifferentiated cells classically noted as small, blue round cells. Neuronal differentiation is more common among these tumors and is characterized

Fig.

A

3121

B

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3122 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Supratentorial (ST-)
ST-SE

Median Age (y):
Prognosis:

ST-EPN-YAP1 ST-EPN-RELA

Subependymoma

(Anaplastic)
Ependymoma

(Anaplastic)
Ependymoma

Balanced
genome

YAP1 Fusion

RELA Fusions
Chromothripsis

WHO grade I

WHO grade II/III

WHO grade II/III

40
Good

1.5
Good

8
Poor

Posterior Fossa (PF-)
PF-SE

Median Age (y):
Prognosis:

PF-EPN-A

PF-EPN-B

Subependymoma

(Anaplastic)
Ependymoma

(Anaplastic)
Ependymoma

Balanced
genome

Balanced
genome

Chromosomal
instability

WHO grade I

WHO grade II/III

WHO grade II/III

59
Good

3
Poor

30
Good

Spinal (SP-)

Fig. 546.8 A, Illustration of the nine recognized subsets of

ependymomas. Only four of these subsets (ST-­
EPN-­
YAP1, ST-­
EPN-­RELA, PF-­EPN-­A, and PF-­EPN-­B) typically occur during the
childhood years. The subependymoma (SE) groups typically affect middle-­age or older adults, and the spinal lesions, although
occasionally encountered in children, are largely seen in adults.
B, Estimate of the overall frequency of the different subtypes of
ependymomas. (From Pollack IF, Agnihotri S, Broniscer A. Childhood brain tumors: current management, biological insights, and
future directions. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2019;23:261–273. Fig. 3.)

A
Median Age (y):
Prognosis:

SP-SE

SP-MPE

SP-EPN

Subependymoma

Myxopapillary
Ependymoma

(Anaplastic)
Ependymoma

6q Deletion

Chromosomal
instability

Chromosomal
instability

WHO grade I

WHO grade I

WHO grade II/III
40
Good

49
Good

32
Good

Subgroup Occurrence
4% ST-SE
3% ST-EPN-YAP1
18% ST-EPN-RELA

7% PF-SE
48% PF-EPN-A
10% PF-EPN-B

1% SP-SE
5% SP-MPE
4% SP-EPN

B

Fig.

A

B

histologically by the presence of Homer Wright rosettes and by immunopositivity for synaptophysin. An anaplastic variant is often more
aggressive and may be associated with poorer prognosis. Patients present with signs and symptoms of increased ICP (i.e., headache, nausea,
vomiting, blurring of vision, mental status changes, and hypertension)

546.9 A, Sagittal T1-­
weighted MR image shows hypointense mass involving the cerebellar hemisphere in a 6-­yr-­old
child with desmoplastic variant
of medulloblastoma. B, Axial T2-­
weighted image of the same child
shows hyperintense mass involving the cerebellar hemisphere.

and cerebellar dysfunction (i.e., ataxia, poor balance, dysmetria, dysarthria). Clinical staging evaluation includes MRI of the brain and spine,
both preoperatively and postoperatively, as well as lumbar puncture
after the increased ICP has resolved. Clinical features that have consistently demonstrated prognostic significance include age at diagnosis,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 546 u Central Nervous System Tumors in Childhood
Subgroup

WNT

SHH

Group 3

Group 4

Incidence

10%

30%

25%

35%

Subtype

WNT α WNT β

SHH α

SHH β

SHH γ

3123

SHH δ Group 3α Group 3β Group 3γ Group 4α Group 4β Group 4γ

Gender

Subtype
proportion

α

β γ

β

α

3β

δ

3α

4β
3γ

4α

4γ

Age

3-17

>10

3-17

0-3

0-3

>17

0-10

3-17

0-10

3-17

3-17

3-17

Metastases

9%

21%

20%

33%

9%

9%

43%

20%

40%

40%

40%

40%

5 year
survival

97%

100%

70%

70%

90%

90%

65%

55%

40%

65%

75%

80%

Copy Number
Changes

6-

MYCN amp,
GLI2 amp,
YAP1 amp

PTEN
Loss

TP53
variants

Other events
Histology

Balanced 10q22-, 7*, 8-, 10- OTX2 gain,
amp,
MYC amp MYCN
SNCAIP CDK6 amp
CDK6 amp
genome 11q23.3 11 , i17q DDX3 loss
dup

Classic, LCA(rare)

TERT
promotor
variants

High
GFI1/1B
expression
Classic, LCA

Desmoplastic, Nodular
Classic, LCA

Classic, LCA

Classic

Desmoplastic/
Nodular

Extensive
nodularity

LCA

40x

20x

10x

20x

Fig. 546.10 Schematic (upper) depicting the four WHO-­recognized subgroups of medulloblastoma, as well as the additional subtypes noted more

recently and their distinguishing characteristics in terms of amplifications (amp) and duplications (dup). The figure (lower) also depicts the histological diversity of medulloblastomas: WNT tumors most commonly have a classic histology, whereas SHH tumors have desmoplastic histology with
varying degrees of nodularity. Large cell/anaplastic (LCA) histology is most commonly seen in group 3 and less commonly in group 4 tumors. (From
Pollack IF, Agnihotri S, Broniscer A. Childhood brain tumors: current management, biological insights, and future directions. J Neurosurg Pediatr.
2019;23:261–273. Fig. 2.)

extent of disease, and extent of surgical resection. Patients younger
than 4 years of age have a poor outcome, partly as the result of a higher
incidence of disseminated disease on presentation and past therapeutic
approaches that have used less intense therapies. Patients with disseminated disease at diagnosis (M > 0), including positive CSF cytologic
result alone (M1), have a markedly poorer outcome than those patients
with no dissemination (M0). Similarly, patients with gross residual disease after surgery have poorer outcomes than those in whom surgery
achieved gross total resection of disease.
Cytogenetic and molecular genetic studies have demonstrated
multiple abnormalities in medulloblastoma (Fig. 546.10). The most
common abnormality involves chromosome 17p deletions, which
occur in 30–40% of all cases. Several signaling pathways have been
shown to be active in medulloblastomas, including the sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway, predominately associated with the desmoplastic variants, and the WNT pathway, which can occur in up to 15%
of cases and has been associated with improved survival. Integrative genomic studies have identified at least four distinct molecular
subgroups of medulloblastoma—WNT, SHH, group 3, and group
4—that exhibit highly discriminate transcriptional, cytogenetic,
and mutational spectra, in addition to divergent patient demographics and clinical behavior (see Fig. 546.10). These prognostic
groups still must be validated in larger prospective studies, though
the WNT subgroup is known to have the most favorable outcome.
A multimodal treatment approach is pursued in medulloblastoma,
with surgery as the starting point of treatment. Medulloblastoma
is sensitive to both chemotherapy and radiation therapy. With

technologic advances in neurosurgery, neuroradiology, and radiation therapy, as well as identification of chemotherapy as an effective modality, the overall outcome among all patients approaches
60–70%. Standard radiation treatment in standard risk medulloblastoma incorporates craniospinal radiation at a total cumulative
dose of 24 Gy, with a cumulative dose of 50-­55 Gy to the tumor
bed. Craniospinal radiation at this dose in children younger than
3 years of age results in severe late neurologic sequelae, including
microcephaly, learning disabilities, cognitive impairment, neuroendocrine dysfunction (growth failure, hypothyroidism, hypogonadism, and absence/delay of puberty), and/or second malignancies.
Similarly, in older children, late sequelae, such as learning disabilities, neuroendocrine dysfunction, and/or second malignancies, can occur. These observations have resulted in stratification
of treatment approaches into the following three strata: (1) patients
younger than 3 years of age, (2) standard-­risk patients older than 3
years of age with surgical total resection and no disease dissemination (M0), and (3) high-­risk patients older than 3 years of age with
disease dissemination (M > 0) and/or bulky residual disease after
surgery. With the risk-­based approach to treatment, children with
high-­risk medulloblastoma receive high-­dose cranial–spinal radiation (36 Gy) with chemotherapy during and after radiation therapy.
As the dose of radiation depends on the risk stratification, complete
staging with MRI of the spine before starting treatment is essential
for the best chance of survival. Approaches in young children (usually younger than 3 years of age) incorporate high-­dose chemotherapy with peripheral stem cell reinfusion to avoid radiation therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3124 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Overall survival in children with nonmetastatic medulloblastoma
and gross total tumor resection approaches 85%. The presence of
bulky residual tumor (56% survival) or metastases (38% survival)
confers a poor prognosis. The molecular classification is being
evaluated to stratify risk groups and tailor therapy accordingly. The
WNT subgroup and nonmetastatic group 4 tumors are recognized
as low-­risk tumors that may qualify for reduced therapy. High-­risk
groups were defined as patients with metastatic SHH or group 4
tumors, where intensification of therapy is being profiled.
Supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumors (SPNETs) account
for approximately 1% of childhood CNS tumors, primarily in children
within the first decade of life. These tumors are similar histologically to
medulloblastoma and are composed of undifferentiated or poorly differentiated neuroepithelial cells. Historically, patients with SPNETs have
had poorer outcomes than those with medulloblastoma after combined-­
modality therapy. Children with SPNETs are considered among the high-­
risk group and receive dose-­
intense chemotherapy with craniospinal
radiation therapy.
Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is a very aggressive embryonal
malignancy that occurs predominantly in children younger than 5
years of age and can occur at any location in the neuraxis. The histology
demonstrates a heterogeneous pattern of cells, including rhabdoid cells
that express epithelial membrane antigen and neurofilament antigen.
The characteristic cytogenetic pattern is partial or complete deletion
of chromosome 22q11.2 that is associated with pathogenic variants in
the INI1 gene. The relation between this variant and tumorigenesis is
unclear. Though the overall prognosis remains poor, intensive chemotherapy, focal radiation, and high-­dose chemotherapy with stem cell
rescue have shown a trend toward improved survival. This is noted
more in patients who undergo complete resection of tumor and focal
radiation.

Pineal Parenchymal Tumors

The pineal parenchymal tumors are the most common malignancies
after germ cell tumors that occur in the pineal region. These include
pineoblastoma, occurring predominantly in childhood, pineocytoma,
and the mixed pineal parenchymal tumors. The therapeutic approach
in this group of diseases is multimodal. There was significant concern
regarding the location of these masses and the potential complications
of surgical intervention. With developments in neurosurgical technique and surgical technology, the morbidity and mortality associated
with these approaches have markedly decreased. Stereotactic biopsy
of these tumors may be adequate to establish diagnosis; however,
consideration should be given to total resection of the lesion before
institution of additional therapy. Pineoblastoma, the more malignant
variant, is considered a subgroup of childhood PNETs. Chemotherapy
regimens incorporate cisplatin, cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), etoposide (VP-­16), and vincristine and/or lomustine. The survival outcome
of combined chemotherapy and radiation therapy in pineal-­region
PNETs approaches 70% at 5 years. Pineocytoma usually is approached
with surgical resection.

Craniopharyngioma

Craniopharyngioma (WHO grade I) is a common tumor of childhood, accounting for 3–10% of all CNS childhood tumors. Two
histological subtypes have been identified, adamantinomatous and
papillary craniopharyngiomas (CP), each with specific origin and
genetic alterations. BRAFV600E pathogenic variants are solely
found in the papillary CP subgroup, which is the common type
in adults, whereas CTNNB1 pathogenic variants are exclusively
detected in adamantinomatous CP, which is common in children.
Children with CP often present with endocrinologic abnormalities (growth failure and delayed sexual maturation) and/or visual
changes (decreased acuity or visual field abnormalities). These
tumors are often large and heterogeneous, displaying both solid and
cystic components, and occur within the suprasellar region. They
are minimally invasive, adhere to adjacent brain parenchyma, and
engulf normal brain structures. MRI demonstrates the solid tumor
with cystic structures containing fluid of intermediate density,

and CT may show calcifications. Surgery is the primary treatment
modality, with gross total resection being curative. Controversy
exists regarding the relative roles of surgery and radiation therapy
in large, complex tumors. Significant morbidity (panhypopituitarism, growth failure, visual loss) is associated with these tumors and
their therapy, owing to the anatomic location.

Germ Cell Tumors

Germ cell tumors of the CNS are a heterogeneous group of tumors
that are primarily tumors of childhood, arising predominantly in
midline structures of the pineal and suprasellar regions (see Fig.
546.3). They account for 3–5% of pediatric CNS tumors. The peak
incidence of these tumors is in children 10-­12 yr of age. Overall,
there is a male preponderance, although there is a female preponderance for suprasellar tumors. Germ cell tumors occur multifocally
in 5–10% of cases. This group of tumors is much more prevalent
in Asian populations than European populations. Delays in diagnosis can occur because these tumors have a particularly insidious
course; the initial presenting symptoms may be subtle. Similar to
peripheral germ cell tumors, the analysis of protein markers, α-­
fetoprotein, and β-­human chorionic gonadotropin may be useful
in establishing the diagnosis and monitoring treatment response.
Surgical biopsy is recommended to establish the diagnosis; however,
secreting germinomas and nongerminomatous germ cell tumors
may be diagnosed based on protein marker elevations. Therapeutic approaches to germinomas and nongerminomatous germ cell
tumors are different. The survival proportion among patients with
pure germinoma exceeds 90%. The postsurgical treatment of pure
germinomas is somewhat controversial in defining the relative roles
of chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Clinical trials have investigated the use of chemotherapy and reduced-dose radiation and field
after surgery in pure germinomas. The therapeutic approach to
nongerminomatous germ cell tumors is more aggressive, combining
more intense chemotherapy regimens with craniospinal radiation
therapy. Survival rates among patients with these tumors are markedly lower than those noted in patients with germinoma, ranging
from 70–80% at 5 years. Trials have shown the benefit of the use of
high doses of chemotherapy with peripheral blood stem cell rescue
specially at metastatic and relapse groups.

Tumors of the Brainstem

Tumors of the brainstem are a heterogeneous group of tumors that
account for 10.9% of childhood primary CNS tumors. Outcome
depends on tumor location, imaging characteristics, and the patient’s
clinical status. Patients with these tumors may present with motor
weakness, cranial nerve dysfunction, cerebellar dysfunction, and/
or signs of increased ICP. On the basis of MRI evaluation and clinical findings, tumors of the brainstem can be classified into four types:
focal (5–10% of patients), dorsally exophytic (5–10%), cervicomedullary (5–10%), and diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) (70–85%)
(Fig. 546.11). Surgical resection is the primary treatment approach for
focal and dorsally exophytic tumors and leads to a favorable outcome.
Histologically, these two groups usually are low-­grade gliomas. Cervicomedullary tumors, because of their location, may not be amenable
to surgical resection but are sensitive to radiation therapy. DIPG, characterized by the diffuse infiltrating grade II-­IV glioma, is associated
with a very poor outcome independent of histologic diagnosis. These
tumors are not amenable to surgical resection. Biopsy in children in
whom MRI shows DIPG is controversial and is not recommended
unless there are atypical radiographic findings suspicious for another
diagnosis, such as infection, vascular malformation, myelination disorder, or metastatic tumor. Studies have identified the unique genetic
makeup of this fatal brain cancer, with nearly 80% found to harbor
pathogenic variants in histone H3.3 or H3.1 (H3-­K27M) and 20%
pathogenic variants affecting the activin receptor gene (ACVR1); three
molecularly distinct subgroups have been identified (H3-­K27M, silent
and MYCN).
The standard treatment approach has been palliative radiation therapy, and median survival with this treatment is 12 months, at best. Use

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 547 u Neuroblastoma 3125

Chapter 547

Neuroblastoma
Fiorela N. Hernandez Tejada and
Douglas J. Harrison
Neuroblastomas are embryonal cancers of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system with heterogeneous clinical presentation and
course, ranging from tumors that undergo spontaneous regression
to very aggressive tumors unresponsive to very intensive multimodal
therapy. The causes of most cases remain unknown. Advances have
been made in the treatment of children with these tumors, which
have improved outcomes, although many with aggressive forms
of neuroblastoma still succumb to their disease despite intensive
therapy.
Fig. 546.11 T2-­weighted sagittal MR image of a diffuse infiltrating

pontine glioma in a 5-­yr-­old child presenting with headaches, left facial
droop, and lethargy.

of chemotherapy, including high-­dose chemotherapy with peripheral
blood stem cell rescue, has not yet been of survival benefit in this group
of patients. Experimental approaches have included the use of immunotherapy with oncolytic herpes simplex virus (HSV) or adenoviruses.

Metastatic Tumors

Metastatic spread of other childhood malignancies to the brain is
uncommon. Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia and non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma can spread to the leptomeninges, causing symptoms of communicating hydrocephalus. Chloromas, which are
collections of myeloid leukemia cells, can occur throughout the neuraxis. Rarely, brain parenchymal metastases occur from lymphoma,
neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, osteosarcoma,
and clear cell sarcoma of the kidney. Therapeutic approaches are based
on the specific histologic diagnosis and may incorporate radiation
therapy, intrathecal administration of chemotherapy, and/or systemic
administration of chemotherapy. Medulloblastoma is the childhood
brain tumor that most commonly metastasizes extraneurally. Less
commonly, extraneural metastases from malignant glioma, PNET,
and ependymoma can occur. Ventriculoperitoneal shunts have been
known to allow extraneural metastases, primarily within the peritoneal
cavity but also systemically.

COMPLICATIONS AND LONG-­TERM MANAGEMENT

Data from the National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results Program indicate that more than 70% of patients with
childhood brain tumors will be long-­term survivors. At least 50% of
these survivors will experience chronic problems as a direct result of
their tumors and treatment. These problems include chronic neurologic deficits such as focal motor and sensory abnormalities, seizure
disorders, neurocognitive deficits (e.g., developmental delays, learning
disabilities), and neuroendocrine deficiencies (e.g., hypothyroidism,
growth failure, delay or absence of puberty). These patients are also at
significant risk for secondary malignancies, hearing deficit, and early
cataract from radiation therapy. Supportive multidisciplinary interventions for children with brain tumors both during and after therapy may
help improve the ultimate outcome. Optimal seizure management,
physical therapy, endocrine management with timely growth hormone
and thyroid replacement therapy, tailored educational programs, and
vocational interventions may enhance the childhood brain tumor survivor’s quality of life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor in children and is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy in the first year
of life. Approximately 600 new cases are diagnosed each year in the
United States, accounting for 8–10% of childhood malignancies and
one-­third of cancers in infants. Neuroblastoma accounts for >15% of
the mortality from cancer in children. The median age of children at
diagnosis of neuroblastoma is 18 months, and 90% of cases are diagnosed in children who are <10 years of age. The incidence is slightly
higher in males and in the White population.

PATHOLOGY

Neuroblastoma tumors, which are derived from primordial neural
crest cells, form a spectrum with variable degrees of neural differentiation, ranging from tumors with primarily undifferentiated small round
cells (neuroblastoma) to tumors consisting of mature and maturing
Schwannian stroma with ganglion cells (ganglioneuroblastoma or
ganglioneuroma). The tumors may resemble other small, round blue
cell tumors, such as rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma. The prognosis of children with neuroblastoma
varies with the histologic features of the tumor as dictated by the presence and amount of Schwannian stroma, the degree of tumor cell differentiation, and the mitosis-­karyorrhexis index.

PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of neuroblastoma in most cases remains unknown.
Familial neuroblastoma is rare but accounts for 1–2% of all cases,
is associated with a younger age at diagnosis, and is linked to germline
gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the ALK gene. The BARD1
gene has also been identified as a major genetic contributor to neuroblastoma risk. Germline gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in
PHOX2B predisposes to most of the syndromic neuroblastoma cases,
including Hirschsprung disease and central congenital hypoventilation syndrome. Neuroblastoma is associated with other neural crest
disorders, such as neurofibromatosis type 1, and potentially congenital cardiovascular malformations (Table 547.1). Children with
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome and hemihypertrophy also have a
higher incidence of neuroblastoma. Increased incidence of neuroblastoma is associated with some maternal and paternal occupational
chemical exposures, maternal drug use, farming, and work related
to electronics, although no single environmental exposure has been
shown to directly cause neuroblastoma.
Genetic characteristics of neuroblastoma tumors that are of prognostic importance include amplification of the MYCN (N-­myc) protooncogene and tumor cell DNA content, or ploidy (Tables 547.2-­547.4).
Amplification of MYCN is strongly associated with advanced tumor
stage and poor outcomes. Other genetic alterations have been identified

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 547 u Neuroblastoma 3125

Chapter 547

Neuroblastoma
Fiorela N. Hernandez Tejada and
Douglas J. Harrison
Neuroblastomas are embryonal cancers of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system with heterogeneous clinical presentation and
course, ranging from tumors that undergo spontaneous regression
to very aggressive tumors unresponsive to very intensive multimodal
therapy. The causes of most cases remain unknown. Advances have
been made in the treatment of children with these tumors, which
have improved outcomes, although many with aggressive forms
of neuroblastoma still succumb to their disease despite intensive
therapy.
Fig. 546.11 T2-­weighted sagittal MR image of a diffuse infiltrating

pontine glioma in a 5-­yr-­old child presenting with headaches, left facial
droop, and lethargy.

of chemotherapy, including high-­dose chemotherapy with peripheral
blood stem cell rescue, has not yet been of survival benefit in this group
of patients. Experimental approaches have included the use of immunotherapy with oncolytic herpes simplex virus (HSV) or adenoviruses.

Metastatic Tumors

Metastatic spread of other childhood malignancies to the brain is
uncommon. Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia and non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma can spread to the leptomeninges, causing symptoms of communicating hydrocephalus. Chloromas, which are
collections of myeloid leukemia cells, can occur throughout the neuraxis. Rarely, brain parenchymal metastases occur from lymphoma,
neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, osteosarcoma,
and clear cell sarcoma of the kidney. Therapeutic approaches are based
on the specific histologic diagnosis and may incorporate radiation
therapy, intrathecal administration of chemotherapy, and/or systemic
administration of chemotherapy. Medulloblastoma is the childhood
brain tumor that most commonly metastasizes extraneurally. Less
commonly, extraneural metastases from malignant glioma, PNET,
and ependymoma can occur. Ventriculoperitoneal shunts have been
known to allow extraneural metastases, primarily within the peritoneal
cavity but also systemically.

COMPLICATIONS AND LONG-­TERM MANAGEMENT

Data from the National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results Program indicate that more than 70% of patients with
childhood brain tumors will be long-­term survivors. At least 50% of
these survivors will experience chronic problems as a direct result of
their tumors and treatment. These problems include chronic neurologic deficits such as focal motor and sensory abnormalities, seizure
disorders, neurocognitive deficits (e.g., developmental delays, learning
disabilities), and neuroendocrine deficiencies (e.g., hypothyroidism,
growth failure, delay or absence of puberty). These patients are also at
significant risk for secondary malignancies, hearing deficit, and early
cataract from radiation therapy. Supportive multidisciplinary interventions for children with brain tumors both during and after therapy may
help improve the ultimate outcome. Optimal seizure management,
physical therapy, endocrine management with timely growth hormone
and thyroid replacement therapy, tailored educational programs, and
vocational interventions may enhance the childhood brain tumor survivor’s quality of life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor in children and is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy in the first year
of life. Approximately 600 new cases are diagnosed each year in the
United States, accounting for 8–10% of childhood malignancies and
one-­third of cancers in infants. Neuroblastoma accounts for >15% of
the mortality from cancer in children. The median age of children at
diagnosis of neuroblastoma is 18 months, and 90% of cases are diagnosed in children who are <10 years of age. The incidence is slightly
higher in males and in the White population.

PATHOLOGY

Neuroblastoma tumors, which are derived from primordial neural
crest cells, form a spectrum with variable degrees of neural differentiation, ranging from tumors with primarily undifferentiated small round
cells (neuroblastoma) to tumors consisting of mature and maturing
Schwannian stroma with ganglion cells (ganglioneuroblastoma or
ganglioneuroma). The tumors may resemble other small, round blue
cell tumors, such as rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma. The prognosis of children with neuroblastoma
varies with the histologic features of the tumor as dictated by the presence and amount of Schwannian stroma, the degree of tumor cell differentiation, and the mitosis-­karyorrhexis index.

PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of neuroblastoma in most cases remains unknown.
Familial neuroblastoma is rare but accounts for 1–2% of all cases,
is associated with a younger age at diagnosis, and is linked to germline
gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the ALK gene. The BARD1
gene has also been identified as a major genetic contributor to neuroblastoma risk. Germline gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in
PHOX2B predisposes to most of the syndromic neuroblastoma cases,
including Hirschsprung disease and central congenital hypoventilation syndrome. Neuroblastoma is associated with other neural crest
disorders, such as neurofibromatosis type 1, and potentially congenital cardiovascular malformations (Table 547.1). Children with
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome and hemihypertrophy also have a
higher incidence of neuroblastoma. Increased incidence of neuroblastoma is associated with some maternal and paternal occupational
chemical exposures, maternal drug use, farming, and work related
to electronics, although no single environmental exposure has been
shown to directly cause neuroblastoma.
Genetic characteristics of neuroblastoma tumors that are of prognostic importance include amplification of the MYCN (N-­myc) protooncogene and tumor cell DNA content, or ploidy (Tables 547.2-­547.4).
Amplification of MYCN is strongly associated with advanced tumor
stage and poor outcomes. Other genetic alterations have been identified

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3126 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 547.1  Syndromes Due to or Associated with Neuroblastoma
EPONYM

FEATURES

SYNDROMES CAUSED BY NEUROBLASTOMA
Pepper syndrome
Massive involvement of the liver with metastatic disease with or without respiratory distress
Horner syndrome

Unilateral ptosis, myosis, and anhidrosis associated with a thoracic or cervical primary tumor; symptoms do
not resolve with tumor resection

Hutchinson syndrome

Limping and irritability in young child associated with bone and bone marrow metastases

Opsoclonus-­myoclonus-­ataxia
syndrome

Myoclonic jerking and random conjugate eye movements with or without cerebellar ataxia; often associated
with a biologically favorable and differentiated tumor; the condition is likely immune mediated, may not
resolve with tumor removal, and often exhibits progressive neuropsychologic sequelae

Kerner-­Morrison syndrome

Intractable secretory watery diarrhea due to tumor secretion of vasointestinal peptides; tumors are generally
biologically favorable

ROHHAD

Approximately 40% may have neural crest-­derived tumors. Obesity and neurologic issues may be part of a
paraneoplastic syndrome

SYNDROMES PREDISPOSING TO NEUROBLASTOMA
Neurocristopathy syndrome
Neuroblastoma associated with other neural crest disorders, including congenital hypoventilation syndrome
or Hirschsprung disease; germline pathogenic variants in the paired homeobox gene PHOX2B have been
identified in a subset of patients with this disease
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome

Macrosomia, hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, omphalocele

Costello syndrome (faciocutaneo­
skeletal syndrome)

Autosomal dominant, pathogenic variant in HRAS, intellectual disability, delayed development,
cardiomyopathy

Familial pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma syndrome

Autosomal dominant, pathogenic variant in MAX and other genes

Fanconi anemia

Autosomal recessive, congenital anomalies, aplastic anemia, pathogenic variants in FANCA, FANCC, FANCG

Neurofibromatosis type 1

NF1 pathogenic variants

Noonan syndrome

Ras-­MAPK pathway (RASopathies) pathogenic variant

Turner syndrome

Partial or complete deletion of X chromosome, short-­webbed neck, short stature

ROHHAD, Rapid-­onset obesity, hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation, autonomic dysregulation.
Modified from Park JR, Eggert A, Caron H. Neuroblastoma: biology, prognosis, and treatment. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2008;55:97–120.

Table 547.2  Children’s Oncology Group Neuroblastoma Risk Stratification
RISK GROUP

STAGE

AGE

Low

1

Any

Low

2A/2B

Any

High

2A/2B

Any

Intermediate

3

Intermediate

3

High

3

Any

High

3

High
Intermediate

MYCN
AMPLIFICATION STATUS

PLOIDY

SHIMADA

Any

Any

Any

Not amplified

Any

Any

Amplified

Any

Any

<547 days

Not amplified

Any

Any

≥547 days

Not amplified

Any

FH

Amplified

Any

Any

≥547 days

Not amplified

Any

UH

4

<365 days

Amplified

Any

Any

4

<365 days

Not amplified

Any

Any

High

4

365 to <547 days

Amplified

Any

Any

High

4

365 to <547 days

Any

DNA index = 1

Any

High

4

365 to <547 days

Any

Any

UH

Intermediate

4

365 to <547 days

Not amplified

DNA index > 1

FH

High

4

≥547 days

Any

Any

Any

Low

4S

<365 days

Not amplified

DNA index > 1

FH

Intermediate

4S

<365 days

Not amplified

DNA index = 1

Any

Intermediate

4S

<365 days

Not amplified

Any

UH

High

4S

<365 days

Amplified

Any

Any

FH, Favorable histology; UH, unfavorable histology.
Data from Irwin MS, Naranjo A, Zhang FF, et al. Revised neuroblastoma risk classification system: a report From the Children’s Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(29):3229–3241.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 547 u Neuroblastoma 3127
Table 547.3  International Neuroblastoma Staging System
STAGE

DEFINITION

INCIDENCE (%)

SURVIVAL AT 5 YR* (%)

1

Localized tumor with complete gross excision, with or without microscopic
residual disease; representative ipsilateral lymph nodes negative for tumor
microscopically (nodes attached to and removed with the primary tumor
may be positive)

5

≥90

2A

Localized tumor with incomplete gross excision; representative ipsilateral
nonadherent lymph nodes negative for tumor microscopically

10

70-­80

2B

Localized tumor with or without complete gross excision, with ipsilateral
nonadherent lymph nodes positive for tumor; enlarged contralateral
lymph nodes must be negative microscopically

10

70-­80

3

Unresectable unilateral tumor infiltrating across the midline,† with or without
regional lymph node involvement; or localized unilateral tumor with contralateral regional lymph node involvement; or midline tumor with bilateral
extension by infiltration (resectable) or by lymph node involvement

25

40-­70

4

Any primary tumor with dissemination to distant lymph nodes; bone, bone
marrow, liver, skin, and other organs (except as defined for stage 4S)

60

85-­90¶
30-­40#

4S

Localized primary tumor (as defined for stage 1, 2A, or 2B), with dissemination limited to skin, liver, and bone marrow‡ (limited to infants <1 yr of age)

5

>80

*Survival is influenced by other characteristics, such as MYCN amplification. Percentages are approximate.
†The midline is defined as the vertebral column. Tumors originating on one side and crossing the midline must infiltrate to or beyond the other side of the vertebral column.
‡Marrow involvement in stage 4S should be minimal (i.e., <10% of total nucleated cells identified as malignant on bone marrow biopsy or on marrow aspirate). More extensive mar-

row involvement would be considered stage 4. Results of the metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scan (if performed) should be negative in the marrow.
¶If age at diagnosis is <18 mo.
#If age at diagnosis is >18 mo.

Modified from Kliegman RM, Marcdante KJ, Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2006. p 746; and Brodeur GM, Pritchard J,
Berthold F, et al. Revisions of the international criteria for neuroblastoma diagnosis, staging, and response to treatment. J Clin Oncol. 1993;11:1466–1477.

Table 547.4  Phenotypic and Genetic Features of Neuroblastoma, Treatment, and Survival According to Prognostic Category
PROGNOSTIC CATEGORY*
VARIABLE

LOW RISK

INTERMEDIATE RISK

HIGH RISK

TUMOR STAGE 4S

Pattern of
disease

Localized tumor

Localized tumor with loco­
regional lymph node extension; metastases to bone
marrow and bone in infants

Metastases to bone marrow and bone
(except in infants)

Metastases to liver and
skin (with minimal bone
marrow involvement) in
infants

Tumor
genomics

Whole-­chromosome
gains

Whole-­chromosome gains

Segmental chromosomal aberrations

Whole-­chromosome gains

Treatment

Surgery†

Moderate-­intensity chemotherapy; surgery†

Dose-­intensive chemotherapy, surgery, and
external-­beam radiotherapy to primary
tumor and resistant metastatic sites;
myeloablative chemotherapy with autologous
hematopoietic stem cell rescue; isotretinoin
with anti-­ganglioside GD2 immunotherapy

Supportive care‡

Survival rate

>98%

90–95%

40–50%

>90%

*Patients are assigned to prognostic groups according to risk, as described by the Children’s Oncology Group, with the level of risk defining the likelihood of death from disease.
Stage 4S disease is considered separately here because of the unique phenotype of favorable biologic features and relentless early progression but ultimately full and complete
regression of the disease.
†The goal of surgery is to safely debulk the tumor mass and avoid damage to surrounding normal structures while obtaining sufficient material for molecular diagnostic studies. Some
localized tumors may spontaneously regress without surgery.
‡Low-­dose chemotherapy or radiation therapy, or both, is used in patients with life-­threatening hepatic involvement, especially in infants <2 mo of age, who are at much higher risk
for life-­threatening complications from massive hepatomegaly.
From Maris JM. Recent advances in neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:2202–2210.

in patients with neuroblastoma using whole genome sequencing such
as loss of function in ATRX and TERT. Hyperdiploidy confers better
prognosis if the child is younger than 18 months of age at diagnosis
if amplification of MYCN is not present. Other chromosomal abnormalities, including loss of heterozygosity of 1p, 11q, and 14q, and gain
of 17q, may be found in neuroblastoma tumors and have been associated with worse outcomes. In addition, many other biologic factors are
associated with neuroblastoma outcomes, including tumor vascularity and the expression levels of nerve growth factor receptors (TrkA,
TrkB), ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase, ganglioside GD2, neuropeptide

Y, chromogranin A, CD44, multidrug resistance–associated protein,
and telomerase.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Neuroblastoma may develop at any site of sympathetic nervous system tissue. Approximately half of neuroblastoma tumors arise in the
adrenal glands, and most of the remainder originate in the paraspinal sympathetic ganglia. Metastatic spread, which is more common in
children older than 1 year of age at diagnosis, occurs via local invasion
or distant hematogenous or lymphatic routes. The most common sites

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3128 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
of metastasis are the regional or distant lymph nodes, long bones and
skull, bone marrow, liver, and skin. Lung and brain metastases are rare,
occurring in less than 3% of cases.
The signs and symptoms of neuroblastoma reflect the tumor site
and extent of disease and may mimic other disorders, which can
result in a delayed diagnosis. Metastatic disease can cause a variety of signs and symptoms, including fever, irritability, failure to
thrive, bone pain, cytopenias, bluish subcutaneous nodules, orbital
proptosis, and periorbital ecchymoses (Fig. 547.1). Localized disease can manifest as an asymptomatic mass or can cause symptoms due to mass effect, which can in certain cases result in spinal
cord compression, bowel obstruction, and superior vena cava
syndrome.
Children with neuroblastoma can also present with associated
neurologic signs and symptoms (see Table 547.1). Neuroblastoma
originating in the superior cervical ganglion can result in Horner
syndrome. Paraspinal neuroblastoma tumors can invade the neural

foramina, causing spinal cord and nerve root compression. Neuroblastoma can also be associated with a paraneoplastic syndrome
of autoimmune origin, termed opsoclonus-­myoclonus-­ataxia syndrome, in which patients experience rapid, uncontrollable jerking eye and body movements, poor coordination, and cognitive
dysfunction. Some tumors produce catecholamines that can cause
increased sweating and hypertension, and some release vasoactive
intestinal peptide, causing a profound secretory diarrhea. Children
with extensive tumors can also experience tumor lysis syndrome
and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Infants younger than
18 months of age also can present in unique fashion, termed stage
MS (previously 4S; see later), with widespread subcutaneous tumor
nodules, massive liver involvement, limited bone marrow disease,
and a small primary tumor without bone involvement or other
metastases. The stage MS disease can spontaneously regress. The
enigmatic characteristics of neuroblastoma with paraneoplastic
syndromes and spontaneous regression under some circumstances
have led some researchers to suggest that neuroblastoma may originate as a neurodevelopmental disorder.

DIAGNOSIS

Fig. 547.1 Neuroblastoma. Periorbital ecchymosis, proptosis, and

subconjunctival hemorrhage of the left eye. (From Mota EB, Penna
CRR, Marchiori E. Metastatic dissemination of a neuroblastoma. J Pediatr. 2017;189:232–232.e1. Fig. 1.)

A

Neuroblastoma is usually discovered as a mass or multiple masses on
plain radiography, CT, or MRI (Fig. 547.2A). The mass often contains
calcification and hemorrhage that can allow it to be appreciated on
plain radiography or CT (Fig. 547.3). Prenatal diagnosis of perinatal
neuroblastoma on maternal ultrasound scans is sometimes possible.
Tumor markers, including catecholamine metabolites homovanillic
acid and vanillylmandelic acid, are elevated in the urine of approximately 95% of cases and help to confirm the diagnosis. A pathologic
diagnosis is established from tumor tissue obtained by biopsy. Neuroblastoma can be confirmed without a primary tumor biopsy if
small, round, blue tumor cells are observed in bone marrow samples
(Fig. 547.4) and the levels of vanillylmandelic acid or homovanillic acid
are elevated in the urine.
Evaluations for metastatic disease should include CT or MRI of the
chest and abdomen, bone scans to detect cortical bone involvement,
and at least two independent bone marrow aspirations and biopsies
to evaluate for marrow disease. Iodine-­123 metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-­MIBG) studies should be used when available to better
define the extent of disease. Some centers use gallium-­68 dotatate
PET/MRI or CT scans, especially if the MIBG scan is negative (Fig.
547.5). MRI of the spine should be performed in cases with suspected
or potential spinal cord compression, but imaging of the brain with

B

C

Fig. 547.2 A, CT scan of an abdominal neuroblastoma with central necrosis at diagnosis. B, Coronal fused CT and metaiodobenzylguanidine

(MIBG) image of the same child with extensive retroperitoneal mass and central necrosis, probably an adrenal primary with extensive lymph node
involvement. C, MIBG avid neuroblastoma with increased uptake of radiolabeled tracer can be detected in multiple sites of disease, including bone
and soft tissue.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 547 u Neuroblastoma 3129
either CT or MRI is not routinely performed unless dictated by the
clinical presentation.
The International Neuroblastoma Risk Group (INRG) Staging
System (INSS) is currently used to stage patients with neuroblastoma and is based on the extent of disease as determined by imaging
at diagnosis. Extent of locoregional disease is based on specific local
image-­defined risk factors (IDRFs) (see Table 547.3). L1 tumors (previously classified as INSS stage 1) are localized and confined to one body
compartment without any IDRFs. L2 tumors (previously classified as
INSS stages 2 and 3) refer to localized tumors with the presence of
IDRFs. Disseminated tumors with metastases to bones, bone marrow, liver, distant lymph nodes, and/or other organs are staged as M
(previously classified as INSS stage 4). Stage MS (previously stage

A

4S) refers to neuroblastoma in children younger than 18 months of
age with dissemination to liver, skin, and/or bone marrow without
bone involvement and with a primary tumor that would otherwise
be staged as L1 or L2. This new INSS was recently developed to
allow for more effective comparisons of treatments and outcomes
worldwide.

TREATMENT

Treatment strategies for neuroblastoma have changed with significant
reduction in treatment intensity for children who have localized low-­
risk tumors and with continued increased treatment intensity and the
addition of novel agents for treatment of children who have high risk
or recurrent disease. The patient’s age and tumor stage are combined
with cytogenetic and molecular features of the tumor to determine
the treatment risk group and estimated prognosis for each patient (see

B

Fig. 547.3 Neuroblastoma. CT images of the abdomen with coro-

nal (A) and sagittal (B) reconstructions showing a large low-­density
tumor in the right suprarenal region (arrowheads). Note the neoplastic calcifications inside the mass. (From Mota EB, Penna CRR,
Marchiori E. Metastatic dissemination of a neuroblastoma. J Pediatr.
2017;189:232–232.e1. Fig. 3.)

Fig. 547.4 Neuroblastoma cells aspirated from the bone marrow.

Clumps of cells often contain ≥3 cells with or without evidence of rosette formation. Rosettes of cells surrounding an inner mass of fibrillary
material are characteristic of neuroblastoma.

B

A

D

C

Fig. 547.5 Neuroblastoma. MRI and gallium-­68 DOTANOC PET/CT scan of chest and abdomen reveal a mass in left posterior mediastinum (likely
neuroblastoma). A, Coronal T1-­weighted postcontrast image (A) and axial T2-­weighted image (B) reveal a well-­defined isointense lesion (42 × 26 ×
27 mm) in the left posterior mediastinum extending from D7-­D11 vertebrae. C, PET/CT maximum intensity projection image shows increased uptake
in left lower thoracic paraspinal region. D, Axial fused PET-­CT image shows somatostatin-­receptor expressing mass (maximum standardized uptake
value, 21; arrow in A–D) in the same location. (From Kaur A, Bhagwat C, Madaan P, et al. Dancing eyes. J Pediatr. 2019;214:231.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3130 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Tables 547.2-­547.4). Treatment for children with low-­risk neuroblastoma typically includes surgery for stages L1 and L2 and observation
for asymptomatic stage MS with cure rates generally >90% without
further therapy. Treatment with chemotherapy or radiation for the
rare child with local recurrence can still be curative. Children with
spinal cord compression at diagnosis may require urgent treatment
with chemotherapy, surgery, or radiation to avoid neurologic damage.
Stage MS neuroblastomas have a very favorable prognosis, and many
regress spontaneously without therapy. Chemotherapy or resection of
the primary tumor does not improve survival rates, but for infants with
massive liver involvement and respiratory compromise, chemotherapy
or radiation is used to alleviate symptoms. For children with stage 4S
neuroblastoma who require treatment for symptoms, the survival rate
is 81%.
Treatment of intermediate-­risk neuroblastoma includes surgery,
chemotherapy, and, in some cases, radiation therapy. The chemotherapy usually includes moderate doses of cisplatin or carboplatin,
cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and doxorubicin given over several
months. Radiation therapy is used for tumors with incomplete
response to chemotherapy. Children with intermediate-­risk neuroblastoma, including children with L2 disease and infants with
M disease both with favorable characteristics, have an excellent
prognosis and >90% survival with this moderate treatment. In this
intermediate-­risk group, obtaining adequate diagnostic material for
determination of the underlying biologic features of the tumor, such
as the Shimada pathologic classification and MYCN gene amplification, is critical, so that children with unfavorable characteristics can
receive more-­aggressive treatment and those with favorable features
can be spared excessive toxic therapy.
Children with high-­
risk neuroblastoma historically have had
poor long-­term survival rates of 25–35% despite intensive treatment consisting of induction chemotherapy, high-­
dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue, surgery, radiation, and
13-­cis-­
retinoic acid. Induction chemotherapy for children with
high-­risk neuroblastoma includes combinations of cyclophosphamide, topotecan, doxorubicin, vincristine, cisplatin, and etoposide. After completion of induction chemotherapy, resection of the
residual primary tumor is followed by high-­dose chemotherapy
with autologous stem cell rescue and focal radiation therapy to
tumor sites. A national cooperative group trial demonstrated significantly better survival with chemotherapy plus autologous stem
cell rescue than with chemotherapy alone. The further addition of
the differentiating agent, 13-­cis-­retinoic acid, following autologous
stem cell transplantation, resulted in further improvements in survival rates. In addition, a national clinical trial has demonstrated
an increase in short-­term survival rates with the addition of the
monoclonal antibody ch14.18 (dinutuximab) to 13-­
cis-­retinoic
acid therapy. This monoclonal antibody targets a disialoganglioside, GD2, which has ubiquitous expression on neuroblastoma cells.
In this large, randomized, clinical trial of high-­risk neuroblastoma
patients sponsored by the Children’s Oncology Group, incorporation of the antibody into consolidative therapy following autologous
stem cell transplant improved the 2-­year event-­free survival from
46.5–66.5%. The incorporation of tandem autologous stem cell
transplant (two separate autologous stem cell transplants with differing conditioning regimens) may further improve outcomes for
patients with high-­risk disease.
Cases of high-­risk neuroblastoma are associated with frequent
relapses, and children with recurrent neuroblastoma have a <50%
response rate to alternative chemotherapy regimens. New treatment
strategies and agents are needed for children with both high-­risk
and recurrent neuroblastoma. Therapies currently under investigation include new chemotherapeutic agents as well as novel therapies
directed against critical intracellular signaling pathways, radiolabeled targeted agents (such as therapeutic 131I-­MIBG), immunotherapy, and antitumor vaccines.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 548

Neoplasms of the Kidney
548.1 Wilms Tumor
Najat C. Daw and Dristhi S. Ragoonanan
Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) is the most common primary malignant renal tumor of childhood. It is the second most common malignant abdominal tumor in childhood after neuroblastoma. The most
common sites of metastases are the lungs, regional lymph nodes, and
liver. Histologically, the classic Wilms tumor is made up of varying
proportions of blastemal, stromal, and epithelial cells, recapitulating stages of normal renal development. The use of multimodality
treatment and multi-­institutional cooperative group trials has dramatically improved the cure rate of Wilms tumor from <30% to >90%
(Table 548.1).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Wilms tumor accounts for 6% of pediatric malignancies and >95% of
kidney tumors in children. In the United States, incidence of Wilms
tumor is approximately 7 cases per 1 million children <15 years of age
per year, and about 650 new cases are diagnosed each year. Approximately 75% of the cases occur in children <5 years old, with a peak
incidence at 2-­3 years. It can arise in one or both kidneys; the incidence of bilateral Wilms tumors is 7%. The male/female ratio is 0.92
to 1 in unilateral disease and 0.6 to 1 in bilateral disease. Most cases
are sporadic, but approximately 2% of patients have a family history.
In 8–10% of patients, Wilms tumor is observed in the context of hemihypertrophy, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and a variety of rare
syndromes, including Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and
Denys-­Drash syndrome (Table 548.2). An earlier age at diagnosis and
an increased incidence of bilateral disease are generally observed in
syndromic and familial cases.

ETIOLOGY: GENETICS AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

Wilms tumor is thought to be derived from incompletely differentiated
renal mesenchyme, and tumors are typically composed of cells reminiscent of the undifferentiated and partially differentiated cells that
normally arise from renal mesenchyme. Foci of benign, undifferentiated mesenchyme (nephrogenic rests) that persist abnormally in the
kidney into postnatal life are observed in approximately 1% of children in the general population but are present in up to 90% of children
who have a family history of Wilms tumor, develop bilateral tumors,
or display features of Wilms tumor–related syndromes. Nephrogenic
rests usually regress or differentiate, but those that persist can become
malignant.
Wilms tumor has been associated with genetic abnormalities. The
first identified Wilms tumor gene, WT1, located at 11p13, is a homozygous gene variant in 10–15% of tumors, resulting in loss of function
of the encoded zinc finger transcription factor. The majority of WT1
pathogenic variants are somatic; however, WT1 pathogenic variants
can also be germline. The type of WT1 pathogenic variant affects the
disease phenotype. Germline truncating variants are usually associated
with Wilms tumor in the context of genitourinary anomalies or the
WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies,
mental retardation) as it involves the deletion of several contiguous
genes at 11p13. Missense germline variants are usually observed in
children with Denys-­Drash syndrome, resulting in early-­onset renal
failure. In instances of germline variant, the wild-­type allele present
in the germline is altered or lost in the tumor, resulting in loss of WT1
function.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3130 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Tables 547.2-­547.4). Treatment for children with low-­risk neuroblastoma typically includes surgery for stages L1 and L2 and observation
for asymptomatic stage MS with cure rates generally >90% without
further therapy. Treatment with chemotherapy or radiation for the
rare child with local recurrence can still be curative. Children with
spinal cord compression at diagnosis may require urgent treatment
with chemotherapy, surgery, or radiation to avoid neurologic damage.
Stage MS neuroblastomas have a very favorable prognosis, and many
regress spontaneously without therapy. Chemotherapy or resection of
the primary tumor does not improve survival rates, but for infants with
massive liver involvement and respiratory compromise, chemotherapy
or radiation is used to alleviate symptoms. For children with stage 4S
neuroblastoma who require treatment for symptoms, the survival rate
is 81%.
Treatment of intermediate-­risk neuroblastoma includes surgery,
chemotherapy, and, in some cases, radiation therapy. The chemotherapy usually includes moderate doses of cisplatin or carboplatin,
cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and doxorubicin given over several
months. Radiation therapy is used for tumors with incomplete
response to chemotherapy. Children with intermediate-­risk neuroblastoma, including children with L2 disease and infants with
M disease both with favorable characteristics, have an excellent
prognosis and >90% survival with this moderate treatment. In this
intermediate-­risk group, obtaining adequate diagnostic material for
determination of the underlying biologic features of the tumor, such
as the Shimada pathologic classification and MYCN gene amplification, is critical, so that children with unfavorable characteristics can
receive more-­aggressive treatment and those with favorable features
can be spared excessive toxic therapy.
Children with high-­
risk neuroblastoma historically have had
poor long-­term survival rates of 25–35% despite intensive treatment consisting of induction chemotherapy, high-­
dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue, surgery, radiation, and
13-­cis-­
retinoic acid. Induction chemotherapy for children with
high-­risk neuroblastoma includes combinations of cyclophosphamide, topotecan, doxorubicin, vincristine, cisplatin, and etoposide. After completion of induction chemotherapy, resection of the
residual primary tumor is followed by high-­dose chemotherapy
with autologous stem cell rescue and focal radiation therapy to
tumor sites. A national cooperative group trial demonstrated significantly better survival with chemotherapy plus autologous stem
cell rescue than with chemotherapy alone. The further addition of
the differentiating agent, 13-­cis-­retinoic acid, following autologous
stem cell transplantation, resulted in further improvements in survival rates. In addition, a national clinical trial has demonstrated
an increase in short-­term survival rates with the addition of the
monoclonal antibody ch14.18 (dinutuximab) to 13-­
cis-­retinoic
acid therapy. This monoclonal antibody targets a disialoganglioside, GD2, which has ubiquitous expression on neuroblastoma cells.
In this large, randomized, clinical trial of high-­risk neuroblastoma
patients sponsored by the Children’s Oncology Group, incorporation of the antibody into consolidative therapy following autologous
stem cell transplant improved the 2-­year event-­free survival from
46.5–66.5%. The incorporation of tandem autologous stem cell
transplant (two separate autologous stem cell transplants with differing conditioning regimens) may further improve outcomes for
patients with high-­risk disease.
Cases of high-­risk neuroblastoma are associated with frequent
relapses, and children with recurrent neuroblastoma have a <50%
response rate to alternative chemotherapy regimens. New treatment
strategies and agents are needed for children with both high-­risk
and recurrent neuroblastoma. Therapies currently under investigation include new chemotherapeutic agents as well as novel therapies
directed against critical intracellular signaling pathways, radiolabeled targeted agents (such as therapeutic 131I-­MIBG), immunotherapy, and antitumor vaccines.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 548

Neoplasms of the Kidney
548.1 Wilms Tumor
Najat C. Daw and Dristhi S. Ragoonanan
Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) is the most common primary malignant renal tumor of childhood. It is the second most common malignant abdominal tumor in childhood after neuroblastoma. The most
common sites of metastases are the lungs, regional lymph nodes, and
liver. Histologically, the classic Wilms tumor is made up of varying
proportions of blastemal, stromal, and epithelial cells, recapitulating stages of normal renal development. The use of multimodality
treatment and multi-­institutional cooperative group trials has dramatically improved the cure rate of Wilms tumor from <30% to >90%
(Table 548.1).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Wilms tumor accounts for 6% of pediatric malignancies and >95% of
kidney tumors in children. In the United States, incidence of Wilms
tumor is approximately 7 cases per 1 million children <15 years of age
per year, and about 650 new cases are diagnosed each year. Approximately 75% of the cases occur in children <5 years old, with a peak
incidence at 2-­3 years. It can arise in one or both kidneys; the incidence of bilateral Wilms tumors is 7%. The male/female ratio is 0.92
to 1 in unilateral disease and 0.6 to 1 in bilateral disease. Most cases
are sporadic, but approximately 2% of patients have a family history.
In 8–10% of patients, Wilms tumor is observed in the context of hemihypertrophy, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and a variety of rare
syndromes, including Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and
Denys-­Drash syndrome (Table 548.2). An earlier age at diagnosis and
an increased incidence of bilateral disease are generally observed in
syndromic and familial cases.

ETIOLOGY: GENETICS AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

Wilms tumor is thought to be derived from incompletely differentiated
renal mesenchyme, and tumors are typically composed of cells reminiscent of the undifferentiated and partially differentiated cells that
normally arise from renal mesenchyme. Foci of benign, undifferentiated mesenchyme (nephrogenic rests) that persist abnormally in the
kidney into postnatal life are observed in approximately 1% of children in the general population but are present in up to 90% of children
who have a family history of Wilms tumor, develop bilateral tumors,
or display features of Wilms tumor–related syndromes. Nephrogenic
rests usually regress or differentiate, but those that persist can become
malignant.
Wilms tumor has been associated with genetic abnormalities. The
first identified Wilms tumor gene, WT1, located at 11p13, is a homozygous gene variant in 10–15% of tumors, resulting in loss of function
of the encoded zinc finger transcription factor. The majority of WT1
pathogenic variants are somatic; however, WT1 pathogenic variants
can also be germline. The type of WT1 pathogenic variant affects the
disease phenotype. Germline truncating variants are usually associated
with Wilms tumor in the context of genitourinary anomalies or the
WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies,
mental retardation) as it involves the deletion of several contiguous
genes at 11p13. Missense germline variants are usually observed in
children with Denys-­Drash syndrome, resulting in early-­onset renal
failure. In instances of germline variant, the wild-­type allele present
in the germline is altered or lost in the tumor, resulting in loss of WT1
function.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 548 u Neoplasms of the Kidney

3131

Table 548.1  Treatment and Four-­Year Outcomes for Patients with Wilms Tumor
STUDY

EFS (%)

OS (%)

NWTS-­5

Stage I or II FH; no LOH

STAGE/HISTOLOGY

Regimen EE4A

91

98

COG AREN0532

Stage I FH (age <24 mo, tumor
weight <550 g)

Nephrectomy alone

90

100

Stage I or II FH; +LOH

Regimen DD4A

87

100

Stage III FH; no LOH

Regimen DD4A
Flank radiation*

88

97

Stage III or IV FH; +LOH

Regimen M
Radiation to flank per local stage
Radiation to metastatic sites

90

96

Stage IV FH with lung metastases only and complete
response at 6 weeks; no LOH

Regimen DD4A
Radiation to flank per local stage
Omit radiation to whole lung

80

96

Stage IV FH with lung metastases only and incomplete
response at 6 weeks; no LOH

Regimen M
Radiation to flank per local stage
Radiation to whole lung

89

95

COG AREN0534

Stage V FH

Chemotherapy
Radiation per local stage

82

95

COG AREN0321

Stage I FA + DA

Regimen DD4A
Radiation to flank

100

100

Stage II DA

Regimen UH-­1
Radiation to flank

87

86

Stage III DA

Regimen UH-­1
Radiation to flank*

81

89

Stage IV DA

Regimen UH-­1/UH-­2
Radiation to flank per local stage
Radiation to metastatic sites

42

49

Stage V DA

Chemotherapy
Radiation to flank per local stage
Radiation to metastatic sites

58

68

Unilateral Wilms tumor with
bilateral predisposition

EE4A followed by treatment per stage/
histology
Radiation to flank per local stage

94

100

COG AREN0533

COG AREN0534

TREATMENT

*Whole-­abdomen radiation therapy indicated for patients with diffuse intraperitoneal tumor rupture, peritoneal tumor seeding, and cytology-­positive ascites
NWTS-­5, National Wilms Tumor Study-­5; COG, Children’s Oncology Group; EFS, event-­free survival; OS, overall survival; FH, favorable histology; LOH, loss of heterozygosity at both
1p and 16q; FA, focal anaplasia; DA, diffuse anaplasia; EE4A, vincristine/dactinomycin × 19 weeks; DD4A, vincristine/dactinomycin/doxorubicin × 25 weeks; M, vincristine/dactinomycin/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide/etoposide × 31 weeks; revised UH-­1, vincristine/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide/carboplatin/etoposide × 30 weeks; revised UH-­2, revised
UH-­1 with vincristine/irinotecan × 36 weeks.

Table 548.2  Wilms Tumor Predisposing Conditions
SYNDROME

GENETIC LESION

WT1-­ASSOCIATED WILMS TUMOR PREDISPOSITION SYNDROMES
Denys-­Drash syndrome (DDS)
WT1 pathogenic variant affecting
exon 8 or 9

ESTIMATED WT RISK

PHENOTYPE

∼75%

Ambiguous genitalia, diffuse mesangial
sclerosis

Frasier syndrome

WT1 pathogenic variant affecting
intron 9 donor splice site

Low; 1 case reported

Ambiguous genitalia, streak gonads, focal
segmental glomerulosclerosis

WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor,
aniridia, genital anomalies,
retardation)

Deletion of 11p13 containing WT1

∼50%

Aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, delayed-­
onset renal failure

WT1-­associated WT
predisposition

WT1 pathogenic variant

∼30%

Median age at WT diagnosis is 1.3 yr (range:
0.6-­4.5)

OTHER SYNDROMES THAT PREDISPOSE TO WILMS TUMOR
Beckwith-­Wiedemann
LOM at maternal IC2 at 11p15.5
syndrome (BWS)
GOM at maternal IC1 at 11p15.5
Paternal UPD at 11p15.5
Pathogenic variant in CDKN1C
Negative molecular test

∼0.2%
∼24%
∼8%
∼1.4%
∼4%

Organomegaly, large birth weight, macroglossia,
omphalocele, hemihypertrophy, ear pits and
creases, neonatal hypoglycemia

Bloom syndrome

∼3%

Short stature, microcephaly, growth deficiency,
immune abnormalities, sensitivity to sunlight

Biallelic BLM pathogenic variants

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3132 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 548.2  Wilms Tumor Predisposing Conditions—cont’d
SYNDROME

GENETIC LESION

ESTIMATED WT RISK

PHENOTYPE

Fanconi anemia

Biallelic BRCA2 or PALB2
pathogenic variants

20–40%

Short stature, abnormal skin pigmentation,
skeletal malformations, microcephaly, bone
marrow failure

Hyperparathyroid-­jaw tumor
syndrome

CDC73 pathogenic variant

∼3%

Primary hyperparathyroidism, ossifying
fibroma of the maxilla and/or mandible

Mosaic variegated aneuploidy

Biallelic BUB1B or TRIP13
pathogenic variants

>85%

Microcephaly, growth deficiency, developmental
delay, eye anomalies, mild dysmorphism

Perlman syndrome

Biallelic DIS3L2 pathogenic
variants

∼65%

Organomegaly, large birth weight,
developmental delay

Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel syndrome

GPC3 pathogenic variant

4–9%

Overgrowth, congenital heart defects

CLOVES syndrome

PIK3CA pathogenic variant

<5%

Congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular
malformations, epidermal nevi, scoliosis/
skeletal/spine anomalies

Sotos syndrome

NSD1 pathogenic variant

<5%

Cerebral giantism, macrocephaly,
intellectual disability, advanced bone age,
poor coordination

Trisomy 18

Trisomy 18

<5%

Cognitive impairment, hypertonia,
overlapping fingers, congenital heart
disease, micrognathia

GENETIC VARIANTS THAT PREDISPOSE TO NONSYNDROMIC WILMS TUMOR
CTR9-­associated WT
CTR9 pathogenic variant
4 families reported;
predisposition
9/14 individuals with a
pathogenic CTR9
variant developed WT

Median age at WT diagnosis is 1.3 yr (range:
0.6-­3.3). All reported variants are paternally
inherited

DICER1 syndrome

DICER1 pathogenic variant

Low; 5 families in which
6/22 individuals with a
pathogenic DICER1
variant developed WT

Lung cysts, cystic nephroma, nodular
hyperplasia of the thyroid, nasal
chondromesenchymal hamartoma, ciliary
body medulloepithelioma and increased
cancer risks including pleuropulmonary
blastoma (PPB), ovarian sex cord-­stromal
tumors, pineoblastoma, and pituitary blastoma

Li-­Fraumeni syndrome (LFS)

TP53 pathogenic variant

Low; 12 cases reported

Around 50% of individuals with LFS develop
cancer by the age of 30 yr, with a lifetime risk
of >70% The tumors most closely associated
with LFS include soft tissue sarcomas,
osteosarcoma, premenopausal breast cancer,
brain tumors, and adrenocortical carcinoma

REST-­associated WT
predisposition

REST pathogenic variant

4 families reported;
7/14 individuals with
a pathogenic REST
variant developed WT
Ten presumed sporadic
cases reported

Median age at WT diagnosis is 3 yr (range:
0.5-­6)
Other clinical features reported include
primary ovarian failure, café-­au-­lait macules,
and mild developmental delay

TRIM28-­associated WT
predisposition

TRIM28 pathogenic variant

9 families reported; 18/24
individuals with a pathogenic TRIM28 variant
developed WT; however,
few unaffected family
members were tested
17 presumed sporadic
cases reported

Median age at WT diagnosis is 1.1 yr (range:
0.4-­9.8)
All reported variants are maternally inherited
Histology is frequently epithelial type

GOM, Gain of methylation; IC, imprinting center; LOM, loss of methylation; UPD, uniparental disomy; WT, Wilms tumor.
Modified from Maciaszek JL, Oak N, Nichols KE. Recent advances in Wilms’ tumor predisposition. Hum Mole Genetics. 2020;29(R2):R138–R149. Table 1, p. R139–R140.

Consistent with the etiology of Wilms tumor being grounded in
aberrant kidney development, genes that regulate the proliferation
and differentiation of kidney progenitors have been identified to be
mutated in tumors. One class of genes that encodes proteins essential
for the biogenesis of mature miRNAs are altered in one fifth to one
third of Wilms tumors. These include DROSHA missense variants that
occur in approximately 10% of tumors, and DICER, DGCR8, XPO5, and

TARBP2 variants. Of note, germline DICER1 variants are observed,
albeit infrequently, in Wilms tumor families and, more frequently, in
families with pleuropulmonary blastoma (see Table 548.2).
The Wnt signaling pathway plays a critical role in regulating the
differentiation of the fetal kidney. Somatic pathogenic variants in
CTNNB1 and WTX, both of which play a role in the Wnt pathway regulation, are observed in approximately 15% and 20% of Wilms tumors,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 548 u Neoplasms of the Kidney

3133

Table 548.3  Differential Diagnosis of Abdominal and Pelvic Tumors in Children
TUMOR

PATIENT AGE

CLINICAL SIGNS

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Wilms tumor

Preschool

Unilateral flank mass, aniridia,
hemihypertrophy

Hematuria, polycythemia, thrombocytosis,
elevated partial thromboplastin time

Neuroblastoma

Preschool

Gastrointestinal/genitourinary obstruction,
raccoon eyes, myoclonus-­opsoclonus,
diarrhea, skin nodules

Increased urinary vanillylmandelic acid,
homovanillic acid, or ferritin; stippled
calcification in the mass

Non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma

>1 yr

Intussusception in >2 yr old

Increased lactate dehydrogenase; blood
cytopenia caused by bone marrow involvement

Rhabdomyosarcoma

All

Gastrointestinal/genitourinary obstruction,
abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding,
paratesticular mass

Hypercalcemia; blood cytopenia caused by
bone marrow involvement

Germ cell tumor/
teratoma

Preschool, teenage

Females: Abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding
Males: Testicular mass, new-­onset hydrocele,
sacrococcygeal mass/dimple

Increased β-­human chorionic gonadotropin,
increased α-­fetoprotein

Hepatoblastoma

Birth-­3 yr

Right upper quadrant mass, jaundice
Early puberty in males

Increased α-­fetoprotein

Hepatocellular
carcinoma

School age, teenage

Right upper quadrant mass, jaundice, hepatitis
B, cirrhosis

Increased α-­fetoprotein

respectively. Somatic variants in genes that are critical for regulating
progenitor proliferation and differentiation (MYCN, SIX1, and SIX2)
are observed in approximately 10% of tumors. Other somatic variants,
including MLLT1, ARID1A, and SMARCA4, occur at a frequency of
approximately 4–5% each. Importantly a somatic variant of the p53
gene, TP53, is observed in approximately 5% of tumors and is associated with anaplastic tumor histology, a poor prognostic feature of
Wilms tumor.
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH; usually copy number neutral) or loss
of imprinting at imprinted loci at 11p15 is observed in approximately
70% of Wilms tumors. This epigenetic alteration often results in biallelic
expression of IGF2, a normally imprinted gene that encodes insulin-­
like growth factor 2, in addition to the loss of imprinting of other 11p15
genes. BWS, a somatic overgrowth syndrome with predisposition to
embryonal tumors (including Wilms tumor), has been linked to 11p15,
and microdeletions within the IGF2 imprinting control region are
present in BWS families in whom Wilms tumor is observed.
Allelic imbalances have been identified in Wilms tumors, particularly LOH at 1p and 16q, which has been associated with increased risk
of recurrence. Gain of chromosome 1q was found to be associated with
inferior survival in unilateral favorable-­histology Wilms tumor.
In patients with a family history of Wilms tumor, predisposition
is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance. Predisposition to other tumor types or other phenotypes is not
observed in most of these families. Germline pathogenic variants have
been identified in a minority of families, and each of those genes identified (e.g., WT1, DICER1, MYCN, REST, BRCA2) is altered in <5% of
Wilms tumor families.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

The most common initial clinical presentation for Wilms tumor is the
incidental discovery of an asymptomatic abdominal mass by parents
while bathing or clothing an affected child or by a physician during a
routine physical examination (Table 548.3). At presentation, the mass
can be quite large, because retroperitoneal masses can grow unhampered by strict anatomic boundaries. Functional defects in paired
organs such as the kidney, with good functional reserve, are also
unlikely to be detected early. Physical exam findings include a firm,
nontender, smooth abdominal mass that rarely crosses the midline.
Care should be taken to avoid vigorous palpation to prevent the risk
of renal capsule rupture. Children with direct access to pediatricians
vs generalists as primary caregivers are more likely to be diagnosed
early and to have smaller tumors and less advanced stage at diagnosis.

Hypertension is present in about 25% of patients at presentation and
has been attributed to increased renin activity. Abdominal pain (40%),
gross painless hematuria (18%), and constitutional symptoms such as
fever, anorexia, and weight loss are other findings at diagnosis. Occasionally, rapid abdominal enlargement and anemia occur because of
bleeding into the renal parenchyma or pelvis. Wilms tumor thrombus
extends into the inferior vena cava (IVC) in 4–10% of patients and
rarely into the right atrium; dislodgment of the intravascular tumor
may produce a fatal occlusive pulmonary embolism. Patients might
also have microcytic anemia from iron deficiency or anemia of chronic
disease, polycythemia, elevated platelet count, and acquired deficiency
of von Willebrand factor or factor VII deficiency.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

An abdominal mass in a child should be considered malignant until
diagnostic imaging, laboratory findings, and pathology can define its
true nature (see Table 548.3). Imaging studies include plain abdominal radiography, abdominal ultrasonography (US), and CT of the
abdomen to define the intrarenal origin of the mass and differentiate
it from adrenal masses (e.g., neuroblastoma) and other masses in the
abdomen. Abdominal US helps differentiate solid from cystic masses.
Wilms tumor might show focal areas of necrosis or hemorrhage and
hydronephrosis because of obstruction of the renal pelvis by the tumor.
US with Doppler imaging of renal veins and the IVC is a useful first
study to identify Wilms tumor, evaluate the collecting system, and
demonstrate tumor thrombi in the renal veins and IVC. However, its
routine use after CT has been performed is not required.
CT is useful to define the extent of the disease, integrity of the contralateral kidney, and metastasis (Figs. 548.1 and 548.2). MRI requires
sedation in young children and is not routinely used. However, MRI
may be helpful in defining an extensive tumor thrombus that extends
up to the level of the hepatic veins, or even into the right atrium, and
to distinguish Wilms tumor from nephrogenic rests. Chest CT is more
sensitive than chest radiography to screen for pulmonary metastasis and is preferably performed before surgery because effusions and
atelectasis can confound the interpretation of postoperative imaging
studies. A bone scan is performed if the histologic diagnosis confirms
clear cell sarcoma of the kidney (CCSK) or rhabdoid tumor of the kidney, to look for bone metastasis. Brain imaging with CT or MRI is also
obtained in cases of clear cell sarcoma or rhabdoid tumor of the kidney
because these tumors can spread to the brain.
Wilms tumor lesions are metabolically active and concentrate fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Regional spread and metastatic lesions can

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3134 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 548.4  Children’s Oncology Group Staging of Wilms
Tumor
STAGE

Tumor confined to the kidney and completely resected
Renal capsule or sinus vessels not involved
Tumor not ruptured or biopsied
Regional lymph nodes examined and negative

II

Tumor extends beyond the kidney but is completely
resected with negative margins and lymph nodes
At least one of the following has occurred: (a) penetration of renal capsule, (b) invasion of renal sinus vessels

III

Residual tumor present following surgery confined to
the abdomen, including gross or microscopic tumor;
spillage of tumor preoperatively or intraoperatively;
biopsy prior to nephrectomy, regional lymph node
metastases; tumor implants on the peritoneal surface;
extension of tumor thrombus into the inferior vena
cava, including thoracic vena cava and heart

IV

Hematogenous metastases (lung, liver, bone, brain,
etc.) or lymph node metastases outside the
abdominopelvic region

V

Bilateral renal involvement by tumor

Fig. 548.1 Large heterogeneous Wilms tumor in left kidney. The re-

sidual renal parenchyma is displaced medially (arrows). (From Haaga
JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body. 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 54-­84, p. 1816.)

Fig. 548.2 Multicentric and bilateral Wilms tumors. The tumors have a

low density and compress residual enhancing renal tissue. (From Haaga
JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body. 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 54-­86, p. 1817.)

be visualized on PET/CT scanning. The diagnosis is usually made by
imaging studies and confirmed by histology at the time of nephrectomy. Although biopsy is a reliable diagnostic tool, it is discouraged
because it results in disease upstaging according to the Children’s
Oncology Group (COG) staging system. A core needle biopsy obtained
through a posterior approach (to limit contamination of the peritoneal cavity) should be performed in cases of unusual presentation (>10
years old, signs of infection, inflammation) or unusual imaging findings (significant adenopathy, no renal parenchyma seen, intratumoral
calcification).
Patients with Wilms tumor associated syndromes should undergo
routine screening with serial abdominal US to allow for early detection
and treatment.

TREATMENT

The COG protocols and the International Society of Pediatric Oncology (SIOP) protocols differ in their initial treatment approach. COG
advocates upfront surgery prior to initiating treatment, whereas SIOP
recommends preoperative chemotherapy. Each approach has advantages
and limitations, but they have similar outcomes. Early surgery provides
accurate diagnosis and staging and can facilitate risk-­adapted therapy.
Preoperative chemotherapy can make surgery easier and reduces the
risk of intraoperative tumor rupture and hemorrhage. Surgery entails

DESCRIPTION

I

a radical nephrectomy, with meticulous dissection to avoid rupture
of the tumor capsule, and lymph node sampling despite the absence
of abnormal nodes on preoperative imaging studies or intraoperative
assessment. Partial nephrectomy is performed in patients with bilateral
disease or those with unilateral Wilms tumor and predisposing syndrome such as the Denys-­Drash and WAGR syndromes to minimize
the risk of future renal failure.
Prognostic factors for risk-­adapted therapy include age, stage, histology, tumor weight, LOH at chromosomes 1p and 16q, and metastatic lung nodule response (Table 548.4). Histology plays a major role
in risk stratification of Wilms tumor. Absence of anaplasia is considered a favorable histologic finding. Presence of anaplasia is further
classified as focal or diffuse, both of which are unfavorable histologic
findings.
The COG has very specific drug dose and schedule recommendations
for risk-­adapted treatment of Wilms tumor. Patients with favorable-­
histology Wilms tumor have a good outcome and are generally treated
in the outpatient setting. Nephrectomy alone is sufficient for patients
with very low risk disease (<2 years old with stage I disease and a tumor
weight <550 g), resulting in a 4-­year event-­free survival of 90% and
a 4-­year overall survival of 100%. Patients with stage I and II disease
receive chemotherapy with two drugs, vincristine and actinomycin D
(also called dactinomycin), every 1-­3 weeks for a total of 18 weeks (regimen EE4A). Patients with stage III or stage IV disease receive chemotherapy with three drugs (vincristine, doxorubicin, and actinomycin
D) every 1-­3 weeks for a total of 24 weeks (regimen DD4A) and radiation therapy. Patients with regional lymph node metastases, residual
disease after surgery, or tumor rupture receive radiation therapy to
the flank or abdomen, and those with lung metastases receive radiation therapy to the lungs. Rapid response of lung metastases to chemotherapy may eliminate the need for lung radiation. In patients with
stage III or stage IV disease and LOH at both 1p and 16q or in those
with lung metastases only who have incomplete response at 6 weeks of
DD4A, therapy is augmented by adding cyclophosphamide/etoposide
to DD4A (Regimen M). The LOH of both 1p and 16q and gain of 1q
confers an adverse prognosis and deserves treatment intensification.
For patients with bilateral Wilms tumor, three-­drug preoperative
chemotherapy, surgical resection within 12 weeks of diagnosis, and
histology-­
based postoperative therapy improves survival outcomes
and feasibility of nephron-­sparing surgery.
Anaplastic histology (focal and diffuse) accounts for approximately
11% of Wilms tumor cases. Patients with diffuse anaplasia have worse
outcome than patients with favorable histology and receive more

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 548 u Neoplasms of the Kidney
intensive therapy. Patients with stage 1 anaplastic Wilms tumor treated
with regimen DD4A and flank radiation had excellent survival outcomes. Patients with stage II-­IV disease are treated more intensively
with multiagent chemotherapy including vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, etoposide, carboplatin, and irinotecan, in addition
to radiotherapy. Despite some improvement in survival outcomes,
patients with stage IV disease continue to fare poorly.

RECURRENT DISEASE

Approximately 15% of favorable-­
histology and 50% of anaplastic-­
histology Wilms tumors relapse; most relapses occur early (within 2
years of diagnosis). Factors associated with a favorable outcome after
relapse include low stage (I/II) at diagnosis, treatment with vincristine and actinomycin D only, no prior radiotherapy, favorable histology, relapse to lung only, and interval from nephrectomy to relapse
≥12 months. Patients with recurrent Wilms tumor who previously
received only vincristine and actinomycin D had a 4-­year survival of
approximately 80%, whereas those who previously received the three-­drug
regimen of vincristine, actinomycin D, and doxorubicin had a 4-­year
survival of only 50%. Other agents used to treat recurrent Wilms tumor
include doxorubicin, carboplatin, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, etoposide, irinotecan, and topotecan. Metachronous Wilms tumor may
not represent tumor relapse but development of a new tumor in the
opposite kidney.

PROGNOSIS

Despite some adverse risk factors that decrease prognosis (presence of
metastasis, unfavorable histology, recurrent disease, incomplete lung
nodule response at 6 weeks of chemotherapy, LOH of both 1p and 16q
and gain of 1q), most children with Wilms tumor have a very favorable
prognosis. Overall survival of children with Wilms tumor exceeds 90%,
with some prognostic factors (low stage, favorable histology, young
age, low tumor weight) conferring even better outcomes. Wilms tumor
tops the list of common pediatric solid tumors in terms of favorable
outcome.

LATE EFFECTS

Current strategies are successful with relatively few long-­term effects
of therapy. Generally, late complications are a consequence of treatment type and intensity; the use of radiotherapy and anthracyclines
increase the risk of these complications. Clinically significant late
sequelae include musculoskeletal effects, cardiac toxicity, pulmonary
disease, reproductive problems, renal dysfunction, and development of
second malignant neoplasms such as leukemia and cancer of the digestive organs and breast (in females).

548.2 Other Pediatric Renal Tumors
Najat C. Daw and Dristhi S. Ragoonanan

MESOBLASTIC NEPHROMA

Mesoblastic nephroma is the most common solid renal tumor identified in the neonatal period and the most frequent benign renal tumor in
childhood. It represents approximately 5% of all pediatric renal tumors.
ETV6-­NTRK3 fusion pathogenic variant is the most common molecular alteration seen in these tumors. Many cases are diagnosed with prenatal US and can manifest as polyhydramnios, hydrops, and premature
delivery. Most patients are diagnosed before 3 months of age, whereas
Wilms tumor is rarely diagnosed before 6 months. Male/female ratio is
1.5:1. Radical nephrectomy is the treatment of choice and may be sufficient by itself. Local recurrence is uncommon. Although rare, malignant variants do occur, marked by metastases to the lung, liver, heart,
and brain.

3135

CLEAR CELL SARCOMA OF THE KIDNEY

CCSK is an uncommon renal neoplasm of childhood, with approximately 20 new cases diagnosed each year in North America. Peak incidence is between 1 and 4 years of age with a male/female ratio of 2:1. It
usually presents with abdominal distention, abdominal mass, or gross
hematuria. Gene expression profiles of CCSK suggest the cell of origin to be a renal mesenchymal cell with neural markers, and BCOR
gene duplication is the most common molecular alteration seen. Bone
is the most common site of distant metastasis, followed by lung, abdomen, retroperitoneum, brain, and liver. Therefore the staging workup
should include a bone scan. With modern therapy, patients with stage
I and II disease have an excellent prognosis (4-­year overall survival of
97–100%), whereas those with stage III and IV disease have a 4-­year
overall survival of 89% and 45%, respectively.

RHABDOID TUMOR OF THE KIDNEY

Malignant rhabdoid tumor of the kidney (MRTK) has rhabdomyoblast-­
like morphology and is a rare but aggressive cancer. The median age
of presentation is 11 months, and hematuria is a common presenting
feature. Both rhabdoid tumor of the kidney and central nervous system
(CNS) atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors have deletions and pathogenic variants of the SMARCB1/hSNF5/INI1 gene and are considered
related. Germline pathogenic variants in SMARCA4 or SMARCB1 have
been linked to rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder that results in the increased risk of developing
rhabdoid tumors predominantly in infants and children younger than
3 years of age. MRTKs tend to metastasize to the lungs and brain. Prognosis is poor with current therapeutic protocols. Younger age at diagnosis, advanced-­stage disease, and CNS involvement are associated
with a worse prognosis. The outcome of patients with MRTK is poor.
Both the 4-­year relapse-­free survival and overall survival for patients
treated on the National Wilms Tumor Study-­5 (NWTS-­5) were 50% for
stage I, 33% for stages II and III, and 21% for stage IV.

RENAL CELL CARCINOMA

Although renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most prevalent renal
tumor in adults, it is extremely rare in children, accounting for <10%
of pediatric renal tumors. The annual incidence rate is approximately
four cases per 1 million children. Although Wilms tumor is the predominant renal tumor in childhood, it is rare past early childhood, and
RCC is the most prevalent renal malignancy during the second decade
of life. Several genetic disorders are associated with a predisposition
to RCC, including von Hippel-­Lindau disease, tuberous sclerosis, and
hereditary leiomyomatosis. The most common subtype of RCC in children, the translocation-­type RCC, is characterized by translocations
most frequently involving the TFE3 gene on chromosome Xp11.2 or
the TFEB gene on chromosome 6p21. Renal medullary carcinoma is
seen typically in young patients with sickle cell trait.
Children with RCC may present with frank hematuria, flank pain,
and/or a palpable mass, although RCC can be asymptomatic and
detected incidentally. RCC has a propensity to metastasize to the lungs,
liver, and bone. Although local lymph node involvement is a poor
prognostic indicator in adult RCC, the importance of nodal status in
pediatric RCC is controversial. Nephrectomy alone may be adequate
for early-­stage RCC. Along with surgery, there is no established optimal treatment for childhood RCC; neither chemotherapy nor radiation therapy has demonstrated significant activity. Localized pediatric
RCC has an excellent outcome without adjuvant therapy; however,
the outcomes remain poor for metastatic RCC and renal medullary
carcinoma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3136 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Pathogenesis

Chapter 549

Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Wendy A. Allen-­Rhoades and
Carola A.S. Arndt
The annual incidence of soft tissue sarcomas is 11 cases per 1 million
children younger than 14 years of age and 17.4 cases per 1 million adolescents age 15-­19 years. Rhabdomyosarcoma accounts for more than
50% of soft tissue sarcomas. The prognosis most strongly correlates with
age and extent of disease at diagnosis, primary tumor site and histology,
and presence of translocations involving the FOXO1 and PAX genes.

RHABDOMYOSARCOMA
Epidemiology

The most common pediatric soft tissue sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma,
accounts for approximately 3.5% of childhood cancers. These tumors
may occur at any anatomic site (Table 549.1) including the head and
neck, orbit, genitourinary tract, and extremities; retroperitoneal and
other sites account for the remainder of primary sites. The incidence
at each anatomic site is related to both patient age and tumor type.
Extremity lesions are more likely to occur in older children and to have
alveolar histology and harbor a fusion oncoprotein. Rhabdomyosarcoma occurs with increased frequency in patients with neurofibromatosis, Costello syndrome, and other family cancer predisposition
syndromes such as Li-­Fraumeni syndrome (Table 549.2).
Table 549.1  	Common Presenting Signs and Symptoms
by Primary Site
PRIMARY SITE (%)

SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS

Head and neck (40%)

Painless or painful swelling
Proptosis
Ptosis
Ophthalmoplegia
Headache
Vomiting
Cranial nerve palsy
Other cranial nerve palsies
Nasal discharge
Nasal/sinus congestion
Trismus
Systemic hypertension

Limbs/trunk (30%)

Asymptomatic swelling

Genitourinary tract/pelvis (20%)

Painless scrotal lesions
Hematuria
Urinary retention/dribbling
Vulval nodule
Polypoid vaginal lesions
Vaginal bleeding/discharge
Constipation

Abdomen/liver/biliary (∼10%)

Metastatic disease (20% at
diagnosis)
Bone
Bone marrow
Lung
Lymph nodes

Asymptomatic swelling
Abdominal pain
Intestinal obstruction
Jaundice
Cholangitis
Otherwise unexplained:
Poor feeding
Seizures
Pain
Irritability
Pancytopenia

Modified from Rogers TN, Dasgupta R. Management of rhabdomyosarcoma in pediatric patients. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2021;30(2):339–353. Table 2.

Rhabdomyosarcoma is thought to arise from the same embryonic
mesenchyme as striated skeletal muscle although a large percentage of these tumors arise in areas lacking skeletal muscle (e.g., bladder, prostate, vagina). On the basis of light microscopic appearance,
it belongs to the general category of small, round, blue cell tumors
that includes Ewing sarcoma, neuroblastoma, and non-­
Hodgkin
lymphoma. Definitive diagnosis of a pathologic specimen requires
immunohistochemical studies using antibodies to skeletal muscle
(desmin, muscle-­specific actin, myogenin) and reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction, next generation sequencing, or fluorescent in situ hybridization for FOXO1 rearrangements.
Determination of the specific histologic subtype and fusion status is important in treatment planning and assessment of prognosis.
There are four recognized histologic subtypes. The embryonal type
accounts for approximately 60% of all cases and does not typically
harbor a genetic translocation. The rare spindle/sclerosing subtype
that accounts for approximately 3–4% of all children with rhabdomyosarcoma. It is characterized by a sclerosing (microalveolar) pattern that can mimic the alveolar subtype, but it does not harbor the
characteristic PAX/FOXO translocation seen in the alveolar subtype.
The alveolar type accounts for approximately 25–40% of cases and is
characterized by the presence of a chromosomal translocation. Over
80% of FOXO1 translocations in the alveolar subtype involve a translocation between FOXO1 and PAX3, but other rare variants exist such
as PAX3-­NCOA2. The tumor cells tend to grow in nests that often
have cleft-­like spaces resembling alveoli. Alveolar tumors occur most
often in the trunk and extremities and carry the poorest prognosis.
The pleomorphic type (adult form) is rare in childhood, accounting
for <1% of cases.

Table 549.2  	Genetic Disorders Associated with
Rhabdomyosarcoma
DISORDER

GENETIC VARIANTS

Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome

Deletions and loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 11p15,
particularly affecting IGF2, CDKAIC, H19, and/or LIT1

Gorlin syndrome (basal cell
nevus syndrome)

PTCH

Costello syndrome

H-­RAS

Neurofibromatosis 1

NF1

Li-­Fraumeni syndrome

TP53

Mosaic variegated aneuploidy
syndrome

BUB1B

Nijmegen breakage syndrome
(ataxia-­telangiectasis syndrome
variant 1)

NBS

Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome

CREBBP

Constitutional mismatch-­repair/
deficiency syndrome

PSM2

Adenomatous polyposis coli

APC

Hereditary retinoblastoma

RB1

Familial pleuropulmonary
­blastoma syndrome

DICER1

Noonan syndrome

PTPN11

Werner syndrome

RECOL2

From Parham DM, Alaggio R, Coffin CM. Myogenic tumors in children and adolescents.
Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2012;15(1):S211–S236. Table 3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

